
Order of the Court (Sixth Chamber) of October – Affatato v Azienda Sanitaria Provinciale di Cosenza
(Case C‑3/10)
Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure – Social policy – Directive 1999/70/EC – Clause of the Framework Agreement on fixed-term work – Fixed-term employment contracts in the public sector – Successive contracts – Abuse – Preventive measures – Sanctions – Conversion of fixed-term contracts to a contract of unlimited duration – Prohibition – Compensation for damage – Principles of equivalence and effectiveness
1.                     Preliminary rulings – Admissibility – Limits – Clearly irrelevant questions and hypothetical questions put in a context not
            permitting a useful answer (Art. TFEU) (see paras 27-33, operative part 1)
2.                     Social policy – Framework Agreement on fixed-term work concluded by ETUC, UNICE and CEEP – Directive 1999/– Measures to
            prevent abuse of successive fixed-term contracts (Art. 4(2) EU; Council Directive 1999/70, Annex, Clause 5) (see paras 50-51,
            operative part 2)
3.                     Social policy – Framework Agreement on fixed-term work concluded by ETUC, UNICE and CEEP – Directive 1999/– Measures to
            prevent abuse of successive fixed-term contracts (Council Directive 1999/70, Annex) (see paras 59-60, 63, operative part 3)
Re: 
Reference for a preliminary ruling – Tribunale di Rossano – Interpretation of clauses 2, 3, and of the Annex to Council
                  Directive 1999/70/EC of June concerning the framework agreement on fixed-term work concluded by ETUC, UNICE and CEEP
                  (OJ L 175, p. 43) – Compatibility of certain provisions of national law on socially useful workers/publicly useful workers
                  – National legislation that allows the reason for the first fixed-term contract for workers in the education sector not to
                  be stated – Concept of a state body – Inclusion of a person with the characteristics of Poste Italiane SpA.
               
Operative part 
1.
	The first questions referred for a preliminary ruling by the Tribunale di Rossano (Italy), by decision of December 2009,
                     are clearly inadmissible; 
                  
2.
	Clause of the Framework Agreement on fixed-term work concluded on March 1999, which is attached as an annex to Council
                     Directive 1999/70/EC of June concerning the framework agreement on fixed-term work concluded by ETUC, UNICE and CEEP
                     (OJ L 175, p. 43), must be interpreted as follows: 
                  
–        it does not preclude national legislation, such as that in Article 36(5) of Legislative Decree No of March laying
         down general rules concerning the organisation of employment in public administrations, which prohibits, in the event of abuse
         resulting from the use of successive fixed-term employment contracts by a public sector employer, the conversion of those
         contracts to a contract of unlimited duration, when the internal legal order of the Member State concerned contains, in the
         sector under consideration, other effective measures to avoid and, as necessary, penalise the abusive use of successive fixed-term
         contracts. Nevertheless, it is for the national court to assess to what extent the conditions for application and the effective
         implementation of the relevant provisions of domestic law constitute an adequate measure for the prevention and, as necessary,
         penalisation of the public administration’s abuse of successive fixed-term employment contracts or relationships; 
      
–        it is, as such, in no way liable to affect the fundamental political and constitutional structures or the essential functions
         of the Member State concerned within the meaning of Article 4(2) TEU.
      
3.
	That framework agreement must be interpreted as meaning that measures provides for by national legislation, such as that at
                     issue in the main proceedings, in order to penalise the abusive use of fixed-term employment contracts or relationships must
                     not be less favourable than those governing similar internal situations or make it practically impossible or excessively difficult
                     to exercise the rights conferred by the legal order of the European Union. It is for the national court to assess to what
                     extent the provisions of domestic law intended to penalise the public administration’s abuse of successive fixed-term employment
                     contracts or relationships are consistent with those principles.
                  
Top  
 