
Case C-456/Peek & Cloppenburg KG
v
Cassina SpA
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Bundesgerichtshof)
(Copyright – Directive 2001/29/EC – Article 4(1) – Distribution to the public by sale or otherwise of the original of a work or a copy thereof – Use of reproductions of copyright-protected furniture as items of furniture exhibited in a sales area and in display windows
         – No transfer of ownership or possession)
      
Summary of the Judgment
Approximation of laws – Copyright and related rights – Directive 2001/– Harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and
            related rights in the information society – Distribution rights
(European Parliament and Council Directive 2001/29, Art. 4(1))
The concept of distribution to the public, otherwise than through sale, of the original of a work or a copy thereof, for the
         purpose of Article 4(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related rights in
         the information society, applies only where there is a transfer of the ownership of that object. As a result, neither granting
         to the public the right to use reproductions of a work protected by copyright nor exhibiting to the public those reproductions
         without actually granting a right to use them can constitute such a form of distribution.
      
The concept of distribution ‘by sale or otherwise’ for the purpose of Article 4(1) of Directive 2001/must be interpreted
         in the light of the definitions given in the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) Copyright Treaty and the WIPO
         Performances and Phonograms Treaty, that directive being intended to implement at Community level the Community’s obligations
         under the those Treaties. Those Treaties link the concept of distribution exclusively to that of transfer of ownership. 
      
The wording of the provisions relating to the exhaustion of the right of distribution in the Copyright Treaty and Directive
         2001/points to the same conclusion. Thus, since Article 4(2) of that directive provides for the exhaustion of the distribution
         right within the Community in respect of the original or copies of the work on the first sale or other transfer of ownership,
         the same interpretation should be given to the term ‘otherwise’ in Article 4(1), because the two provisions form a whole.
      
Those findings are not affected by recitals to in the preamble to Directive 2001/29, which state that harmonisation of
         copyright must take as a basis a high level of protection, that authors have to receive an appropriate reward for the use
         of their work and that the system for the protection of copyright must be rigorous and effective. That protection can be achieved
         only within the framework put in place by the Community legislature. 
      
(see paras 31-38, 41, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Copyright – Directive 2001/29/EC – Article 4(1) – Distribution to the public by sale or otherwise of the original of a work or a copy thereof – Use of reproductions of copyright-protected furniture as items of furniture exhibited in a sales area and in display windows
         – No transfer of ownership or possession)
      
In Case C‑456/06,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, from the Bundesgerichtshof (Germany), made by decision of October
         2006, received at the Court on November 2006, in the proceedings
      
Peek & Cloppenburg KG
v
Cassina SpA,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, G. Arestis, R. Silva de Lapuerta, E. Juhász and J. Malenovský (Rapporteur),
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: M.-A. Gaudissart, head of unit,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on November 2007,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Peek & Cloppenburg KG, by A. Auler, Rechtsanwalt, 
–        Cassina SpA, by A. Bock, Rechtsanwalt, 
–        the Polish Government, by E. Ośniecką-Tamecką, acting as Agent, 
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by H. Krämer and W. Wils, acting as Agents, 
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2008,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 4(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC of the European
         Parliament and of the Council of May on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related rights in the
         information society (OJ L 167, p. 10). 
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between Peek & Cloppenburg KG (‘Peek & Cloppenburg’) and Cassina SpA (‘Cassina’)
         concerning the making available to the public and display of furniture which, according to Cassina, infringed its exclusive
         right of distribution.
      
 Legal context 
 International legislation
The World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) Copyright Treaty (‘CT’) and the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty
         (‘PPT’), adopted in Geneva on December 1996, were approved on behalf of the European Community by Council Decision 2000/278/EC
         of March (OJ L 89, p. 6). 
      
Article of the CT, entitled ‘Right of distribution’, provides:
      
‘1.               Authors of literary and artistic works shall enjoy the exclusive right of authorising the making available to the public of
         the original and copies of their works through sale or other transfer of ownership.
      
2.               Nothing in this Treaty shall affect the freedom of Contracting Parties to determine the conditions, if any, under which the
         exhaustion of the right in paragraph applies after the first sale or other transfer of ownership of the original or a copy
         of the work with the authorisation of the author.’ 
      
Article of the PPT, entitled ‘Right of distribution’, confers on performers the exclusive right of authorising the making
         available to the public of the original and copies of their performances fixed in phonograms through sale or other transfer
         of ownership.
      
Article of the PPT provides for a similar right in favour of producers of phonograms. 
      
 Community legislation
Recitals to 11, and in the preamble to Directive 2001/state:
      
‘(9)      Any harmonisation of copyright and related rights must take as a basis a high level of protection, since such rights are crucial
         to intellectual creation. Their protection helps to ensure the maintenance and development of creativity in the interests
         of authors, performers, producers, consumers, culture, industry and the public at large. ...  
      
(10)      If authors or performers are to continue their creative and artistic work, they have to receive an appropriate reward for
         the use of their work, as must producers in order to be able to finance this work. ...
      
(11)      A rigorous, effective system for the protection of copyright and related rights is one of the main ways of ensuring that European
         cultural creativity and production receive the necessary resources and of safeguarding the independence and dignity of artistic
         creators and performers.
      
…
(15)      The Diplomatic Conference held under the auspices of the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) in December led to the adoption of two new Treaties, the [CT] and the [PPT] ... . This Directive also serves to implement a number of
         the new international obligations. 
      
(28)      Copyright protection under this Directive includes the exclusive right to control distribution of the work incorporated in
         a tangible article. The first sale in the Community of the original of a work or copies thereof by the rightholder or with
         his consent exhausts the right to control resale of that object in the Community. ... ’
      
Article of that directive, entitled ‘Distribution right’, states:
      
‘1.      Member States shall provide for authors, in respect of the original of their works or of copies thereof, the exclusive right
         to authorise or prohibit any form of distribution to the public by sale or otherwise.
      
2.      The distribution right shall not be exhausted within the Community in respect of the original or copies of the work, except
         where the first sale or other transfer of ownership in the Community of that object is made by the rightholder or with his
         consent.’
      
Under Article 1(1) and (2) of Council Directive 92/100/EEC of November on rental right and lending right and on certain
         rights related to copyright in the field of intellectual property (OJ L 346, p. 61):
      
‘1.       In accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, Member States shall provide, subject to Article 5, a right to authorise
         or prohibit the rental and lending of originals and copies of copyright works ... 
      
2.      For the purposes of this Directive, “rental” means making available for use, for a limited period of time and for direct or
         indirect economic or commercial advantage.’
      
Under Article 9(1) of Directive 92/100, ‘Member States shall provide [for performers, phonogram producers, producers of the
         first fixations of films and for broadcasting organisations] the exclusive right to make available [protected objects], including
         copies thereof, to the public by sale or otherwise, hereafter referred to as the “distribution right”’.
      
Directive 92/was repealed by Directive 2006/115/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of December on
         rental right and lending right and on certain rights related to copyright in the field of intellectual property (OJ L
         376, p. 28). The latter directive reproduces, in similar terms, the abovementioned provisions of Directive 92/100.
      
 National legislation
Paragraph 15(1) of the Law on copyright (Urheberrechtsgesetz) of September (BGB1. I, p. 1273) provides:
      
‘The author has the exclusive right to exploit his work in a material form; that right includes in particular:
...,
the right of distribution (Paragraph 17),
...’
Paragraph 17(1) of that Law provides:
      
‘The right of distribution is the right to offer to the public or put into circulation the original work or copies thereof.’
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Cassina manufactures chairs. Its collection includes furniture manufactured according to the designs of Charles-Édouard Jeanneret
         (Le Corbusier). That furniture includes armchairs and sofas in categories LC and LC and the table system LC 10-P. Cassina
         has concluded a licensing agreement for the manufacture and sale of that furniture.
      
Peek & Cloppenburg operates menswear and womenswear shops throughout Germany. It has set up in one of its shops a rest area
         for customers, fitted out with armchairs and sofas from the LC and LC range and a low table from the LC 10-P table system.
         In a display window of its outlet, Peek & Cloppenburg placed an armchair from the LC range for decorative purposes. Those
         items of furniture did not come from Cassina but were manufactured without Cassina’s consent by an undertaking in Bologna
         (Italy). According to the referring court, such furniture was not protected at the time by copyright in the Member State in
         which it was manufactured.
      
As it considered that Peek & Cloppenburg had infringed its rights by so doing, Cassina brought an action against it before
         the Landgericht Frankfurt (Frankfurt Regional Court) (Germany) seeking an order that it must desist from that practice and
         provide Cassina with information, in particular as regards the distribution channels for those items of furniture. In addition,
         Cassina sought an order that Peek & Cloppenburg pay damages.
      
After the Landgericht Frankfurt had granted Cassina’s application and the appeal court had, essentially, confirmed the judgment
         given at first instance, Peek & Cloppenburg brought an appeal on a point of law before the Bundesgerichtshof (Federal Court
         of Justice) (Germany).
      
That court states that, since Cassina has an exclusive right of distribution for the purpose of Paragraph of the Law on
         copyright of September 1965, its decisions turns on whether the conduct of Peek & Cloppenburg referred to above infringed
         that right.
      
It takes the view that there is normally a distribution where the original of a work or copies thereof cease to form part
         of the undertaking and are made publicly available through transfer of ownership or possession. In this connection, a transfer
         of possession for a merely temporary period may suffice. The issue arises, however, of whether conduct consisting in making
         publicly available reproductions protected by copyright without a transfer of ownership or possession, and thus without a
         transfer of the de facto power of disposal, can also be classified as a distribution to the public otherwise than by sale
         for the purpose of Article 4(1) of Directive 2001/29, those reproductions being, as in the main proceedings, installed in
         sales areas merely for the purpose of being used by customers. 
      
In addition, the Bundesgerichtshof raises the question whether merely exhibiting a reproduction of a work in a shop display
         window, without making it available for use, also constitutes a form of distribution to the public within the meaning of that
         provision.
      
Furthermore, it submits that the issue also arises of whether the requirements of the protection of the free movement of goods
         laid down in Articles EC and EC restrict, in the circumstances of the main proceedings, the exercise of that right of
         distribution.
      
In those circumstances, the Bundesgerichtshof decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the
         Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)(a) Can it be assumed that there is a distribution to the public otherwise than by sale, within the meaning of Article 4(1) of
         Directive 2001/..., in the case where it is made possible for third parties to make use of items of copyright-protected
         works without the grant of user involving a transfer of de facto power to dispose of those items?
      
(b)               Is there a distribution under Article 4(1) of [Directive 2001/29] also in the case in which items of copyright‑protected works
         are shown publicly without the possibility of using those items being granted to third parties?
      
(2)      If the answers are in the affirmative:
                  Can the protection accorded to the free movement of goods preclude, in the abovementioned cases, exercise of the distribution
         right if the items presented are not under copyright protection in the Member State in which they were manufactured and placed
         on the market?’
      
 The application for the reopening of the oral procedure
By letter received at the Court on March 2008, Cassina requested the reopening of the oral procedure pursuant to Article
         of the Rules of Procedure of the Court following the delivery of the Advocate General’s Opinion. Cassina submits, in particular,
         that the Advocate General founded her Opinion on a number of incorrect arguments, that she misinterpreted the Court’s case-law
         and that she failed to take into account all the facts relevant to the proceedings. Cassina accordingly wishes to submit further
         information to the Court.
      
In this connection, it must be pointed out that neither the Statute of the Court of Justice nor its Rules of Procedure make
         provision for the parties to submit observations in response to the Advocate General’s Opinion (see, inter alia, Case C‑259/Emanuel [2006] ECR I-3089, paragraph 15).
      
Admittedly, the Court may, of its own motion, on a proposal from the Advocate General, or at the request of the parties, order
         the reopening of the oral procedure in accordance with Article of the Rules of Procedure if it considers that it lacks
         sufficient information, or that the case must be dealt with on the basis of an argument which has not been debated between
         the parties (see, inter alia, Case C‑209/Schilling and Fleck-Schilling [2003] ECR I-13389, paragraph 19, and Case C-30/Recheio – Cash & Carry [2004] ECR I-6051, paragraph 12).
      
However, the Court, after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General, considers that in the present case it has all the information
         necessary to answer the questions referred.
      
Consequently, there is no need to order the reopening of the oral procedure.
      
 The questions referred
 Question 1(a) and (b) 
By Question 1(a) and (b), the referring court is essentially asking whether the concept of distribution to the public otherwise
         than through the sale of the original of a work or a copy thereof, for the purpose of Article 4(1) of Directive 2001/29, must
         be interpreted as meaning that it includes, first, granting to the public the right to use reproductions of a work protected
         by copyright without that grant of use entailing a transfer of ownership and, secondly, exhibiting those reproductions to
         the public without actually granting a right to use them.
      
Neither Article 4(1) of Directive 2001/nor any other provision of that directive gives a sufficient explanation of the
         concept of distribution to the public of a work protected by copyright. That concept is, on the other hand, defined more clearly
         by the CT and the PPT.
      
In this connection, it is settled case-law that Community legislation must, so far as possible, be interpreted in a manner
         that is consistent with international law, in particular where its provisions are intended specifically to give effect to
         an international agreement concluded by the Community (see, inter alia, Case C‑341/Bettati [1998] ECR I‑4355, paragraph 20, and Case C-306/SGAE [2006] ECR I-11519, paragraph 35).
      
It is common ground that, as recital in the preamble to Directive 2001/makes clear, that directive is intended to implement
         at Community level the Community’s obligations under the CT and the PPT. In those circumstances, the concept of distribution
         in Article 4(1) of that directive must be interpreted, as far as is possible, in the light of the definitions given in those
         Treaties. 
      
Article 6(1) of the CT defines the concept of the right of distribution enjoyed by the authors of literary and artistic works
         as the exclusive right of authorising the making available to the public of the original and copies of their works through
         sale or ‘other transfer of ownership’. Moreover, Articles and of the PPT contain the same definitions of the right of
         distribution enjoyed by performers and producers of phonograms. Thus, the relevant international Treaties link the concept
         of distribution exclusively to that of transfer of ownership.
      
Since Article 4(1) of Directive 2001/provides, in such a context, for ‘distribution by sale or otherwise’, that concept
         should be interpreted in accordance with those Treaties as a form of distribution which entails a transfer of ownership.
      
The wording of the provisions relating to the exhaustion of the right of distribution in the CT and Directive 2001/also
         points to that conclusion. Exhaustion is dealt with in Article 6(2) of the CT, which links it to the acts referred to in Article
         6(1). Thus, paragraphs and of Article of the CT form a whole and should be interpreted together. Those two provisions
         refer expressly to acts entailing a transfer of ownership.
      
Article 4(1) and (2) of Directive 2001/follow the same scheme as Article of the CT and are intended to implement it.
         Like Article 6(2) of the CT, Article 4(2) of the directive provides for the exhaustion of the distribution right within the
         Community in respect of the original or copies of the work on the first sale or other transfer of ownership of that object.
         Since Article implements Article of the CT and should be interpreted, like Article of the CT, as a whole, it follows
         that the term ‘otherwise’ in Article 4(1) of Directive 2001/must be interpreted in accordance with the meaning given to
         it in Article 4(2), that is to say, as entailing a transfer of ownership.
      
It follows that the concept of distribution to the public, otherwise than through sale, of the original of a work or a copy
         thereof, for the purpose of Article 4(1) of Directive 2001/29, covers acts which entail, and only acts which entail, a transfer
         of the ownership of that object. The information provided by the referring court shows that that clearly does not apply to
         the acts at issue in the main proceedings.
      
Contrary to what Cassina asserts, those findings are not affected by recitals to in the preamble to Directive 2001/29,
         which state that harmonisation of copyright must take as a basis a high level of protection, that authors have to receive
         an appropriate reward for the use of their work and that the system for the protection of copyright must be rigorous and effective.
      
That protection can be achieved only within the framework put in place by the Community legislature. Therefore, it is not
         for the Court to create, for authors’ benefit, new rights which have not been provided for by Directive 2001/and by so
         doing to widen the scope of the concept of distribution of the original of a work or a copy thereof beyond that envisaged
         by the Community legislature.
      
It would be for the Community legislature to amend, if necessary, the Community rules on protection of intellectual property
         if it considered that protection of authors is not assured to an adequate level by the legislation in force and that uses
         such as those at issue in the main proceedings should be subject to authors’ consent.
      
For the same reasons, Cassina’s arguments according to which the concept of distribution of the original of a work or a copy
         thereof should be interpreted widely, on the ground that the actions at issue in the main proceedings are objectionable because
         the copyright owner obtained no remuneration for the use of copies of his work, which is protected under the legislation of
         the Member State where those copies are used, cannot be accepted.
      
Therefore, the answer to Question is that the concept of distribution to the public, otherwise than through sale, of the
         original of a work or a copy thereof, for the purpose of Article 4(1) of Directive 2001/29, applies only where there is a
         transfer of the ownership of that object. As a result, neither granting to the public the right to use reproductions of a
         work protected by copyright nor exhibiting to the public those reproductions without actually granting a right to use them
         can constitute such a form of distribution. 
      
 Question Since the answer to Question was in the negative, there is no need to answer Question 2.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
The concept of distribution to the public, otherwise than through sale, of the original of a work or a copy thereof, for the
            purpose of Article 4(1) of Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of May on the harmonisation
            of certain aspects of copyright and related rights in the information society, applies only where there is a transfer of the
            ownership of that object. As a result, neither granting to the public the right to use reproductions of a work protected by
            copyright nor exhibiting to the public those reproductions without actually granting a right to use them can constitute such
            a form of distribution.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 