
Order of the Court (Sixth Chamber) of March – Grigore v Regia Naţională a Pădurilor Romsilva – Direcţia Silvică Bucureşti
(Case C-258/10)
First subparagraph of Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure – Social policy – Protection of the safety and health of workers – Directive 2003/88/EC – Organisation of working time – ‘Working time’ – ‘Maximum weekly working time’ – Forester subject, under the terms of his employment contract and the applicable collective agreement, to flexible working
         time of hours per day and hours per week – National legislation holding him liable for any damage suffered in the range of forest under his control – Classification – Effect of overtime on the remuneration and financial allowances of the person concerned
      
1.                     Social policy – Protection of the safety and health of  workers – Directive 2003/concerning certain aspects of the organisation
            of working time – Working time – Definition – Forester – Employment entailing the duty to look after a range of forest for
            eight hours a day and forty hours a week, the forester being responsible, without any limits as to time, for the areas falling
            within his purview – Included – Conditions – Physically present at the place of work and at the employer’s disposal – Assessment
            by the national court (European Parliament and Council Directive 2003/88, Art. 2(1)) (see para. 58, operative part 1)
2.                     Social policy – Protection of the safety and health of  workers – Directive 2003/concerning certain aspects of the organisation
            of working time – Working time – Definition – Forester – Tied cottage at his disposal – Effect on the calculation of working
            time – Criteria to be taken into consideration – Worker obliged to be physically present at the place determined by the employer
            and to be at the employer’s disposal – Assessment by the national court (European Parliament and Council Directive 2003/88,
            Art. 2(1)) (see paras 64-70, operative part 2)
3.                     Social policy – Protection of the safety and health of  workers – Directive 2003/concerning certain aspects of the organisation
            of working time – Maximum weekly working time – Forester – Contract of employment fixing maximum weekly working time at hours – Statutory duties leading to watching over the forest range either permanently or for longer than the maximum working
            time – Unlawful – Limits – Assessment by the national court (European Parliament and Council Directive 2003/88, Arts 6, 17(1))
            (see para. 79, operative part 3)
4.                     Social policy – Protection of the safety and health of workers – Directive 2003/concerning certain aspects of the organisation
            of working time – Ambit – Remuneration – Not included (European Parliament and Council Directive 2003/88) (see paras 82-84,
            operative part 4)
Re:
Reference for a preliminary ruling – Tribunal Dâmboviţa – Interpretation of Articles 2(1) and of Directive 2003/88/EC of
                  the European Parliament and of the Council of November concerning certain aspects of the organisation of working time
                  (OJ L 299, p. 9) – Notion of ‘working time’ – National legislation holding a forester liable for all damage occurring
                  in his range of forest, despite the terms of his employment contract making him subject to a maximum daily working time of
                  eight hours – ‘Maximum weekly working time’ – Actual weekly working time exceeding the statutory maximum weekly working time
                  – Effect on the remuneration and financial allowances of the person concerned.
               
Operative Part:
1.
	Article 2(1) of Directive 2003/88/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of November concerning certain aspects
                     of the organisation of working time must be interpreted as meaning that a period during which a forester, whose daily working
                     time, as stipulated in his employment contract, is eight hours, is required to look after a forest range, and who incurs disciplinary,
                     economic, civil or criminal liability, as the case may be, for any damage ascertained in the range within his purview, regardless
                     of when the damage occurs, constitutes ‘working time’ within the meaning of that provision only if the nature and extent of
                     that forester’s wardenship duty and the system of liability applicable to him require his physical presence at the place of
                     work and if, during that period, he must be available to his employer.  It is for the national court to undertake the checking
                     of fact and law necessary, in particular as regards the applicable national law, in order to assess whether that is so in
                     the case before it.
                  
2.
	The classification of a period as ‘working time’ within the meaning of Article 2(1) of Directive 2003/does not depend on
                     the provision of tied accommodation within the range of forest within that forester’s purview in so far as that provision
                     does not imply that he is required to be physically present at the place determined by the employer and available there to
                     his employer so that he may take appropriate action if necessary.  It is for the national court to undertake the checks necessary
                     in order to assess whether that is so in the case before it.
                  
3.
	Article of Directive 2003/must be interpreted as precluding, in principle, a situation in which, although the employment
                     contract of a forester stipulates that the maximum working time is hours a day and the maximum weekly working time hours,
                     he in fact, in accordance with statutory obligations, looks after the forest range within his purview, either permanently
                     or for longer than the maximum weekly working time fixed in that article.  It is for the national court to undertake the checks
                     necessary in order to assess whether that is so in the case before it and, if necessary, to ascertain whether the conditions
                     laid down in Article 17(1) of Directive 2003/or in Article 22(1) thereof relating to the opportunity of derogating from
                     Article have been satisfied in the case in the main proceedings.
                  
4.
	Directive 2003/must be interpreted as meaning that the employer’s obligation to pay salaries and benefits that may be treated
                     as salary in respect of the period during which the forester is required to look after the range of forest for which he is
                     responsible falls, not within the ambit of that directive, but within that of the relevant provisions of national law.
                  
Top  
 