
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-173/Kingdom of Spain
v
Commission of the European Communities
(Regulation (EEC) No 3950/– Common organisation of the market for milk and milk products – Commission decision prohibiting aid to acquire milk quotas)
Summary of the Judgment
Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Milk and milk products – Additional levy on milk – Regulation No 3950/– Aid granted by a Member State although not authorised by the regulation – Prohibited – No effect on the functioning of the
            market – No impact
(Council Regulation No 3950/92, Arts and 8)
Where the Community has established a common market organisation in a particular sector, it is for it to seek solutions to
         problems which may arise in the context of the common agricultural policy. Member States must therefore refrain from taking
         any unilateral measure in that area, even if that measure is likely to support the common policy of the Community.
      
In the context of the common organisation of the market for milk products, only State aid expressly authorised by Regulation
         No 3950/establishing an additional levy in the milk and milk products sector, in particular Articles and 8, is lawful.
         It follows that State aid granted by a Member State which consists of an interest-rate rebate on loans contracted to acquire
         reference quantities from other producers is not expressly authorised either by Article or by Article of that regulation,
         it must be regarded as incompatible with the common market. Furthermore, that aid is still unlawful, even if it is not such
         as to distort the functioning of that market for milk and milk products, since lawfulness does not depend on the possible
         effects that that aid may have on the functioning of that market.
      
(see paras 19-20, 22, 31)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)October 2004(1)
(Regulation (EEC) No 3950/–  Common organisation of the market for milk and milk products  –  Commission decision prohibiting aid to acquire milk quotas)
 In Case C-173/02,APPLICATION for annulment under Article EC,brought on May 2002,
            
Kingdom of Spain,  represented by S. Ortiz Vaamonde, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg, 
            
applicant,
v
Commission of the European Communities,  represented by J.L. Buendía Sierra, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg, 
            
defendant,
THE COURT (First Chamber),,
 composed of: P. Jann (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, A. Rosas and S.von Bahr, Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs, Registrar: R. Grass,
             having regard to the written procedure,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By its application the Kingdom of Spain asks the Court to annul Commission Decision 2002/411/EC of March on the State
         aid implemented by Spain for producers of cows’ milk considered to be priority producers (OJ L 144, p. 49) (‘the contested
         decision’).
         
Legal background
            
 Under Article EC:
         ‘The provisions of the chapter relating to rules on competition shall apply to production of and trade in agricultural products
         only to the extent determined by the Council … .’
         
            
 Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 804/of June on the common organisation of the market in milk and milk
         products (OJ, English Special Edition (I), p. 176) provides:
         ‘Save as otherwise provided in this Regulation, Articles to of the Treaty [now Articles to EC] shall apply to
         the production of and trade in the products listed in Article 1.’
         
            
 Article of Council Regulation (EEC) No 3950/of December establishing an additional levy in the milk and milk
         products sector (OJ L 405, p.1) provides:
         ‘1. Within the quantities referred to in Article 3, the Member State may replenish the national reserve following an across-the-board
         reduction in all the individual reference quantities in order to grant additional or specific quantities to producers determined
         in accordance with objective criteria agreed with the Commission.
          Without prejudice to Article 6(1), reference quantities available to producers who have not marketed milk or other milk products
         for one of the twelve-month periods shall be allocated to the national reserve and may be reallocated in accordance with the
         first subparagraph. Where the producer resumes production of milk or other milk products within a period to be determined
         by the Member State, he shall be granted a reference quantity in accordance with Article 4(1) no later than April following
         the date of his application.’
         
            
 The penultimate recital in the preamble to Regulation No 3950/states that in order to continue restructuring milk production
         and improving the environment, Member States should, amongst other things, be authorised to continue implementing national
         restructuring programmes and to organise some degree of mobility for reference quantities within a given geographical area,
         on the basis of objective criteria. 
         
            
 To that end, Article of Regulation No 3950/provides:
         ‘With a view to completing restructuring of milk production at national, regional or collection area level, or to environmental
         improvement, Member States may take one or more of the following actions in accordance with detailed rules which they shall
         lay down taking account of the legitimate interests of the parties:
         
–
grant compensation in one or more annual instalments to producers who undertake to abandon definitively all or part of their
               milk production and place the reference quantities thus released in the national reserve,
            
–
determine on the basis of objective criteria the conditions under which producers may obtain, in return for payment, at the
               beginning of a 12-month period, the reallocation by the competent authority or by the body designated by that authority, of
               reference quantities released definitively at the end of the preceding twelve-month period by other producers in return for
               compensation in one or more annual instalments equal to the abovementioned payment,
            
…’.
         
Factual background, the contested decision and the procedure before the Court
            
 In the marketing year 1998/the competent authorities in the Autonomous Community of the Principality of Asturias (Spain)
         implemented acquisition aid for milk quotas (‘the aid at issue’). That aid was intended to facilitate the acquisition of reference
         quantities by the milk producers regarded, by virtue of Royal Decree No 1888/of December (BOE No 2, of January
         1992, p. 84), as priority producers. It consisted of an interest‑rate rebate on loans contracted in order to finance such
         an acquisition.
         
            
 Following a complaint concerning that aid, the Commission, on March 2002, adopted the contested decision prohibiting that
         aid on the ground that it was incompatible with the common market. According to the contested decision the aid at issue was
         not authorised by the provisions of Regulation No 3950/and Article 87(2) and (3) EC was not applicable.
         
            
 In its application the Kingdom of Spain claims that the Court should annul the contested decision and order the Commission
         to pay the costs. 
         
            
 The Commission contends that the Court should dismiss the action as unfounded and order the Kingdom of Spain to pay the costs.
         
         
The application
            
 In support of its application the Spanish Government puts forward, essentially, two pleas.
         
The first plea  Arguments of the parties
         
            
 By its first plea, the Spanish Government argues that the contested decision is contrary to Regulation No 3950/92, in that
         it prohibits aid which is consistent with the objectives of that regulation and the fundamental rules and principles of Community
         law.
         
            
 In order to assess whether the aid is in accordance with Regulation No 3950/it is not necessary to show that it is expressly
         authorised by that regulation. It is sufficient to show that it is consistent with the objectives underpinning that regulation
         and that it does not infringe any other rules or fundamental principle of Community law (Case 177/Pigs and Bacon Commission  v McCarren [1979] ECR 2161, paragraph 14; Case 216/Commission v France [1988] ECR 793, paragraphs and 19; Case 90/Zoni [1988] ECR 4285, paragraph 26; and Case C-86/Italy v Commission [1990] ECR I-3891, paragraph 19). The aid at issue does, in fact, satisfy those conditions.
         
            
 In any event, the Member States have discretion to supplement the options referred to in Article of that regulation.
         
            
 The Commission replies that it does not see anything in the case-law of the Court capable of supporting the Spanish Government’s
         argument that the aid referred to by the contested decision is compatible with Regulation No 3950/even if it is not expressly
         provided for by that regulation.
         
 Findings of the Court
         
            
 As stated in Commission  v France, in paragraph 18, milk products are subject to a common organisation of the market.
         
            
 As regards the aid in that sector, it is clear from Article of Regulation No 804/68, read in combination with Article EC, that Articles EC, EC and EC are applicable to the production of and trade in milk products only to the extent
         that such application is provided for by the regulation which lays down the common organisation of the market.
         
            
 In that regard, Regulation No 3950/provides, inter alia, in Articles and 8, that the Member States may, under certain
         conditions, grant aid to producers of milk products.
         
            
 The Court has consistently held that once the Community has established a common market organisation in a particular sector,
         it is for the Community to seek solutions to problems arising in the context of the common agricultural policy. Member States
         must therefore refrain from taking any unilateral measure in that area, even if that measure is likely to support the common
         policy of the Community (Commission v France, paragraph 18, Italy v Commission, paragraph 19, and Zoni, paragraph 26).
         
            
 In the context of the common organisation of the market for milk products, only State aid expressly authorised by Regulation
         No 3950/92, in particular Articles and 8, is lawful.
         
            
 In that regard, the argument put forward by the Spanish Government that it is clear from the judgment in Case C-313/Mulligan and Others [2002] ECR I-that it is unnecessary for an aid to be expressly authorised by Regulation No 3950/cannot be accepted.
         As the Advocate General rightly states in paragraph of his Opinion, in that case the Court held that the Irish scheme at
         issue was legitimate only because it fell within the scope of the measures authorised by Article 7(1) of Regulation No 3950/(Mulligan, paragraph 29).
         
            
 In this case, the aid at issue, which consists of an interest-rate rebate on loans contracted to acquire reference quantities
         from other producers is not expressly authorised either by Article or by Article of Regulation No 3950/92.
         
            
 The reference quantities for the purchase of which the aid was paid do not come from the national reserve, were not released
         following an across-the-board reduction in all the individual reference quantities and do not correspond to the reference
         quantities available to producers who have not marketed milk or other milk products during a 12-month period, within the meaning
         of Article of Regulation No 3950/92.
         
            
 Furthermore, since the aid at issue is an interest-rate rebate, it does not constitute compensation within the meaning of
         the first indent of Article of Regulation No 3950/92.
         
            
 Finally, it does not fall within the scope of the second indent of Article 8, since the reference quantities for the purchase
         of which the compensation was paid do not come from the national reserve. 
         
            
 Moreover, as the Advocate General rightly pointed out in paragraph of his Opinion, the reference to ‘one or more of the
         following actions’ in Article of Regulation No 3950/enables the Member States to adopt singly or in combination any or
         all of the measures listed, but does not authorise them to provide for new types of actions in that field. Similarly, the
         ‘detailed rules’ which Member States may enact must serve to implement one or more of those measures.
         
            
 Consequently, the first plea must be dismissed. 
         
The second plea Arguments of the parties
         
            
 By its second plea, the Spanish Government submits that the contested decision is contrary to Regulation No 3950/92, in that
         it prohibits aid which does not have the effect of distorting the rules governing the functioning of the market for milk and
         milk products.
         
            
 According to the Spanish Government, an aid which does not distort the rules governing the functioning of the milk market
         is compatible with the common market and, therefore, cannot be prohibited. 
         
            
 The Commission maintains, if the Court holds that Regulation No 3950/does not prevent restructuring measures other than
         those for which it expressly provides to be taken, that the aid in question is capable of provoking significant distortions
         on the market and is therefore incompatible with the common rules of the market.
         
 Findings of the Court
         
            
 As stated in paragraph of the present judgment, only aid expressly authorised by Regulation No 3950/is lawful. That
         lawfulness does not depend on the possible effects that that aid may have on the functioning of the market for milk and milk
         products. Therefore, if such an aid is not expressly authorised by that regulation it is unlawful, even if it is not such
         as to distort the functioning of that market.
         
            
 In this case, the aid at issue was not expressly authorised by Regulation No 3950/92.
         
            
 It follows that the second plea must also be rejected.
         
            
 It follows from all those considerations that the application must be dismissed.
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Kingdom of Spain has been unsuccessful and the Commission has applied
         for costs, the Kingdom of Spain must be ordered to pay the costs.
         
 On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby:
         
 
1.
Dismisses the application; 
 
2.
Orders the Kingdom of Spain to pay the costs.
 Signatures.
      
 –
            
Language of the case: Spanish.
Top  
 