
Case C-301/Italian Republic
v
Commission of the European Communities
(Structural funds – Eligibility of expenditure – Amendments to programme complements – Inadmissibility)
Summary of the Judgment
Actions for annulment – Actionable measures – Acts intended to produce legal effects – Measures relating to the date of eligibility
            of new expenditure when programming documents for Community structural assistance are amended – Not included 
(Art. EC)
An action for annulment must be available in the case of all measures adopted by the institutions, whatever their nature or
         form, which are intended to have legal effects. That is not the case with regard to a document issued by the Commission in
         connection with assistance provided under the Structural Funds relating to the date of eligibility of new expenditure when
         programming documents are amended, which uses the words ‘it is proposed to introduce the following rules’, since a proposal
         is a clear and specific indication that the document is not intended to have legal effects. Moreover, before that document
         was distributed to the Member States, the Commission gave an express warning that such a document was internal, was not always
         the final version, and merely reflected the Commission’s opinion. 
      
The same applies to the three Commission notes on this matter sent to the national authorities. First, those notes merely
         refer to that document, which is not itself intended to have legal effects. Second, those notes were sent by the Commission
         in the course of the written consultation procedure for the amendment of the programme complements, initiated by the Monitoring
         Committees concerned. It is clear from Articles 15(6), 34(3) and of Regulation No 1260/laying down general provisions
         on the Structural Funds, read together, that, in such a procedure, the Commission has a mere consultative role and is not
         empowered to adopt any legally binding act, except where any amendments relate to the elements contained in the decision on
         the contribution of the Structural Funds within the meaning of Article 34(3) of that regulation, which is not, however, alleged
         in the present case. 
      
(see paras 19, 21-28)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
December (*)
      
(Structural funds – Eligibility of expenditure – Amendments to programme complements – Inadmissibility)
In Case C-301/03,
ACTION for annulment under Article EC, brought on July 2003,
Italian Republic, represented by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by G. Aiello and A. Cingolo, avvocati dello Stato, with an address
         for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Commission of the European Communities,  represented by E. de March and L. Flynn, acting as Agents, assisted by A. Dal Ferro, avvocato, with an address for service
         in Luxembourg,
      
defendant,
 
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, C. Gulmann, R. Schintgen, G. Arestis and J. Klučka,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs,
Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on June 2005,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application the Italian Republic requests the Court to annul:
      
–        Commission document No CDRR-03-0013-00-IT, relating to the date of eligibility of new expenditure when programming documents
         are amended (‘the contested document’),
      
–        Commission note No of May 2003, which was sent to the Italian authorities and relates to Regional Operational Programme
         Sardegna 2000-2006,
      
–        Commission note No of May 2003, which was sent to the Italian authorities and relates to Regional Operational Programme
         Sicilia 2000-2006,
      
–        Commission note No of June 2003, which was sent to the Italian authorities and relates to Single Programming Document
         Lazio 2000-(collectively, ‘the contested notes’), and
      
–        all connected measures, both prior and subsequent.
 Legal context
Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 1260/of June laying down general provisions on the Structural Funds
         (OJ L 161, p. 1; ‘the regulation’), entitled ‘Preparation and Approval’, states in paragraph 6:
      
‘The Member State or the managing authority shall adopt the programme complement defined in Article 9(m) after the agreement
         of the Monitoring Committee if the programme complement is drawn up after the Commission decision on the contribution of the
         Funds, or after consulting the relevant partners if it is drawn up before the decision on the contribution of the Funds. In
         the latter case, the Monitoring Committee shall either confirm the programme complement or request an adjustment in accordance
         with Article 34(3).
      
Within three months of the Commission decision approving an operational programme or single programming document, the Member
         State shall send the programme complement to the Commission in a single document for information.’
      
Article of the regulation, entitled ‘Eligibility’, states in paragraph 2:
      
‘Expenditure may not be considered eligible for a contribution from the Funds if it has actually been paid by the final beneficiary
         before the date on which the application for assistance reaches the Commission. That date shall constitute the starting point
         for the eligibility of expenditure.
      
The final date for the eligibility of expenditure shall be laid down in the decision to grant a contribution from the Funds.
         It shall relate to payments made by the final beneficiaries. It may be extended by the Commission at the duly justified request
         of the Member State in accordance with Articles and 15.’
      
Article of the regulation, entitled ‘Management by the managing authority’, states in paragraph 3:
      
‘The managing authority shall, at the request of the Monitoring Committee or on its own initiative, adjust the programme complement,
         without changing the total amount of the contribution from the Funds granted to the priority concerned nor its specific targets.
         After approval by the Monitoring Committee, it shall inform the Commission of the adjustment within one month.
      
Any amendments to the elements contained in the decision on the contribution of the Funds shall be decided by the Commission,
         in agreement with the Member State concerned, within four months of delivery of the Monitoring Committee’s approval.’
      
Under Article of the regulation, entitled ‘Monitoring Committees’:
      
‘1.      Each Community support framework or single programming document and each operational programme shall be supervised by a Monitoring
         Committee.
      
Monitoring Committees shall be set up by the Member State, in agreement with the managing authority after consultation with
         the partners. The partners shall promote the balanced participation of women and men.
      
The Monitoring Committees shall be set up no more than three months after the decision on the contribution of the Funds. The
         Monitoring Committees shall act under the authority and within the legal jurisdiction of the Member State.
      
2.      A representative of the Commission and, where appropriate, of the EIB, shall participate in the work of the Monitoring Committee
         in an advisory capacity.
      
The Monitoring Committee shall draw up its own rules of procedure within the institutional, legal and financial framework
         of the Member State concerned and agree them with the managing authority.
      
In principle, the Monitoring Committee shall be chaired by a representative of the Member State or the managing authority.
3.      The Monitoring Committee shall satisfy itself as to the effectiveness and quality of the implementation of assistance. To
         that end:
      
(a)      pursuant to Article 15, it shall confirm or adjust the programme complement, including the physical and financial indicators
         to be used to monitor the assistance. Its approval must be obtained before any further adjustment is made;
      
…’
 Factual background and procedure
In 2002, the Commission, in partnership with the Member States, embarked on an exercise aimed at simplifying the procedures
         for use of the Structural Funds. On July 2002, at the 67th meeting of the Committee for the Development and Conversion of the Regions (‘the committee’), established by Article of
         the regulation, and then on October at the ministerial meeting between the Ministers of the Member States and the Commissioner
         responsible for regional policy, the Commission submitted to the delegates of the Member States a draft document entitled
         ‘Note on the simplification, clarification, coordination and flexibility of structural policy management in the period 2000-2006’.
         One of the subjects dealt with in that document concerned the amendment of ongoing programmes.
      
As recorded in the minutes of the 67th meeting of the committee, at the beginning of the meeting the Chairman, Director in the Commission’s Directorate-General
         for ‘Regional Policy’, declared that the purpose of the information notes sent to the committee by the Commission was ‘to
         clarify for the Member States how the Commission was interpreting and applying the rules on the implementation of the Structural
         Funds. By their very nature, these documents were internal and, in addition, not always the final version’.
      
The minutes also record that the Commission representative, in reply to a question from the delegate of the Italian Republic,
         declared that ‘in cases of a modification of programmes, the starting date of eligibility of the new (or modified) measures
         is the same as the one of the programme, i.e. in most cases the date of receipt of an admissible programme’.
      
The particular issue of the retroactivity of expenditure in cases where programmes are amended was raised and discussed at
         subsequent meetings of the committee, following which the Commission informed the Member States that it had referred the question
         to its Legal Service.
      
At the 75th meeting of the committee on April the Commission presented the contested document.
      
That document states, first of all, that, with the exception of decisions relating to notified State aid, ‘[t]he original
         decisions approving programming documents lay down the date on which the eligibility of operations covered by the form of
         assistance begins, in accordance with Articles and of [the regulation]’.
      
The document goes on to state:
      
‘…
Given the need to ensure that programming continues to focus on the objective of developing and converting eligible regions
         and not simply on ensuring that funding is absorbed and automatic decommitment avoided, and in view of current practice in
         the Member States, it is proposed to introduce the following rules:
      
1.      The eligibility of new expenditure resulting from an amendment of an operational programme [“the OP”] or [a single programming
         document (“the SPD”)] should begin on the date on which the Commission receives the request for amendment of the assistance.
         The eligibility date must then be indicated in the decision approving the amendment to the SPD or OP.
      
2.      Where programming complements are amended, there are two possible situations. If the changes require an amendment of the SPD
         or OP, the eligibility date given in the decision approving the amendment of the SPD or OP will apply. On the other hand,
         if the amendment only relates to the programming complement itself, the date on which eligibility begins is to be laid down
         by the Monitoring Committee but, for the sake of sound financial management, may not be before the date on which the Committee
         approves the proposed amendment.
      
…
5.      In the case of amending decisions already adopted which do not specify a date, eligibility begins on the date laid down in
         the original, unamended decision’.
      
By letter of April sent to the Commission, the Italian Government challenged the contested document.
      
Subsequently, in the course of the written consultation procedure for the amendment of the programme complements, initiated
         by the Monitoring Committees for the Regions of Sardinia, Sicily and Lazio, the Commission sent those regions the contested
         notes in which, in addition to various comments and observations on the amendments communicated, it referred to the contested
         document and confirmed its contents.
      
 Admissibility of the action
The Commission disputes the admissibility of the action. In its submission, the contested document and notes do not constitute
         measures open to challenge for the purposes of Article EC. According to settled case-law, a measure can be the subject
         of an action for annulment only if it is intended from an objective point of view to have legal effects in relation to third
         parties and may thus directly affect the latter’s interests by bringing about a distinct change in their legal position.
      
According to the Commission, those conditions are not met in the case of the contested document and notes. It merely communicated
         to the Member States the interpretation it intends to adopt in applying Article of the regulation. The interests of third
         parties could be materially affected only by measures actually adopted in accordance with the line of conduct communicated.
      
The Italian Government considers the action to be admissible.
      
It argues that even though the contested document contains only a proposal to adopt procedural rules of a general nature,
         it is capable, as the contested notes demonstrate, of having immediate and prejudicial effects on Member States, which will
         find themselves in the position of having immediately to adopt different rules on amending programme complements, since they
         cannot run the risk that expenditure incurred in operations already carried out will be considered ineligible for Community
         cofinancing.
      
It should be noted in this regard that an action for annulment must be available in the case of all measures adopted by the
         institutions, whatever their nature or form, which are intended to have legal effects (see, in particular, Case C-443/Spain v Commission [2000] ECR I‑2415, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
It is therefore important to consider whether the contested document and notes constitute such measures.
      
With regard to the contested document, it should be pointed out that it uses the words ‘it is proposed to introduce the following
         rules’.
      
The reference to a proposal is a clear and specific indication that the content of the document is not intended to have legal
         effects.
      
Moreover, before the contested document was distributed to the Member States, the Commission gave an express warning at the
         committee’s 67th  meeting that such a document was internal, was not always the final version, and merely reflected the Commission’s opinion.
      
Therefore, in view of the wording of the contested document and the context in which it was presented, it must be held that
         this document is not intended to have legal effects.
      
The same finding applies to the contested notes.
      
First, those notes merely refer to the contested document, which is not itself intended to have legal effects.
      
Second, it is clear from the case-file that those notes were sent by the Commission in the course of the written consultation
         procedure for the amendment of the programme complements, initiated by the Monitoring Committees for the Regions of Sardinia,
         Sicily and Lazio.
      
As was pointed out by the Advocate General at paragraph of his Opinion, it is clear from Articles 15(6), 34(3) and of
         the regulation, read together, that, in such a procedure, the Commission has a mere consultative role and is not empowered
         to adopt any legally binding act, except where any amendments relate to the elements contained in the decision on the contribution
         of the Structural Funds within the meaning of Article 34(3) of the regulation. That is not, however, alleged to be so in the
         present case.
      
The Italian Government’s argument that Member States must immediately adopt different rules on amending programme complements
         if they are not to be faced with some of their expenditure being considered ineligible for Community cofinancing does not
         call into question the finding that the contested document and notes are not intended to have legal effects.
      
While the contested document and notes may have the effect of informing the Member States that they are running the risk of
         Community financing being refused for some of the expenditure incurred, in accordance with a different interpretation of the
         same provision of the regulation, this is none the less a mere consequence of fact and not a legal effect the contested document
         and notes are intended to have (see, to that effect, Case 60/IBM  v Commission [1981] ECR 2639, paragraph 19).
      
The Italian Government’s argument that the contested document and notes are intended to have legal effects on the ground that
         the Commission there adopts an incorrect interpretation of the obligations under Article of the regulation cannot, moreover,
         be accepted.
      
Even if that document and those notes contain an incorrect interpretation of that provision, that fact of itself is not capable
         of calling into question the finding, based on their wording and context, that that document and those notes are not intended
         to have legal effects.
      
Accordingly, the action must be dismissed as inadmissible.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. As the Commission has applied for costs against the Italian Republic, and
         as the latter has been unsuccessful, the Italian Republic must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Dismisses the action as inadmissible;
2.      Orders the Italian Republic to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 