
Case C-176/KVZ retec GmbH
v
Republik Österreich
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Landesgericht für Zivilrechtssachen Wien)
(Waste – Regulation (EEC) No 259/– Supervision and control of shipments of waste – Meat-and-bone meal)
Opinion of Advocate General Kokott delivered on September Judgment of the Court (First Chamber), March Summary of the Judgment
Environment – Waste – Regulation No 259/on shipments of waste 
(European Parliament and Council Regulation No 1774/2002, as amended by Regulation No 808/2003; Council Regulation No 259/93,
            as amended by Regulation No 2557/2001, Art. 1(3)(a))
Under Article 1(3)(a) of Regulation No 259/on the supervision and control of shipments of waste within, into and out of
         the European Community, as amended by Regulation No 2557/2001, the shipment of meat-and-bone meal classified as waste on account
         of a requirement or intention to discard it, which is destined for recovery only and listed in Annex II to that regulation,
         is excluded from the scope of the provisions of the regulation except as provided for in Article 1(3)(b) to (e), Article and Article 17(1) to (3) thereof. 
      
However, it is for the national court to ensure that that shipment takes place in compliance with the requirements arising
         from the provisions of Regulation No 1774/laying down health rules concerning animal by-products not intended for human
         consumption, as amended by Regulation No 808/2003, amongst which those of Articles 7, and and of Annex II to the regulation
         may prove to be relevant. 
      
The application of Regulation No 259/does not mean that the provisions of Regulation No 1774/are completely irrelevant.
         Besides the environmental risks, meat-and-bone meal presents risks of spreading disease. To avoid any threat of dispersal
         of pathogens, the provisions of Regulation No 1774/impose a series of requirements aimed at ensuring that animal by-products
         are not used or shipped for illegal purposes. In order to maintain the effectiveness of those regulations, they must therefore
         be applied in parallel so that their respective provisions are complementary. 
      
(see paras 73, 77, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
March (*)
      
(Waste – Regulation (EEC) No 259/– Supervision and control of shipments of waste – Meat-and-bone meal)
In Case C‑176/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Landesgericht für Zivilrechtssachen Wien (Austria), made
         by decision of April 2005, received at the Court on April 2005, in the proceedings
      
KVZ retec GmbH
v
Republik Österreich,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann, President of the Chamber, K. Lenaerts, E. Juhász, K. Schiemann (Rapporteur) and M. Ilešič, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: K. Sztranc‑Sławiczek, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on June 2006,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       KVZ retec GmbH, by H. Zanier and M. Firle, Rechtsanwälte,
–       the Republik Österreich, by E. Hofbauer, acting as Agent,
–       the Austrian Government, by E. Riedl, acting as Agent,
–       the French Government, by G. de Bergues and R. Loosli‑Surrans, acting as Agents,
–       the United Kingdom Government, by C. White, acting as Agent, and J. Maurici, Barrister,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by M. Konstantinidis and F. Erlbacher, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Council Regulation (EEC) No 259/of February on the supervision and control of shipments of waste within, into and out of the European Community (OJ L 30, p. 1),
         as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 2557/of December (OJ L 349, p. 1) (‘Regulation No 259/93’),
         and of Regulation (EC) No 1774/of the European Parliament and of the Council of October laying down health rules
         concerning animal by-products not intended for human consumption (OJ L 273, p. 1), as amended by Commission Regulation
         (EC) No 808/of May (OJ L 117, p. 1) (‘Regulation No 1774/2002’).
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between KVZ retec GmbH (‘KVZ’) and the Republik Österreich regarding,
         firstly, the application of the Community legislation on waste to the shipment of meat-and-bone meal for use as fuel in a
         power station and, secondly, the relation between that legislation and Regulation No 1774/2002.
      
 Legal context
 Directive 75/442/EEC
The first subparagraph of Article 1(a) of Council Directive 75/442/EEC of July on waste (OJ L 194, p. 39), as
         amended by Commission Decision 96/350/EC of May (OJ L 135, p. 32) (‘Directive 75/442’), defines the term ‘waste’
         as ‘any substance or object in the categories set out in Annex I which the holder discards or intends or is required to discard’.
      
As set out in Article of Directive 75/442:
‘For the purposes of this Directive:
…
(e)       “disposal” shall mean any of the operations provided for in Annex IIA; 
(f)       “recovery” shall mean any of the operations provided for in Annex IIB;
…’
Among the categories of waste listed in Annex I to Directive 75/is category Q16, which is defined as ‘[a]ny materials,
         substances or products which are not contained in the above categories’.
      
Annex IIB to Directive 75/is intended to list waste recovery operations as they are carried out in practice. Those operations
         include inter alia the following:
      
‘R Use principally as a fuel or other means to generate energy’.
Article 2(1) of Directive 75/provides:
‘The following shall be excluded from the scope of this Directive:
…
(b)      where they are already covered by other legislation:
…
(iii)  animal carcases and the following agricultural waste: faecal matter and other natural, non-dangerous substances used in farming;
…’
 Regulation No 259/Article of Regulation No 259/is worded as follows:
‘1. This Regulation shall apply to shipments of waste within, into and out of the Community.
2. The following shall be excluded from the scope of this Regulation:
…
(d)       shipments of waste mentioned in Article 2(1)(b) of Directive 75/442/EEC, where they are already covered by other relevant
         legislation;
      
…
3.       (a)    Shipments of waste destined for recovery only and listed in Annex II shall also be excluded from the provisions of this Regulation
         except as provided for in subparagraphs (b), (c), (d) and (e), in Article and in Article 17(1), (2) and (3).
      
         (b)    Such waste shall be subject to all provisions of Directive 75/442/EEC. It shall in particular be:
–       destined for duly authorised facilities only, authorised according to Articles and of Directive 75/442/EEC,
–       subject to all provisions of Articles 8, 12, and of Directive 75/442/EEC.
         (c)    However, certain wastes listed in Annex II may be controlled, if, among other reasons, they exhibit any of the hazardous characteristics
         listed in Annex III of Council Directive 91/689/EEC, as if they had been listed in Annex III or IV.
      
                  These wastes and the decision about which of the two procedures should be followed shall be determined in accordance with
         the procedure laid down in Article of Directive 75/442/EEC. Such wastes shall be listed in Annex IIA.
      
         (d)    In exceptional cases, shipments of wastes listed in Annex II may, for environmental or public health reasons, be controlled
         by Member States as if they had been listed in Annex III or IV.
      
                  Member States which make use of this possibility shall immediately notify the Commission of such cases and inform other Member
         States, as appropriate, and give reasons for their decision. The Commission, in accordance with the procedure laid down in
         Article of Directive 75/442/EEC, may confirm such action including, where appropriate, by adding such wastes to Annex IIA.
      
         (e)    Where waste listed in Annex II is shipped in contravention of this Regulation or of Directive 75/442/EEC, Member States may
         apply appropriate provisions of Articles and of this Regulation.’
      
Under Article 2(a) of Regulation No 259/93:
‘For the purposes of this Regulation:
(a)       “waste” is as defined in Article 1(a) of Directive 75/442/EEC’.
Article of Regulation No 259/provides that shipments of waste for recovery listed in Annex II to that regulation must
         be accompanied by certain information.
      
Article 17(1) to (3) of Regulation No 259/provides for rules applicable to shipments of waste listed in Annex II thereto
         to countries to which the Decision of the Council of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) of March on the control of transfrontier movements of wastes destined for recovery operations does not apply.
      
Annex II to Regulation No 259/93, entitled ‘Green list of wastes’ (‘the green list’), contains the following introduction:
‘Regardless of whether or not wastes are included on this list, they may not be moved as green wastes if they are contaminated
         by other materials to an extent which (a) increases the risks associated with the waste sufficiently to render it appropriate
         for inclusion in the amber or red lists, or (b) prevents the recovery of the waste in an environmentally sound manner.’
      
Category GM 130, which covers ‘[w]aste from the agro-food industry excluding by-products which meet national and international
         requirements and standards for human or animal consumption’, appears under the heading ‘GM. Wastes arising from agro-food
         industries’ in Annex II.
      
Article 26(1)(a) and (b) of Regulation No 259/states:
‘1.       Any shipment of waste effected:
(a)       without notification to all competent authorities concerned pursuant to the provisions of this Regulation; or
(b)       without the consent of the competent authorities concerned pursuant to the provisions of this Regulation
…
shall be deemed to be illegal traffic’.
 Regulation No 1774/Article of Regulation No 1774/provides that that regulation lays down animal and public health rules for the collection,
         transport, storage, handling, processing and use or disposal of animal by-products to prevent these products from presenting
         a risk to animal or public health and also rules for the placing on the market and, in certain specific cases, the export
         and transit of animal by-products and those products derived from them which are referred to in Annexes VII and VIII to the
         regulation.
      
Article 2(1) of Regulation No 1774/defines ‘animal by-products’ as entire bodies or parts of animals or products of animal
         origin referred to in Articles to of the regulation which are not intended for human consumption.
      
Article of Regulation No 1774/2002, entitled ‘Category material’, states:
1. Category material shall comprise animal by-products of the following description, or any material containing such by-products:
…
(b) (i) specified risk material, …
…
2. Category material shall be collected, transported and identified without undue delay in accordance with Article and,
         except as otherwise provided in Articles and 24, shall be:
      
(a)       directly disposed of as waste by incineration in an incineration plant approved in accordance with Article 12;
(b)       processed in a[n approved] processing plant … in which case the resulting material shall be … finally disposed of as waste
         by incineration or by co-incineration in an incineration or co-incineration plant approved in accordance with Article 12;
      
(c)       with the exclusion of material referred to in paragraph 1(a)(i) and (ii), processed in a[n approved] processing plant … in
         which case the resulting material shall be … finally disposed of as waste by burial in a[n approved] landfill …
      
…
(e)       in the light of developments in scientific knowledge, disposed of by other means that are approved in accordance with the
         procedure referred to in Article 33(2), after consultation of the appropriate scientific committee. These means may either
         supplement or replace those provided for in subparagraphs (a) to (d).’
      
Under the title ‘Category material’, Article of Regulation No 1774/provides:
‘1. Category material shall comprise animal by-products of the following description, or any material containing such by-products:
…
(e)       animal by-products derived from the production of products intended for human consumption, including degreased bones and greaves;
…
2. Category material shall be collected, transported and identified without undue delay in accordance with Article and,
         except as otherwise provided in Articles and 24, shall be:
      
(a)       directly disposed of as waste by incineration in an incineration plant approved in accordance with Article 12;
(b)       processed in a[n approved] processing plant … in which case the resulting material shall be … disposed of as waste either
         by incineration or by co-incineration in an incineration or co-incineration plant approved in accordance with Article or
         in a[n approved] landfill …
      
(c)       processed in a processing plant approved in accordance with Article 17;
(d)       transformed in a technical plant approved in accordance with Article 18;
(e)       used as raw material in a petfood plant approved in accordance with Article 18;
(f)       transformed in a biogas plant or in a composting plant approved in accordance with Article 15;
…
(i)       disposed of by other means, or used in other ways, in accordance with rules laid down under the procedure referred to in Article
         33(2), after consultation of the appropriate scientific committee. These means or ways may either supplement or replace those
         provided for in subparagraphs (a) to (h).
      
…’
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Mr Krenski, a German engineer, who trades under the business name of PGI Umwelttechnik developed a meat-and-bone meal based
         fuel intended for use in a heating process (incineration) in a power station in Bulgaria, which had been specially approved
         for that purpose.
      
On April 2003, in the port of Straubing (Germany), some t of meat-and-bone meal (‘the meat-and-bone meal’) which
         were Mr Krenski’s property were loaded onto the cargo ship MS Euroca (‘the cargo ship’) for transport by river from Germany
         to Bulgaria and the recipient of the load, the company New-Energy-GmbH. Having crossed Austria and Hungary, the cargo ship
         reached Serbia where the national customs authorities prevented it from proceeding further, on the ground that the transit
         of meat-and-bone meal is contrary to Serbian law which provides that it constitutes waste.
      
Mr Krenski declined to agree to the voluntary designation of the cargo as waste because in those circumstances it would not
         have been allowed to enter Bulgarian territory where its final destination was to be found. In order to establish whether
         or not the meat-and-bone meal being transported was waste, it was taken back towards the port of Straubing. However, in the
         course of that return journey, on June 2003, the Austrian customs authorities detained the cargo ship in the river port
         of Vienna/Hainburg.
      
By decision of June 2003, made in accordance with Paragraph of the Federal Law on Waste Management of (Abfallwirtschaftsgesetz
         2002) and Article 26(1)(a) and (b) of Regulation No 259/93, the Bundesminister für Land- und Forstwirtschaft, Umwelt und Wasserwirtschaft
         (Federal Minister for Agriculture, Forestry, the Environment and Water Management) (‘the Minister’) authorised Mr Krenski
         to take the meat-and-bone meal back to the port of Straubing subject to compliance with certain conditions and obligations.
         It is apparent from the order for reference that, in the decision of June 2003, the meat-and-bone meal was classified as
         ‘animal-tissue waste’ the shipment of which is subject to the obligation  of notification in accordance with the provisions
         of Regulation No 259/93.
      
Once those conditions and obligations were fulfilled, the Minister made it known on September that there were no further
         objections to the meat-and-bone meal’s return to Straubing and, consequently, the cargo ship left the river port of Vienna/Hainburg
         in the direction of Germany.
      
The action brought by Mr Krenksi against the decision of June 2003, in so far as it classifies the meat-and-bone meal as
         ‘animal-tissue waste’, was dismissed by order of the Verwaltungsgerichtshof (Higher Administrative Court) of October 2003.
      
Following that order, KVZ, to which Mr Krenski had assigned his claims, brought an action on the basis of administrative liability
         against the Republik Österreich before the referring court, claiming payment of a sum of EUR 984.by way of damages,
         plus interest for late payment, for detention of the cargo ship.
      
It is in those circumstances that the Landesgericht für Zivilrechtssachen  Wien (Vienna Regional Civil Court) decided to stay
         the proceedings and refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Is the shipment (transit or, more specifically, return) of meat-and-bone meal, whether or not free of special risk material,
         subject, in so far as it involves waste, to the notification obligation under Regulation No 259/93?
      
If so,
(2)      Is the shipment of meat-and-bone meal, whether or not free of special risk material, excluded from the application of Regulation
         No 259/in accordance with Article 1(2)(d) of that regulation?
      
If the answer to the second question is in the negative:
(3)       Is the shipment (transit or, more specifically, return) of meat-and-bone meal
(a)      which is free of special risk material; or
(b)      which contains special risk material (classified as “Category 1” material under … Regulation … No 1774/2002)
illegal under Article 26(1)(a) and (b) of Regulation No 259/93, in the absence of notification to and the consent of the authorities
         concerned, on the ground that it involves waste within the meaning of Regulation No 259/93?’
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
The questions referred by the national court, which must be examined together, essentially raise three fundamental issues.
         First, it must be established whether the shipment of meat-and-bone meal, if that meal is to be regarded as covered by the
         concept of animal carcases, is automatically excluded from the scope of Regulation No 259/pursuant to Article 1(2)(d) of
         that regulation. If the possibility of such an exclusion were to be ruled out, it would, secondly, be necessary to examine
         the question of the classification of that meat-and-bone meal as ‘waste’ within the meaning of Directive 75/and, therefore,
         of Regulation No 259/93. Lastly, it proves necessary to analyse whether there was an obligation to provide notification of
         the shipment of the meat-and-bone meal.
      
Before each of those three issues is examined in turn, the following few preliminary observations should be made.
The legal issues raised by the shipment of meat-and-bone meal concern the interpretation of the Community legislation relating,
         firstly, to waste and, secondly, to the protection of animal and human health. It is with the twofold nature of the dispute
         in the main proceedings in mind that an answer must be given to the national court.
      
Meat-and-bone meal is one of the products resulting from the rendering process. According to the explanations provided by
         the Austrian Government in its written observations, that meal is produced by the crushing of animal carcases which are subject
         to a batch pressure process. After the material obtained has been crushed again, the fat is extracted from it and the residue,
         which is rich in protein, is dried in order to obtain a powder which is, in part, also pressed and made into pellets.
      
The common practice of using animal protein in animal feed was suspended by Council Decision 2000/766/EC of December concerning certain protection measures with regard to transmissible spongiform encephalopathies and the feeding of animal
         protein (OJ L 306, p. 32). As is apparent from point of the reasons for that decision, as a precautionary measure,
         it was deemed appropriate to prohibit on a temporary basis the use of animal protein in animal feed and, as that prohibition
         could have environmental implications if not controlled properly, it was necessary to ensure that animal waste is collected,
         transported, processed, stored and disposed of in a safe manner.
      
Article 2(1) of Decision 2000/provided that Member States were required to prohibit the feeding of processed animal proteins
         to farmed animals which are kept, fattened or bred for the production of food.
      
On May 2001, Regulation (EC) No 999/of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down rules for the prevention,
         control and eradication of certain transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (OJ L 147, p. 1) was adopted. Article 7(1)
         of that regulation prohibited the feeding to ruminants of protein derived from mammals. Under Article 7(2), that prohibition
         was extended to animals and products of animal origin.
      
The legislative developments described in the three preceding paragraphs and the restrictions stemming from them as regards
         the use of animal protein in animal feed make it possible to understand the context in which Regulation No 1774/was adopted.
         The third recital in the preamble to that regulation states that the possible uses of certain animal material should be limited
         and that rules should be laid down for the use of animal by-products other than in feed and for the disposal of those by-products.
         In pursuit of that objective the regulation lays down animal and public health rules for the collection, transport, storage,
         handling, processing and use or disposal of animal by-products.
      
In their written observations lodged before the Court, the Austrian and United Kingdom Governments claimed that materials
         such as meat-and-bone meal can be classified as waste in view of the requirements imposed, as regards animal by-products,
         by the provisions of Regulation No 1774/2002. In its order for reference, the national court also refers to that regulation,
         but does not consider that it applies to the facts of the main proceedings. The regulation would apply only as from May
         2003, whilst the transport of the meat-and-bone meal to Bulgaria took place in April 2003.
      
It must be pointed out in that regard that the main proceedings relate to the decision of June of the Minister who,
         as is apparent from the file submitted to the Court, essentially classified the meat-and-bone meal as waste and claimed that
         its return to Germany was illegal since no notification had been given to the competent Austrian authorities. It is apparent
         from the wording of the questions referred that the national court is concerned about whether there is any such obligation
         to provide notification, in particular on account of the return journey of the meat-and-bone meal to the port of Straubing.
         Since that journey took place, as is apparent from the order for reference, after the entry into force of Regulation No 1774/on May 2003, the regulation is applicable to the main proceedings.
      
 Whether the shipment of meat-and-bone meal, if that meal is covered by the concept of animal carcases, is excluded from the
            scope of Regulation No 259/According to Article 2(1)(b)(iii) of Directive 75/442, animal carcases are excluded from the scope of that directive where
         they are already covered by other legislation. As for Article 1(2)(d) of Regulation No 259/93, it excludes from its scope
         shipments of waste mentioned in that provision of Directive 75/442.
      
It is apparent from the grounds of the order for reference that the national court considers ‘animal carcases’ to be a generic
         concept which covers not only carcases for rendering, but also the products thereby obtained, including meat-and-bone meal.
      
By contrast, the Commission submits that that concept covers only whole carcases of animals which have died in the course
         of agricultural production, whereas meat-and-bone meal is waste which results not from agricultural production as such, but
         from slaughter and rendering.    
      
The Austrian, French and United Kingdom Governments submit that meat-and-bone meal is not covered by the exclusion relating
         to animal carcases and that, consequently, shipments thereof are also not excluded from the scope of Regulation No 259/93.
         The by-products from the processing and treatment of such carcases, which have the characteristics of a powder, cannot be
         included in the concept of animal carcases.
      
In that connection, it must be pointed out that the exclusion of animal carcases and certain other waste from the scope of
         Directive 75/is explained in the sixth recital in the preamble to that directive and stems from the Community legislature’s
         intention to exclude material which is covered by specific Community rules.
      
It is common ground that animal carcases are in fact covered by specific Community rules, namely Regulation No 1774/2002.
         In particular, it follows from Article 2(1)(a) of that regulation that the definition of animal by-products includes ‘entire
         bodies or parts of animals’. That finding must not however be interpreted as meaning that everything which is covered by that
         regulation must automatically be excluded from the material scope of Directive 75/442. Thus, the fact that by-products such
         as meat-and-bone meal are also covered by Regulation No 1774/does not mean that the exclusion relating to animal carcases
         provided for by that directive and by Regulation No 259/must also be extended to those by-products.
      
It must be stated that the Community legislature has chosen to express that exclusion in precise terms. The concept of animal
         carcases, on account of its natural literal meaning, refers to dead animals, that is to say to an unprocessed raw material.
         The fact that those carcases are whole or in pieces in no way alters the fact that they have not undergone any processing
         capable of altering their inherent nature. By contrast, what is at issue in the main proceedings is meat-and-bone meal, that
         is to say a material of a completely different nature from the material from which it was produced on account of the fact
         that it has undergone a specific process, as described in paragraph of this judgment.
      
The fundamental difference between those two kinds of material is reflected, as regards the definition of animal by-products,
         in the clear distinction between ‘entire bodies or parts of animals’ and ‘products of animal origin’ made by Article 2(1)(a)
         of Regulation No 1774/2002.
      
Furthermore, the context of the term animal carcases militates in favour of a strict interpretation of the concept. Besides
         animal carcases, Article 2(1)(b)(iii) of Directive 75/excludes from its scope certain agricultural waste which is specifically
         listed. The inclusion, in the same provision, of those two terms, namely animal carcases and the agricultural waste specified,
         indicates that there is a link between them as regards their origin. By analogy, the concept of animal carcases could cover
         animal carcases from agricultural production and not from the specific process of slaughtering or rendering from which meat-and-bone
         meal is obtained.
      
A strict interpretation of the concept of animal carcases is, in addition, consistent with the case-law of the Court according
         to which the concept of waste cannot be interpreted restrictively (see Joined Cases C‑418/and C-419/ARCO Chemie Nederland and Others [2000] ECR I-4475, paragraphs to 40, and Case C-9/Palin Granitand Vehmassalon kansanterveystyön kuntayhtymän hallitus [2002] ECR I‑3533, ‘Palin Granit’, paragraph 23), which implies a strict interpretation of the exceptions to the concept of waste.
      
It is however necessary to point out that an important legislative amendment occurred in this field with the entry into force
         of Regulation (EC) No 1013/of the European Parliament and of the Council of June on shipments of waste (OJ L 190, p. 1). The 11th recital in the preamble to that regulation states that it is necessary to avoid duplication with Regulation
         No 1774/2002, which already contains provisions covering the overall consignment, channelling and movement (collection, transport,
         handling, processing, use, recovery or disposal, record keeping, accompanying documents and traceability) of animal by-products
         within, into and out of the Community.
      
Article 1(3)(d) of Regulation No 1013/excludes from its scope shipments which are subject to the approval requirements
         of Regulation No 1774/2002. However, since the regulation is applicable only as from July 2007, it cannot be taken into
         consideration in the context of the main proceedings.
      
Since meat-and-bone meal is not covered by ‘animal carcases’ within the meaning of Article 2(1)(b)(iii) of Directive 75/and, consequently, shipments of it are not automatically excluded from the scope of Regulation No 259/93, it is appropriate
         to examine whether that meal is to be classified as ‘waste’ within the meaning of Directive 75/and, therefore, of Regulation
         No 259/93.
      
 The classification of meat-and-bone meal as waste
In order to define the term ‘waste’, Article 2(a) of Regulation No 259/refers to Article 1(a) of Directive 75/442. Under
         the first subparagraph of the latter provision, ‘waste’ is regarded as ‘any substance or object in the categories set out
         in Annex I which the holder discards or intends or is required to discard’. It is common ground that meat-and-bone meal is
         covered by that annex, in particular by category Qthereof.
      
The scope of the term ‘waste’, within the meaning of Directive 75/442, turns on the meaning of the term ‘discard’ in the first
         subparagraph of Article 1(a) of that directive (see Case C-129/Inter-Environnement Wallonie [1997] ECR I-7411, paragraph 26).
      
The method of treatment or use of a substance does not determine conclusively whether or not it is to be classified as waste.
         What subsequently happens to an object or a substance does not affect its nature as waste, which, in accordance with the first
         subparagraph of Article 1(a) of Directive 75/442, is defined in terms of the holder discarding it or intending or being required
         to discard it (ARCO Chemie Nederland and Others, paragraph 64).
      
As was stated in paragraph of this judgment, the observations submitted to the Court suggest that materials such as meat-and-bone
         meal can be classified as waste in view of the requirements imposed, as regards animal by-products, by the provisions of Regulation
         No 1774/2002. The relevance of those provisions must therefore be examined and it must be considered, in particular, whether
         a requirement to discard meat-and-bone meal can be inferred from them. It should be borne in mind that the national court
         has left open the question whether or not the meat-and-bone meal contains specified risk material, as is apparent from the
         wording of the questions referred to the Court.
      
If that meat-and-bone meal contains specified risk material, it must be classified as ‘Category material’ within the meaning
         of Article 4(1)(b)(i) of Regulation No 1774/2002. In accordance with that provision, Category material is to comprise specified
         risk material or any material containing such material.
      
Under Article 4(2) of Regulation No 1774/2002, Category material must be either directly disposed of as waste by incineration
         in an approved incineration plant or processed in an approved processing plant and finally disposed of as waste by incineration
         or co-incineration or by burial in an approved landfill.
      
An obligation to dispose of products such as meat-and-bone meal where they contain specified risk material results from the
         provisions of Article 4(2) of Regulation No 1774/read in the light of the need, expressed in the seventh recital in the
         preamble to that regulation, to avoid the risk of spreading disease presented by the use, in animal feed, of proteins derived
         from the bodies, or parts of bodies, of the same species.
      
Therefore, that meat-and-bone meal, if it contains such material, must be regarded as a substance which the holder is required
         to ‘discard’ within the meaning of Article 1(a) of Directive 75/and, therefore, as waste.
      
By contrast, if the meat-and-bone meal does not contain any specified risk material, it could be a ‘Category material’ within
         the meaning of Article of Regulation No 1774/2002, as one of the ‘animal by‑products derived from the production of products
         intended for human consumption’ referred to in Article 6(1)(e) of that regulation.
      
Under Article 6(2)(a) and (b) of Regulation No 1774/2002, that category of by-products must be disposed of as waste by incineration
         in an approved incineration plant. However, unlike Category material, Category material is not intended exclusively for
         disposal. In particular, Article 6(2)(c) to (f) provides that that material may be either processed into products of economic
         value or used as raw material in a petfood plant. Since disposal of such by-products as waste is thus optional, an absolute
         requirement to discard substances such as meat-and-bone meal in so far as they do not contain specified risk material cannot
         be inferred from Regulation No 1774/2002.
      
Consequently, it must be examined whether by-products such as meat-and-bone meal which do not contain specified risk material
         can be classified as waste on the ground that the holder discards or intends to discard them. If not, they could, as submitted
         by KVZ, be classified not as waste but as raw material which does not fall within the scope of Directive 75/442. The relevant
         date in order to examine such a classification is June 2003, that is the date of adoption of the Minister’s decision classifying
         the meat-and-bone meal as waste.
      
In that regard, it should be borne in mind that the concept of ‘waste’ within the meaning of Directive 75/cannot be interpreted
         restrictively (see ARCO Chemie Nederland and Others, paragraphs to 40, and Palin Granit, paragraph 23). It should also not be understood as excluding substances and objects which are capable of economic reuse.
         The system of supervision and management established by Directive 75/is intended to cover all objects and substances discarded
         by their holders, even if they have a commercial value and are collected on a commercial basis for recycling, reclamation
         or reuse (see Palin Granit, paragraph 29).
      
Goods, materials or raw materials may constitute not a residue but a by‑product which the undertaking does not wish ‘to discard’,
         within the meaning of the first subparagraph of Article 1(a) of Directive 75/442, and  which it intends to exploit or market
         on terms which are advantageous to it. In addition to the criterion of whether a substance constitutes a production residue,
         a relevant criterion for determining whether or not that substance is ‘waste’ within the meaning of Directive 75/is the
         degree of likelihood that that substance will be reused, without any further processing prior to its reuse. If, in addition
         to the mere possibility of reusing the substance, there is also a financial advantage to the holder in so doing, the likelihood
         of reuse is high. In such circumstances, the substance in question must no longer be regarded as a burden which its holder
         seeks to discard, but as a genuine product (Palin Granit, paragraph 37).
      
However, whether it is in fact ‘waste’ within the meaning of Directive 75/must be determined in the light of all the circumstances,
         regard being had to the aim of that directive and the need to ensure that its effectiveness is not undermined (see, to that
         effect, ARCO Chemie Nederland and Others, paragraph 88).
      
It is for the national court to determine, in accordance with the case-law mentioned in the previous three paragraphs, whether,
         on June 2003, the holder of the meat-and-bone meal intended to discard it.
      
If that court reaches the conclusion that, in the main proceedings, the holder of the meat-and-bone meal in fact intended
         to discard it even though it did not contain any specified risk material, then that meat-and-bone meal should be classified
         as waste.
      
 The obligation to provide notification of the shipment of meat-and-bone meal
It remains to be examined whether the shipment of meat-and-bone meal, in the event that that meal is classified as ‘waste’
         within the meaning of Directive 75/442, on account of a requirement or intention to discard it, is subject to the notification
         obligation, in accordance with the provisions of Regulation No 259/93.
      
In its written observations, the French Government submits that, as waste from the meat agro-food industry, meat-and-bone
         meal is on the green list. Consequently, the shipment thereof should not have been subject to the notification obligation.
      
It that regard, it must be stated that, on that green list, under the heading ‘GM. Wastes arising from agro-food industries’,
         is category GM relating to ‘[w]aste from the agro-food industry excluding by-products which meet national and international
         requirements and standards for human or animal consumption’. As the Advocate General pointed out at point of her Opinion,
         the description ‘waste from the agro-food industry’ is wide enough to include meat-and-bone meal. Under Article 1(3)(a) of
         Regulation No 259/93, shipments of waste destined for recovery only and listed in Annex II are to be excluded from the provisions
         of the regulation except as provided for in Article 1(3)(b) to (e), Article and Article 17(1) to (3) thereof. A notification
         obligation cannot therefore be imposed as regards the shipment of meat-and-bone meal in so far as, on its return to Germany,
         it would still be destined for recovery and would consequently come under Annex II of Regulation No 259/93.
      
However, it should be pointed out that the introduction to Annex II states that wastes may not be moved as green wastes if
         they are contaminated by other materials to an extent which, on the one hand, increases the risks associated with the waste
         sufficiently to render it appropriate for inclusion in the amber or red lists, or, on the other hand, prevents the recovery
         of the waste in an environmentally sound manner. It must therefore be ascertained whether the hypothetical presence of specified
         risk material in the meat-and-bone meal constitutes an obstacle to its being considered to be on the green list.
      
As the Advocate General observed at point of her Opinion, it is apparent from the 14th recital in the preamble to Regulation
         No 259/that classification of waste on the green list is based on the consideration that it should not normally present
         a risk to the environment if properly recovered in the country of destination. Although, as observed by the Advocate General
         at point of her Opinion, it is unlikely that, during recovery of meat-and-bone meal as fuel, contamination of that meat-and-bone
         meal by specified risk material will lead to any apparent increased risk to the environment compared with uncontaminated meat-and-bone
         meal, it is for the national court to establish, if necessary, whether, in the main proceedings, such contamination would
         result in the exclusion of the meat-and-bone meal at issue from the green list.
      
Shipments of meat-and-bone meal would be subject to the notification obligation imposed by Regulation No 259/only where
         that meal is not on the green list or where it is no longer destined for recovery only.
      
It must be added that, under Article 1(3)(a) of Regulation No 259/93, meat-and-bone meal classified as waste which is destined
         for recovery only and is on the green list must, in any event, comply with the provisions of Article 1(3)(b) to (e), Article
         and Article 17(1) to (3) of that regulation.
      
As a final point, it is important to state that the application of Regulation No 259/does not mean that the provisions
         of Regulation No 1774/are completely irrelevant. Besides the environmental risks, meat-and-bone meal presents risks of
         spreading disease. To avoid any threat of dispersal of pathogens, the provisions of Regulation No 1774/impose a series
         of requirements aimed at ensuring, as submitted by the Commission in its written observations, that animal by-products are
         not used or shipped for illegal purposes. In order to maintain the effectiveness of those regulations, they must therefore
         be applied in parallel so that their respective provisions are complementary.
      
Such parallel implementation of those regulations is in fact necessarily contemplated by the fourth recital in the preamble
         to Regulation No 1774/2002, in which it is stated, inter alia, that the regulation should not affect the application of existing
         environmental legislation.
      
Furthermore, as noted by the Austrian Government in the written observations which it submitted to the Court, Annex VII to
         Regulation No 1774/2002, entitled ‘Specific hygiene requirements for the processing and placing on the market of processed
         animal protein and other processed products that could be used as feed material’, refers in Chapter II concerning ‘[s]pecific
         requirements for processed animal protein’, to the disposal, as waste, of mammalian processed animal protein ‘in accordance
         with [applicable] Community legislation’ which unquestionably includes Regulation No 259/(Chapter II(A)(1) of Annex VII).
         
      
Consequently, in the context of an application in parallel of Regulation No 259/and Regulation No 1774/2002, even though,
         in accordance with Article 1(3)(a) of Regulation No 259/93, notification of the shipment of waste such as meat-and-bone meal
         is not required under that regulation, in so far as that meal is destined for recovery only and is on the green list, it is
         for the national court to ensure compliance with the provisions of Regulation No 1774/2002. In that regard, Article of that
         regulation governing the collection, transport and storage of animal by-products, Article relating to the dispatch of animal
         by-products and processed products to other Member States and Article dealing with records of consignments of animal by-products
         may prove to be relevant. The hygiene requirements laid down in Annex II to Regulation No 1774/which are applicable to
         the collection and transport of animal by-products and processed products must also be borne in mind.
      
In the light of all of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the questions referred must be that, under Article 1(3)(a)
         of Regulation No 259/93, the shipment of meat-and-bone meal classified as waste on account of a requirement or intention to
         discard it, which is destined for recovery only and listed in Annex II to that regulation, is excluded from the scope of the
         provisions of the regulation except as provided for in Article 1(3)(b) to (e), Article and Article 17(1) to (3) thereof.
         However, it is for the national court to ensure that that shipment takes place in compliance with the requirements arising
         from the provisions of Regulation No 1774/2002, amongst which those of Articles 7, and and of Annex II to the regulation
         may prove to be relevant.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
Under Article 1(3)(a) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 259/of February on the supervision and control of shipments
            of waste within, into and out of the European Community, as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 2557/of December
            2001, the shipment of meat-and-bone meal classified as waste on account of a requirement or intention to discard it, which
            is destined for recovery only and listed in Annex II to that regulation, is excluded from the scope of the provisions of the
            regulation except as provided for in Article 1(3)(b) to (e), Article and Article 17(1) to (3) thereof. However, it is for
            the national court to ensure that that shipment takes place in compliance with the requirements arising from the provisions
            of Regulation (EC) No 1774/of the European Parliament and of the Council of October laying down health rules concerning
            animal by-products not intended for human consumption, as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 808/of May 2003,
            amongst which those of Articles 7, and and of Annex II to the regulation may prove to be relevant.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 