
Joined Cases C-5/and C-23/to C-36/Zuckerfabrik Jülich AG, formerly Jülich AG
v
Hauptzollamt Aachen
and
Saint Louis Sucre SNC and Others
v
Directeur général des douanes et droits indirects
and
Receveur principal des douanes et droits indirects de Gennevilliers
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Finanzgericht Düsseldorf and from the Tribunal de grande instance de Nanterre)
(Sugar – Production levies – Detailed rules for the application of the quota system – Calculation of the exportable surplus – Calculation of the average loss)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar 
(Council Regulation No 1260/2001, Art. 15(1)(b) and (c))
2.        Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar 
(Council Regulation No 1260/2001, Art. 15(1)(d); Commission Regulations No 1837/2002, No 1762/and No 1775/2004)
1.        Pursuant to Article 15(1)(c) of Regulation No 1260/on the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector, for
         the purpose of calculating the exportable surplus, all the quantities of exported products which fall under that article must,
         regardless of whether or not refunds have actually been paid, be subtracted from consumption.
      
As the exportable surplus is the difference between Community production under quotas A and B and consumption within the Community,
         the latter is not intended to include the quantities of exported products, regardless of whether they have or have not benefited
         from export refunds. The quantities of exported products cannot be considered to have been disposed of for consumption within
         the Community, within the meaning of Article 15(1)(b) of Regulation No 1260/2001.
      
The exportable surplus includes quantities of products for the disposal of which Community support measures have been laid
         down.
      
Moreover, if quantities exported without refunds were included in the account of consumption within the Community, that account
         would be overvalued. As a consequence, the exportable surplus would be underestimated. Thus, there is a risk that the objective
         pursued by the system of the self‑financing of the costs of disposing of surpluses – which has been to ensure, in a fair yet
         efficient way, that the producers themselves meet those costs in full – would not be achieved.
      
(see paras 37‑39, 44‑45, 68, operative part)
2.        Article 15(1)(d) of Regulation No 1260/on the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector is to be interpreted
         as meaning that all the quantities of exported products which fall under that article, regardless of whether or not refunds
         have actually been paid, are to be taken into account for the purpose of calculating the estimated average loss per tonne
         of product.
      
The estimated total loss – obtained by multiplying the exportable surplus by the average loss – will be excessive if a product
         may be considered to have been exported for the purpose of calculating the exportable surplus but was not correspondingly
         taken into account for the purpose of the calculation of the average loss, the denominator of which is the total tonnage of
         export obligations to be fulfilled during the current marketing year. Thus, with the exception of the largely theoretical
         case in which all exports benefit from refunds, the system introduced by the Commission, by excluding from export obligations
         the quantities exported without refunds, inasmuch as it resulted, in practice, in fixing a priori the total loss at an amount greater than that of the costs linked to refunds, goes beyond the objective of Regulation No 1260/2001,
         and in particular beyond that of the equitable financing of the costs of disposing of Community production surpluses, in accordance
         with the principle of self‑financing.
      
It follows that the method of calculating the average loss per tonne of sugar which takes into consideration only the quantities
         of exported products which actually gave rise to the payment of refunds does not comply with Article of Regulation No 1260/2001.
         Consequently, Regulations No 1762/and No 1775/fixing production levies in the sugar sector for the marketing years
         2002/and 2003/04, which apply that method, are invalid. By contrast, examination of Regulation No 1837/2002, which refers
         to the marketing year 2001/02, has not disclosed the existence of any factors liable to affect its validity since the average
         loss was calculated on the basis of the total quantities of sugar exported in the form of processed products, regardless of
         whether or not those exports had actually benefited from refunds.
      
(see paras 53‑54, 60‑61, 63‑66, 68, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Sugar – Production levies – Detailed rules for the application of the quota system – Calculation of the exportable surplus – Calculation of the average loss)
In Joined Cases C-5/and C-23/to C-36/06,
REFERENCES for preliminary rulings under Article EC, from the Finanzgericht Düsseldorf (Germany) (C‑5/06) and from the
         Tribunal de grande instance de Nanterre (France) (C‑23/to C‑36/06), made by decisions of and January respectively,
         received at the Court on and January 2006, in the proceedings
      
Zuckerfabrik Jülich AG, formerly Jülich AG (C‑5/06)
      
v
Hauptzollamt Aachen
and
Saint Louis Sucre SNC (C‑23/06),
Sucreries du Marquenterre SA (C‑24/06),
      
SA des Sucreries de Fontaine Le Dun, Bolbec, Auffray (SAFBA) (C‑25/06),
      
SA Lesaffre Frères (C‑26/06),
      
Tereos, as successor in title to Sucreries, Distilleries des Hauts de France (C‑27/06),
      
SA Sucreries & Distilleries de Souppes – Ouvré fils (C‑28/06),
      
SA Sucreries de Toury et Usines Annexes (C‑29/06),
      
Tereos (C‑30/06),
      
Tereos, as successor in title to SAS Sucrerie du Littoral Groupe SDHF (C‑31/06),
      
Cristal Union (C‑32/06),
      
Sucrerie Bourdon (C‑33/06),
      
SA Sucrerie de Bourgogne (C‑34/06),
      
SAS Vermendoise Industries (C‑35/06),
      
SA Sucreries et Raffineries d’Erstein (C‑36/06)
      
v
Directeur général des douanes et droits indirects,
Receveur principal des douanes et droits indirects de Gennevilliers,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, L. Bay Larsen (Rapporteur), K. Schiemann, J. Makarczyk and C. Toader,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: B. Fülöp, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on March 2007,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Zuckerfabrik Jülich AG (formerly Jülich AG), by H.‑J. Prieß, Rechtsanwalt,
–        Saint Louis Sucre SNC, by S. Le Roy, avocat,
–        Sucreries du Marquenterre SA, SA des Sucreries de Fontaine Le Dun, Bolbec, Auffray (SAFBA), SA Lesaffre Frères, Tereos, as
         successor in title to Sucreries, Distilleries des Hauts de France, SA Sucreries & Distilleries de Souppes – Ouvré fils, SA
         Sucreries de Toury et Usines Annexes, Tereos, Tereos, as successor in title to SAS Sucrerie du Littoral Groupe SDHF, Cristal
         Union, Sucrerie Bourdon, SA Sucrerie de Bourgogne, SAS Vermendoise Industries and SA Sucreries et Raffineries d’Erstein, by
         N. Coutrelis, avocat,
      
–        the German Government, by M. Lumma and U. Forsthoff, acting as Agents, and L. Harings, Rechtsanwalt,
–        the French Government, by G. de Bergues, A. Colomb and A.‑L. During, acting as Agents,
–        the Greek Government, by V. Kontolaimos, E. Svolopoulou and S. Charitaki, acting as Agents,
–        the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and G. Aiello, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by M. Nolin, F. Erlbacher and C. Cattabriga, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on June 2007,
gives the following
Judgment
These references for preliminary rulings concern the interpretation of Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 1260/of June on the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector (OJ L 178, p. 1), the validity of Article 6(4)
         of Commission Regulation (EC) No 314/of February laying down detailed rules for the application of the quota
         system in the sugar sector (OJ L 50, p. 40), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1140/of June (OJ
         L 160, p. 33), and the validity of Commission Regulations (EC) No 1837/of October fixing the production
         levies and the coefficient for the additional levy in the sugar sector for the marketing year 2001/(OJ L 278, p. 13),
         (EC) No 1762/of October fixing the production levies in the sugar sector for the 2002/marketing year (OJ L 254,
         p. 4) and (EC) No 1775/of October setting the production levies in the sugar sector for the 2003/marketing
         year (OJ L 316, p. 64).
      
The references have respectively been made, first, in the context of proceedings between Zuckerfabrik Jülich AG (‘Jülich’),
         a sugar manufacturer, and the Hauptzollamt (Principal Customs Office) Aachen (Germany) concerning the amount of the production
         levy required for the marketing year 2003/in connection with the financing of the common organisation of the markets in
         the sugar sector and, second, in the context of proceedings between Saint Louis Sucre SNC (‘Saint Louis Sucre’) along with
         other sugar producers, namely the companies Sucreries du Marquenterre SA, SA des Sucreries de Fontaine Le Dun, Bolbec, Auffray
         (SAFBA), SA Lesaffre Frères, Tereos, as successor in title to Sucreries, Distilleries des Hauts de France, SA Sucreries &
         Distilleries de Souppes – Ouvré fils, SA Sucreries de Toury et Usines Annexes, Tereos, Tereos, as successor in title to SAS
         Sucrerie du Littoral Groupe SDHF, Cristal Union, Sucrerie Bourdon, SA Sucrerie de Bourgogne, SAS Vermendoise Industries and
         SA Sucreries et Raffineries d’Erstein (‘Sucreries du Marquenterre and Others’), on the one hand, and the Directeur général
         des douanes et droits indirects (Director-General of Customs and Indirect Taxation) and the Receveur principal des douanes
         et droits indirects de Gennevilliers (Chief Customs Revenue Officer, Gennevilliers) (France), on the other hand, concerning
         the amounts of levies paid in respect of the marketing years 2001/02, 2002/and 2003/in connection with the financing
         of the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector.
      
 Legal context
Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 1260/states:
      
‘The reasons which have hitherto led the Community to adopt a production quota system for sugar, isoglucose and inulin syrup
         currently remain valid. However, that system has been adjusted to take account of recent developments in production, to provide
         the Community with the instruments necessary to ensure, in a fair yet efficient way, that the producers themselves meet in
         full the cost of disposing of the surpluses of Community production over consumption and to comply with the Community’s obligations
         under the Agreements resulting from the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations, hereinafter referred to as “GATT”
         …’
      
Recitals to in the preamble to Regulation No 1260/are worded as follows:
      
‘(11)          The common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector is based, firstly, on the principle that producers should bear
         full financial responsibility for the losses incurred each marketing year from disposing of that part of Community production
         under quota which is surplus to the Community’s internal consumption and, secondly, on a differentiation of price guarantees
         for disposal reflecting the production quota allocated to each undertaking. A sugar production quota is allocated to each
         undertaking on the basis of its actual production during a particular reference period.
      
(12)               Since commitments to reduce export support were implemented during the transitional period, the basic quantities of sugar
         and isoglucose and the quotas for inulin syrup should be kept at their present levels, but it must be possible for the relevant
         guarantees to be adjusted as necessary to enable the Community to comply with its commitments under the Agreement [on Agriculture
         concluded under the GATT agreements, “the Agreement”], while taking account of the fundamental factors affecting the situation
         of its sugar sector. The sector’s system of self‑financing through production levies and the production quota regime should
         be maintained.
      
(13)               The producers should thus continue to assume financial responsibility by paying a basic production levy charged on all production
         of A and B sugar, which is, however, limited to 2% of the intervention price for white sugar, and a B levy charged on the
         production of B sugar up to a limit of 37.5% of that price. In certain circumstances, producers of isoglucose and inulin syrup
         also pay a proportion of those contributions. Capping the levies in the manner described above means that in some marketing
         years sugar production is not fully self‑financing. An additional levy should be charged in those cases.
      
(14)               In the interests of equal treatment, the additional levy should be calculated for each undertaking on the basis of its share
         in the revenue generated by the production levies which it has paid for the marketing year in question. A coefficient should
         therefore be fixed for the Community as a whole representing the ratio for that marketing year between the total loss recorded
         and the total revenue generated by the production levies concerned. It is necessary to specify the conditions under which
         beet and cane sellers are to contribute to eliminating the outstanding loss for the marketing year concerned.
      
(15)               In any given marketing year, the consumption, production, importation, stock and carry-over levels, and the average loss likely
         to be borne under the self‑financing scheme, may be such that the production quotas allocated to each undertaking in the sugar
         sector result in an export volume exceeding that set in the Agreement. The guarantees linked to the quotas should therefore
         be adjusted each marketing year so that the Community can meet its commitments.’
      
Thus, Article 11(1) of Regulation No 1260/provides that the Member States are to allocate an A and B quota to each undertaking
         producing sugar, each undertaking producing isoglucose and each undertaking producing inulin syrup established in its territory
         and provided with an A and B quota during the 2000/marketing year.
      
Pursuant to Article 11(2) of that regulation, those quotas are to be allocated by reference to the A and B basic quantities
         fixed for each production region.
      
It is apparent from, inter alia, Articles 7(1), 10(3) to (5), 13(1) and 27(1) of Regulation No 1260/that the A and B
         sugar quotas are guaranteed quantities which may be disposed of on the Community market, delivered into intervention, or exported
         with the benefit of export refunds.
      
It follows from Article 15(3) and (4) of Regulation No 1260/2001, read in conjunction with recitals and in the preamble
         thereto, that the losses incurred each marketing year from disposing of that part of Community production under quota which
         is surplus to the Community’s internal consumption gives rise to production levies which are to be charged, in particular,
         to sugar manufacturers.
      
With regard to the calculation of those levies, Article provides:
      
‘1.      Before the end of each marketing year, the following shall be recorded:
(a)      a forecast of the production of A and B sugar, A and B isoglucose and A and B inulin syrup attributable to the marketing year
         concerned;
      
(b)      a forecast of the quantities of sugar, isoglucose and inulin syrup disposed of for consumption within the Community during
         the marketing year concerned;
      
(c)      the exportable surplus obtained by subtracting the quantity referred to in (b) from the quantity referred to in (a); 
(d)      an estimate of the average loss or revenue per tonne of sugar for export obligations to be fulfilled during the current marketing
         year.
      
This average loss or revenue shall be equal to the difference between the total amount of refunds and the total amount of
         levies on the total tonnage of export obligations in question;
      
(e)      an estimate of overall loss or revenue, obtained by multiplying the surplus referred to in (c) by the average loss or revenue
         referred to in (d).
      
2.      Before the end of the 2005/marketing year and without prejudice to Article 10(3), (4), (5) and (6), the following shall
         be recorded cumulatively for the 2001/to 2005/marketing years:
      
(a)      the exportable surplus established on the basis of the definitive production of A and B sugar, A and B isoglucose and A and
         B inulin syrup and the definitive quantity of sugar, isoglucose and inulin syrup disposed of for consumption within the Community;
      
(b)      the average loss or revenue per tonne of sugar resulting from the total export obligations concerned, calculated using the
         method described in the second subparagraph of paragraph 1(d) above;
      
(c)      the overall loss or revenue, obtained by multiplying the surplus referred to in (a) by the average loss or revenue referred
         to in (b);
      
(d)      the sum total of the basic production levies and the B levies charged.
The estimate of overall loss or revenue referred to in paragraph 1(e) shall be adjusted by the difference between the amounts
         referred to in (c) and (d).
      
3.      Without prejudice to Article 18(1), should the figures recorded under paragraph and adjusted under paragraph result in
         a foreseeable overall loss, then that loss shall be divided by the estimated production of A and B sugar, A and B isoglucose
         and A and B inulin syrup attributable to the current marketing year. The resulting amount shall be charged to manufacturers
         as a basic production levy on their production of A and B sugar, A and B isoglucose and A and B inulin syrup.
      
…
4.      Should the maximum permitted basic production levy not fully cover the overall loss referred to in the first subparagraph of
         paragraph 3, the balance not covered shall be divided by the estimated production of B sugar, B isoglucose and B inulin syrup
         attributable to the marketing year in question. The resulting amount shall be charged to manufacturers as a B levy on their
         production of B sugar, B isoglucose and B inulin syrup.
      
…
6.      All the losses resulting from the grant of production refunds under Article 7(3) shall be taken into account when calculating
         the overall loss referred to in paragraph 1(e).
      
7.      The levies referred to in this Article shall be collected by the Member States.
8.      Detailed rules for applying this Article shall be adopted in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 42(2), and
         shall cover in particular:
      
–        the amounts of the levies to be collected,
…’
Article of Regulation No 1260/states:
      
‘1.      Where the overall loss recorded for a particular marketing year under Article 15(1) and (2) is not fully covered by the proceeds
         from the production levies for that marketing year after application of Article 15(3), (4) and (5), an additional levy shall
         be charged to manufacturers, without prejudice to Article 4, to cover the outstanding balance of the overall loss. 
      
2.      The additional levy shall be determined for each sugar-producing undertaking, each isoglucose-producing undertaking and each
         inulin syrup‑producing undertaking by multiplying the total sum due from the undertaking by way of production levies for the
         marketing year concerned by a coefficient to be determined. That coefficient shall be the ratio for the entire Community,
         reduced by 1, between the overall loss recorded under Article 15(1) and (2) for the marketing year concerned and the proceeds
         from the basic production levies and B levies due from manufacturers of sugar, isoglucose and inulin syrup, respectively,
         for that marketing year. 
      
…
5.      Detailed rules for applying this Article, in particular the coefficient referred to in paragraph 2, shall be adopted in accordance
         with the procedure referred to in Article 42(2).’
      
Pursuant to, inter alia, Articles 15(8) and 16(5) of Regulation No 1260/2001, the Commission of the European Communities adopted
         Regulation No 314/2002.
      
In its original version, Article 6(4) of that regulation stated that:
      
‘The quantity to be determined under Article 15(1)(b) of Regulation … No 1260/shall be established on the basis of the
         sum of the following quantities:
      
(a)      the quantities of sugar, isoglucose and inulin syrup disposed of in the Community for direct consumption or for consumption
         after processing by the user industries;
      
(b)      the quantities of denatured sugar;
(c)      the quantities of sugar, isoglucose and inulin syrup imported from non‑member countries as processed products.
There shall be subtracted from the sum referred to in the first subparagraph the sum of the quantities of sugar, isoglucose
         and inulin syrup exported to non‑member countries as processed products and the quantities of basic products expressed as
         white sugar for which certificates for the production refunds referred to in Article 7(3) of Regulation … No 1260/have
         been issued.’
      
That provision was amended by Regulation No 1140/as follows:
      
‘The quantities disposed of for consumption in the Community to be recorded under Article 15(1)(b) and (2)(a) of Regulation
         … No 1260/shall be established by totalling the quantities, expressed as white sugar, of the sugars and syrups indicated
         in Article 1(1)(a), (b), (c) and (d) and of isoglucose and inulin syrup:
      
(a)      stored at the beginning of the marketing year;
(b)      produced under quotas A and B;
(c)      imported in the natural state;
(d)      contained in imported processed products;
subtracting the quantities referred to in the first subparagraph, expressed as white sugar, of sugar, isoglucose and inulin
         syrup:
      
(a)      exported in the natural state;
(b)      contained in exported processed products;
(c)      stored at the end of the marketing year;
(d)      for which certificates for production refunds as indicated in Article 7(3) of Regulation … No 1260/have been issued.
…’
Article 6(5) of Regulation No 314/states:
      
‘The following shall be regarded within the meaning of Article 15(1)(d) of Regulation … No 1260/as export obligations
         to be fulfilled during the current marketing year:
      
(a)      all quantities of sugar to be exported in the natural state with export refunds or levies fixed by means of tenders opened
         in respect of that marketing year;
      
(b)      all quantities of sugar, isoglucose and inulin syrup to be exported in the natural state with export refunds or levies fixed
         periodically on the basis of export licences issued during that marketing year;
      
(c)      all foreseeable exports of sugar, isoglucose and inulin syrup in the form of processed products with export refunds or levies
         fixed for that purpose during that marketing year, such quantities being spread evenly over the marketing year.
      
For the calculation of the foreseeable average loss referred to in Article 15(1)(d) of Regulation … No 1260/2001, the production
         refunds for the quantities of basic products expressed as white sugar for which certificates for the production refunds referred
         to in Article 7(3) of that Regulation have been issued during the course of the marketing year in question shall also be taken
         into account.’
      
The amounts of the production levies were fixed for the marketing years 2001/02, 2002/and 2003/04, respectively, by Regulations
         No 1837/2002, No 1762/and No 1775/2004, pursuant to Regulations No 1260/and No 314/2002, the latter, where appropriate,
         as amended by Regulation No 1140/2003.
      
 The actions in the main proceedings and the questions referred for preliminary rulings
 Case C‑5/By decision of October 2004, the Hauptzollamt Aachen calculated Jülich’s production levy by applying, in respect of the
         basic production levy for A and B sugar, the amount per tonne laid down in Article 1(a) of Regulation No 1775/and, in
         respect of the B levy relating to B sugar, the amount per tonne referred to in Article 1(b) of that regulation.
      
Upon the rejection of its complaint challenging that decision, Jülich brought an action before the Finanzgericht (Finance
         Court) Düsseldorf, claiming that Regulation No 1775/was invalid on the ground that the Commission had erred in its calculation
         of the production levies. First, Jülich submitted, when calculating the exportable surplus the Commission had wrongly included
         the quantity of tonnes of sugar exported from the Community in the form of processed goods, in respect of which no
         export refunds had been paid, since, moreover, the Community budget had suffered no loss in respect of that quantity. Second,
         it argued, in calculating the average loss, the Commission had failed to include that quantity. There was, Jülich submitted,
         no objective justification for using two different quantities for the purpose of calculating the exportable surplus and the
         average loss per tonne of sugar.
      
According to the national court, if the purpose of charging production levies were simply to require producers to meet the
         costs of disposing of surplus Community production, the act of setting levies without taking account of the fact that export
         refunds are paid only in respect of a portion of the sugar exported would go beyond what is necessary to achieve that aim.
         The Finanzgericht Düsseldorf decided, therefore, to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court
         of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Is Article of [Regulation No 1260/2001] to be interpreted as meaning that, when determining the exportable surplus, account
         should be taken only of those export quantities of sugar, isoglucose and inulin syrup in respect of which export refunds have
         actually been paid?
      
(2)      If Question is to be answered in the affirmative: is Article 6(4) of [Regulation No 314/2002], as amended by [Regulation
         No 1140/2003], invalid?
      
(3)      If Question is to be answered in the negative: is Article of [Regulation No 1260/2001] to be interpreted as meaning that,
         when determining both the exportable surplus and the average loss per tonne of sugar, all exports are to be taken into account,
         even where no export refunds were paid in respect of a portion of those exports in the relevant marketing year?
      
(4)      If Questions 1, or are to be answered in the affirmative: is [Regulation No 1775/2004] invalid?’
 Cases C‑23/to C-36/Saint Louis Sucre along with Sucreries du Marquenterre and Others are liable, as sugar manufacturing companies, to pay production
         levies on sugar.
      
Being of the opinion that the levies which they had paid for the marketing years 2001/02, 2002/and 2003/were too high,
         they applied for a partial refund of those levies by the Receveur principal des douanes et droits indirects de Gennevilliers,
         who was entrusted with their collection.
      
By decisions of the Receveur principal of February 2005, the claims for reimbursement were rejected on the ground that
         the rates of the contested levies resulted from the application of Community legislation.
      
Accordingly, Saint Louis Sucre and Sucreries du Marquenterre and Others brought actions before the Tribunal de grande instance
         de Nanterre (Regional Court, Nanterre) (France) seeking orders annulling the decisions and ordering partial reimbursement
         of the contested levies together with payment of default interest.
      
The applicants in the main proceedings claim that the relevant Community legislation laid down different accounting for sugar
         exported in the form of processed products not eligible for export refunds, first, by including it in the exportable surplus
         to be financed and, second, by excluding it from ‘the export obligations in question’ which enable ‘the average loss’ to be
         calculated in order to finance effectively the disposal of that surplus. Thus, they contend, the Commission overestimated
         the amount of the levies for the marketing years 2001/02, 2002/and 2003/and failed to comply with the self‑financing
         objective imposed by the Council of the European Union.
      
Consequently, the applicants in the main proceedings challenge the validity of Article 6(4) of Regulation No 314/2002, which,
         they claim, in the version as amended by Regulation No 1140/2003, gives too wide a definition to the concept of exportable
         surplus, contrary to the principles of proportionality, the hierarchy of norms and the limitation of the Commission’s implementing
         powers. As a secondary point and on the same grounds, they challenge the validity of the regulations fixing, pursuant to Regulation
         No 314/2002, the amounts of the production levies for the marketing years at issue in the main proceedings.
      
In the alternative, and should a wide definition of the concept of exportable surplus prevail, Saint Louis Sucre and Sucreries
         du Marquenterre and Others claim that the objective of strict self‑financing laid down in Regulation No 1260/has still
         not been complied with inasmuch as the Commission, which took into account in products exported without refunds in its
         annual calculations of the average loss, now overlooks in its calculations the fact that the constituent elements of the ‘exportable
         surplus’ and the calculation of the ‘average loss’ must be identical.
      
Against this background, the Tribunal de grande instance de Nanterre decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following
         questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Is Article 6(4) of … Regulation … No 314/and/or Regulations … No 1837/2002, No 1762/and No 1775/adopted to
         implement it invalid in the light of Article of … Regulation … No 1260/and in the light of the principle of proportionality,
         in that, with regard to calculation of the production levy, they do not provide for the exclusion from the “exportable surplus”
         of the sugar contained in processed products which are exported without export refunds?
      
If the answer to this question is in the negative:
(2)      Are Regulations … No 1837/2002, No 1762/and No 1775/invalid in the light of … Regulation … No 314/and Article of … Regulation … No 1260/and of the principles of equality and proportionality, in that they lay down a production levy
         for sugar which is calculated on the basis of the “average loss” per tonne exported, which does not take account of the quantities
         exported without refund, although these quantities are included in the total used to evaluate the total loss to be financed?’
      
 The joining of Case C-5/and Cases C-23/to C-36/In view of the connections between Case C-5/and Cases C‑23/to C‑36/06, it is appropriate, in accordance with Article of the Rules of Procedure, read in conjunction with Article of those rules, to join those cases for the purpose of the
         judgment.
      
 The questions referred for preliminary rulings
As the questions referred by the two national courts for preliminary rulings are essentially the same, it is appropriate to
         deal with them by reference to the manner in which they are formulated in Case C‑5/06.
      
 The question whether, pursuant to Article of Regulation No 1260/2001, all the quantities of exported products which fall
            under that provision are, for the purpose of calculating the exportable surplus, to be subtracted from the consumption within
            the Community
It should be pointed out that the 11th recital in the preamble to Council Regulation (EEC) No 1785/of June on the
         common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector (OJ L 177, p. 4) laid down, as provided for in recital in the
         preamble to Regulation No 1260/2001, that changes were to be made to the system of production levies in order to take account
         of recent developments in production, in particular ‘to provide the Community with the instruments necessary to ensure, in
         a fair yet efficient way, that the producers themselves meet in full the cost of disposing of the surpluses of Community production
         over consumption …’.
      
Article 28(1) of Regulation No 1785/81, which laid down the criteria for calculating the production levies on the production
         of A and B sugar and on A and B isoglucose, provided as follows:
      
‘Before the end of the 1981/to 1985/marketing years, there shall be recorded:
(a)      estimates of the production of A and B sugar and [of] A and B isoglucose attributable to the marketing year in question;
(b)      estimates of the quantities of sugar and isoglucose disposed of for consumption within the Community during the marketing
         year in question;
      
(c)      the exportable surplus obtained by subtracting the quantity referred to in (b) from the quantity referred to in (a);
(d)      estimates [of] the average loss or the average revenue per tonne of sugar for export obligations to be fulfilled during the
         current marketing year.
      
This average loss or average revenue shall be equal to the difference between the total amount of refunds and the total amount
         of levies on the total tonnage of export obligations in question;
      
(e)      estimates of the total loss or the total revenue obtained by multiplying the surplus referred to in (c) by the average loss
         or the average revenue referred to in (d).’
      
That provision, although successively replaced by Article 33(1) of Council Regulation (EC) No 2038/of September on the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector (OJ L 252, p. 1) and by Article 15(1) of Regulation No 1260/2001,
         has remained essentially unchanged.
      
Article 5(5) of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 1443/of June laying down detailed rules for the application of the
         quota system in the sugar sector (OJ L 158, p. 17) provided that the quantities of sugar and isoglucose exported as processed
         products to non‑member countries were to be subtracted from the quantities of sugar and isoglucose included in the account
         of consumption within the Community.
      
It is, in particular, clear from the Court file relating to Cases C‑23/to C‑36/that, with regard to the exportable surplus,
         the Commission has consistently contended that this corresponds to production less disposals of sugar, since exports of sugar
         as processed products, regardless of whether or not they benefit from a refund, are included not in the consumption within
         the Community, but in the surplus.
      
Article of Regulation No 1260/2001, which lays down the criteria for calculating the production levies on the production
         of A and B sugar, A and B isoglucose and A and B inulin syrup, lays down, in Article 15(1)(a) to (c), that the exportable
         surplus is obtained by subtracting the forecast of the quantities of sugar, isoglucose and inulin syrup disposed of for consumption
         within the Community during the marketing year concerned from the forecast of the production of A and B sugar, A and B isoglucose
         and A and B inulin syrup attributable to the marketing year concerned.
      
Pursuant to Article 15(1)(d) of that regulation, the estimate of average loss is equal to the difference between the total
         amount of refunds and the total amount of levies on the total tonnage of export obligations in question.
      
The estimate of overall loss is, according to Article 15(1)(e) of Regulation No 1260/2001, obtained by multiplying the exportable
         surplus by the average loss.
      
As the exportable surplus is the difference between Community production under quotas A and B and consumption within the Community,
         the latter is not intended to include the quantities of exported products, regardless of whether they have or have not benefited
         from export refunds.
      
The quantities of exported products cannot be considered to have been disposed of for consumption within the Community, within
         the meaning of Article 15(1)(b) of Regulation No 1260/2001.
      
The exportable surplus includes quantities of products for the disposal of which Community support measures have been laid
         down. Thus, for example, the quantities of products which may be in stock at the end of the marketing year must be entered
         in the accounts as unconsumed quantities for the purpose of establishing the exportable surplus even though, by definition,
         they have not, at that stage, benefited from disposal support measures.
      
The exportable surplus is not to be confused with the quantities of exported products. Those products, despite giving rise
         to refunds, do not always lead to financial costs for producers. That is particularly the case where the quantity resulting,
         by definition, from the difference between initial stocks and Community production, on the one hand, and final stocks, on
         the other hand, is greater than the Community production and where the quantities of products giving entitlement to refunds
         do not exceed the difference between the Community production and that quantity.
      
As the Commission essentially contends, if the objective of Regulation No 1260/had been to base the calculation of production
         levies on the budgetary costs of refunds, it would have sufficed to calculate those levies from the total loss based on export
         and production refunds.
      
It should be pointed out that the estimate of the total loss, as defined in Article 15(1)(e) of Regulation No 1260/2001, is
         not identical to the total amount of refunds for the marketing year concerned, but is made up of the product of the exportable
         surplus and the estimate of the average loss per tonne of sugar for export obligations to be fulfilled during the current
         marketing year.
      
It follows that the method for calculating the estimated total loss is designed, in any event, to establish, in a forward-looking
         and conventional way, the losses caused by disposing of surplus Community production.
      
If quantities exported without refunds were included in the account of consumption within the Community, that account would
         be overvalued. As a consequence, the exportable surplus would be underestimated. Thus, there is a risk that the objective
         pursued by the system of the self‑financing of the costs of disposing of surpluses – which, from the introduction of that
         system by Regulation No 1785/81, has been to ensure, in a fair yet efficient way, that the producers themselves meet those
         costs in full, and the application of which by the Commission has always been based on a definition of exportable surplus
         which includes sugar exports regardless of whether they benefit from a refund – would not be achieved. There is therefore
         a risk that the maintenance of the system would be liable to be undermined, contrary to recital in the preamble to Regulation
         No 1260/2001.
      
In the light of the foregoing, Article 15(1)(c) of Regulation No 1260/must be interpreted as meaning that, for the purpose
         of calculating the exportable surplus, all the quantities of exported products which fall under that article, regardless of
         whether or not refunds have actually been paid, are to be subtracted from consumption.
      
 The question whether, pursuant to Article of Regulation No 1260/2001, all the quantities of exported products which fall
            under that provision are to be taken into account for the purpose of calculating the estimated average loss per tonne of sugar
Pursuant to Article 15(1)(d) of Regulation No 1260/2001, the average loss is equal to the difference between the total amount
         of refunds and the total amount of levies on the total tonnage of export obligations in question to be fulfilled during the
         marketing year concerned.
      
The estimate of the total loss is, according to Article 15(1)(e) of that regulation, calculated by multiplying the exportable
         surplus by the average loss.
      
Pursuant to Article 22(1) of that regulation, exports from the Community of sugar, isoglucose and inulin syrup are subject
         to the presentation of an export licence, the issue of which is conditional on the provision of a guarantee that the obligation
         to export during the term of validity of the licence will be fulfilled.
      
In the context of the exports referred to in Regulation No 1260/2001, it is necessary, in the absence of specific reasons
         to the contrary, to interpret the concept of ‘export obligations to be fulfilled during the current marketing year’ which
         appears in Article 15(1)(d) of that regulation in a manner which is consistent with Article 22(1) of that regulation, which
         refers to the export obligation.
      
Thus, in the present context, that concept has the effect of covering any quantity of products falling under Article of
         Regulation No 1260/which is intended for export from the Community.
      
In that regard, it should be pointed out that, contrary to the contentions of the numerous interested parties which submitted
         observations in the proceedings, the question whether or not the quantities of products for export attract export refunds
         is not relevant in the light of the concept of ‘export obligations to be fulfilled during the current marketing year’. That
         concept covers only the quantities of products for which export licences have been issued.
      
Such an interpretation of Article 15(1)(d) of Regulation No 1260/is consistent with the concept of ‘exportable surplus’
         which appears in Article 15(1)(c), as identified at paragraph of the present judgment, and makes it possible, moreover,
         to calculate in a coherent manner the estimated total loss as defined in Article 15(1)(e).
      
As the applicants in the main proceedings and the German and French Governments have in essence argued, the estimated total
         loss – obtained by multiplying the exportable surplus by the average loss – will be excessive if a product may be considered
         to have been exported for the purpose of calculating the exportable surplus but was not correspondingly taken into account
         for the purpose of the calculation of the average loss, the denominator of which, as specified in the second subparagraph of
         Article 15(1)(d) of Regulation No 1260/2001, is the total tonnage of export obligations to be fulfilled during the current
         marketing year.
      
It is apparent from the Court file and, more specifically, from Commission working document D/32013/on the method for calculating
         levies in respect of ‘sugar production’ submitted to the Management Committee for the Sugar Sector on September that
         certain Member States have expressed the wish for sugar exported without refunds to be included in the calculation of the
         average loss. According to that document, the total loss, as calculated by the Commission, inter alia in application of Article 6(5)
         of Regulation No 314/2002, namely in particular by excluding from export obligations the quantities exported without refunds,
         is equal to or greater than the cost of the sugar refunds.
      
The Commission, however, contends that such a method of calculation makes it possible to discourage the creation of surpluses
         which would exert downward pressure on market prices, would destabilise the common organisation of markets in the sugar sector
         and might give rise to costs, particularly intervention purchase costs.
      
That argument cannot be accepted.
      
It follows from recitals 9, and in the preamble to Regulation No 1260/that the system introduced by that regulation
         seeks to make producers meet in full, in a fair yet efficient way, the cost of disposing of the surpluses of Community production
         in accordance with the principle of self‑financing.
      
As the Court has ruled, the system for financing the costs of disposal is designed in such a way that the A quota, which represents
         internal consumption, attracts only a minimal levy whereas the B quota, which is mainly for export, is subject to a much higher
         levy in order to finance the necessary refunds whilst discouraging production (see Case 250/Eridania zuccherifici nazionali and Others [1986] ECR 117, paragraph 19).
      
The dissuasive effect which, according to the ruling of the Court in Eridania zuccherifici nazionali and Others, the system for financing the costs of disposal is liable to have on producers derives, as the Advocate General has noted
         at point of her Opinion, from the very fact that the production levy imposes on producers the burden of financing the costs
         of disposing of Community production surpluses.
      
With the exception of the largely theoretical case in which all exports benefit from refunds, the system introduced by the
         Commission, inasmuch as it resulted, in practice, in fixing a priori the total loss at an amount greater than that of the
         costs linked to refunds, goes beyond the objective of Regulation No 1260/2001, and in particular beyond that of the equitable
         financing of the costs of disposing of Community production surpluses, noted at paragraph of the present judgment.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the question referred must be that Article 15(1)(d) of Regulation No 1260/is to be interpreted as meaning that all the quantities of exported products which fall under that article, regardless of
         whether or not refunds have actually been paid, are to be taken into account for the purpose of calculating the estimated
         average loss per tonne of product.
      
 The validity of Regulations No 1837/2002, No 1762/and No 1775/Regulations No 1837/2002, No 1762/and No 1775/fixed, for the marketing years 2001/02, 2002/and 2003/04, the amount
         of the production levies in the sugar sector.
      
It is common ground that the Commission, pursuant to Article 6(5) of Regulation No 314/2002, took into account, for the purpose
         of calculating the average loss per tonne of sugar, only those exports which had attracted refunds. However, it is evident
         from the Court file that that method of calculation has been applied only from 2003. As regards the marketing year 2001/02,
         to which Regulation No 1837/relates, it is not contested that, for the purpose of fixing the production levies, the Commission
         calculated the average loss by basing itself on the total quantities of sugar exported in the form of processed products,
         regardless of whether or not those exports had actually benefited from refunds. The following year, the Commission proceeded
         to correct the calculation of the average loss by taking into consideration only the quantities of exported products which
         had actually given rise to the payment of refunds. This led to an increase in the average loss, the amount of which was carried
         over into the total loss for the marketing year 2002/03.
      
It follows from the answer given at paragraph of the present judgment that such a method of calculating the average loss
         does not comply with Article of Regulation No 1260/2001.
      
Consequently, Regulations No 1762/and No 1775/2004, which apply that method, are invalid.
      
In the light of the foregoing, examination of Regulation No 1837/has not disclosed the existence of any factors such
         as to affect its validity.
      
That notwithstanding, it follows from the arguments set out above that the correction of the calculation of the average loss
         noted at paragraph of the present judgment, inasmuch as it was based on the method of calculation noted in that paragraph,
         does not comply with Article of Regulation No 1260/2001.
      
Having regard to all the foregoing considerations, the answer to the questions referred must be that:
      
–        pursuant to Article 15(1)(c) of Regulation No 1260/2001, for the purpose of calculating the exportable surplus, all the quantities
         of exported products which fall under that article must, regardless of whether or not refunds have actually been paid, be
         subtracted from consumption;
      
–        Article 15(1)(d) of that regulation is to be interpreted as meaning that all the quantities of exported products which fall
         under that article must, regardless of whether or not refunds have actually been paid, be taken into account for the purpose
         of calculating both the exportable surplus and the average loss per tonne of product;
      
–        Regulations No 1762/and No 1775/are invalid; and
–        examination of Regulation No 1837/has not disclosed the existence of any factors such as to affect its validity.
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the respective actions pending before the
         national courts, the decisions on costs are a matter for those courts. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court,
         other than the costs of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
Pursuant to Article 15(1)(c) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1260/of June on the common organisation of the markets
            in the sugar sector, for the purpose of calculating the exportable surplus, all the quantities of exported products which
            fall under that article must, regardless of whether or not refunds have actually been paid, be subtracted from consumption.
Article 15(1)(d) of that regulation is to be interpreted as meaning that all the quantities of exported products which fall
            under that article must, regardless of whether or not refunds have actually been paid, be taken into account for the purpose
            of calculating both the exportable surplus and the average loss per tonne of product.
Commission Regulations (EC) No 1762/of October fixing the production levies in the sugar sector for the 2002/marketing year and (EC) No 1775/of October setting the production levies in the sugar sector for the 2003/marketing year are invalid.
Examination of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1837/of October fixing the production levies and the coefficient
            for the additional levy in the sugar sector for the marketing year 2001/has not disclosed the existence of any factors
            such as to affect its validity.
[Signatures]
* Languages of the cases: German and French.
      
Top  
 