
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-177/Italian RepublicvCommission of the European Communities
«(EAGGF – Clearance of accounts – Financial years to – Export refunds – Olive oil – Sale of intervention alcohol)»
Opinion of Advocate General Léger delivered on September I - Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber), January I - Summary of the Judgment
Agriculture – EAGGF – Clearance of accounts – Disallowance of expenditure arising from irregularities in the application of the Community rules – Disputed by the Member State concerned – Burden of proof(Council Regulation No 729/70)As regards the inspections carried out by Commission staff in connection with the clearance of EAGGF accounts, the Member
         State concerned cannot disprove the Commission's findings without substantiating its own claims by providing evidence of a
         reliable and operational supervisory system. If it is not able to show that the Commission's findings are inaccurate, they
         are likely to raise serious doubts as to the existence of an appropriate and effective body of supervisory measures and inspection
         procedures.see para. JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)January (1)
((EAGGF – Clearance of accounts – Financial years to – Export refunds – Olive oil – Sale of intervention alcohol))
In Case C-177/00, 
            
 Italian Republic,  represented by U. Leanza, acting as Agent, assisted by D. Del Gaizo, avvocato dello Stato, with an address for service in
            Luxembourg, 
            
applicant, 
v
 Commission of the European Communities,  represented by E. de March and L. Visaggio, acting as Agents, assisted by A. Dal Ferro, avvocato, with an address for service
            in Luxembourg,
            
defendant, 
APPLICATION for partial annulment of Commission Decision 2000/216/EC of March excluding from Community financing certain
            expenditure incurred by the Member States under the Guarantee Section of the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee
            Fund (EAGGF) (OJ L 67, p. 37), in so far as it imposes financial adjustments in respect of expenditure declared by the
            applicant Member State,
            
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),,
composed of: M. Wathelet, President of the Chamber, D.A.O. Edward, A. La Pergola, P. Jann (Rapporteur) and S. von Bahr, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: P. Léger, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2002, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on May 2000, the Italian Republic brought an action, pursuant to the first
         paragraph of Article EC, for partial annulment of Commission Decision 2000/216/EC of March excluding from Community
         financing certain expenditure incurred by the Member States under the Guarantee Section of the European Agricultural Guidance
         and Guarantee Fund (EAGGF) (OJ L 67, p. 37,  
         the contested decision), in so far as it imposed three financial adjustments in respect of expenditure declared by the applicant Member State. 
         
            
The application for partial annulment concerns the following adjustments, the description of which and reasons for which are
         given in the Commission's summary report of October on the results of the inspections in the clearance of the accounts
         of the Guarantee Section of the EAGGF as regards export refunds, fruit and vegetables, animal premiums, agri-environmental
         measures, financial audit, arable crops, flax and hemp (Document VI/10529/99) (
         the summary report): 
         
─
a negative adjustment of ITL applied to expenditure declared in respect of export refunds (paragraph 2.8.of the summary report); 
         
─
a negative adjustment of ITL applied to expenditure declared in respect of export refunds for olive oil (paragraph
            2.8.of the summary report); 
         
─
a negative adjustment of ITL corresponding to the amount of a security which should have been forfeited in connection
            with the sale of alcohol from intervention stocks (paragraph 7.of the summary report). 
         
The negative adjustment of ITL in respect of export refunds
            
By its action, the Italian Republic challenges first of all a negative adjustment of ITL which the Commission
         applied to export refunds on the ground that inadequate physical checks had been carried out by the national authorities.
         
         General legal background
         
            
Articles and of Council Regulation (EEC) No 729/of April on the financing of the common agricultural policy
         (OJ, English Special Edition (I), p. 218) provide that the European Community will finance from the Guarantee Section
         of the Fund refunds on exports to third countries and intervention intended to stabilise the agricultural markets, granted
         in accordance with the Community rules within the framework of the common organisation of agricultural markets. 
         
            
Article 8(1) of the same regulation provides that Member States are to take the measures necessary to satisfy themselves that
         transactions financed by the Fund are actually carried out and are executed correctly, to prevent and deal with irregularities,
         and to recover sums lost as a result of irregularities or negligence.  
         
            
Article 8(2) of that regulation provides that in the absence of total recovery, the financial consequences of irregularities
         or negligence are to be borne by the Community, with the exception of the consequences of irregularities or negligence attributable
         to administrative authorities or other bodies of the Member States.  
         
            
Article 9(1) of Regulation No 729/provides that Member States are to make available to the Commission all information required
         for the proper working of the Fund and take all suitable measures to facilitate the supervision which the Commission may consider
         it necessary to undertake within the framework of the management of Community financing, including inspections on the spot.
          
         
            
Article 9(2) of that regulation provides that officials appointed by the Commission to carry out inspections on the spot are
         to have access to the books and all other documents relating to expenditure financed by the Fund. At the request of the Commission
         and with the agreement of the Member State, inspections or inquiries concerning the transactions referred to in RegulationNo
         729/are to be carried out by the competent authorities of that Member State. Officials of the Commission may also participate.
          
         
            
Article 1(1) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4045/of December on scrutiny by Member States of transactions forming
         part of the system of financing by the Guarantee Section of the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund, and repealing
         Directive 77/435/EEC (OJ L 388, p. 18) concerns scrutiny of the commercial documents of recipient undertakings in order
         to ascertain whether transactions forming part of the system of financing by the Guarantee Section of the EAGGF have actually
         been carried out and have been executed correctly. Article 2(1) of that regulation provides that Member States are to carry
         out systematic scrutiny of the commercial documents of recipients, taking account of the nature of the transactions to be
         scrutinised. The detailed procedure for such scrutiny is laid down in Article 2(2) et seq. 
         
            
As regards the financial consequences in the event of the absence of scrutiny by the Member States, criteria were adopted
         by the Commission in Document No VI/216/of June 1993, known as  
         the Belle Report. Those criteria provide for three categories of flat-rate adjustment: 
         
─
2% of expenditure where the absence is limited to certain aspects of the system of scrutiny of minor importance or the performance
            of checks which are not essential in order to ensure that expenditure has been incurred lawfully, so that it may reasonably
            be concluded that the risk of loss for the Fund was minor. 
         
─
5% of expenditure where the absence concerns significant aspects of the system of scrutiny or the performance of checks which
            play a major role in determining whether expenditure was lawful, so that it may reasonably be concluded that the risk of loss
            for the Fund was significant. 
         
─
10% of expenditure where the absence concerns all or fundamental aspects of the system of scrutiny or the performance of essential
            checks which are designed to ensure that expenditure was lawful, so that it may reasonably be concluded that there was a high
            risk of comprehensive loss for the Fund. 
         
            
As regards the final decisions adopted by the Commission, Article of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1663/of July laying down detailed rules for the application of Regulation No 729/regarding the procedure for the clearance of the accounts
         of the EAGGF Guarantee Section (OJ L 158, p. 6) provides:  
         
1.
 When, as a result of any enquiry, the Commission considers that expenditure was not effected according to Community rules,
         it shall communicate to the Member State concerned its findings, the corrective measures to be taken to ensure future compliance,
         and an evaluation of any expenditure which it may propose to exclude pursuant to Article 5(2)(c) of Regulation (EEC) No 729/70.
         The communication shall make reference to this regulation. The Member State shall reply within two months, and the Commission
         may modify its position in consequence. In justified cases the Commission may agree to extend this period for reply.
         After expiry of the period allowed for reply, the Commission shall initiate a bilateral discussion, and both parties shall
         endeavour to come to an agreement as to the measures to be taken. The Commission shall then formally communicate its conclusions
         to the Member State ...
         
2.
 The decisions referred to in Article 5(2)(c) of Regulation (EEC) No 729/shall be taken after an examination of any report
         drawn up by the Conciliation Body ...
         .
         Legal framework with regard to the contested adjustment
         
            
Council Regulation (EEC) No 386/of February on the monitoring carried out at the time of export of agricultural
         products receiving refunds or other amounts (OJ L 42, p. 6) introduced a system of Community monitoring of agricultural
         products in respect of which refunds or other amounts are granted on export. Article 3(1) of that regulation provides: 
         
1.
 Without prejudice to any specific provisions which require more extensive checks, the physical checks referred to in Article
         2(a) must:
         
(a)
take the form of spot checks conducted frequently and without prior warning; 
         
(b)
in any event, relate to not less than 5% of the export declarations in respect of which applications are submitted for the
         amounts specified in Article 1(1).
         
            
The provisions for applying Regulation No 386/were adopted in Commission Regulation (EC) No 2030/of July laying
         down detailed rules for the application of Council Regulation (EEC) No 386/as regards physical checks carried out at the
         time of export of agricultural products attracting refunds or other amounts (OJ L 186, p. 6), which was replaced from
         January by Commission Regulation (EC) No 2221/of September laying down detailed rules for the application
         of Council Regulation (EEC) No 386/as regards physical checks carried out at the time of export of agricultural products
         qualifying for refunds (OJ L 224, p. 13). The annex to that regulation describes the specific methods and practical details
         of how those checks are to be conducted. 
         The contested adjustment
         
            
It may be seen from the documents before the Court that in order to counter the growing risk of fraud and irregularities in
         the area of export refunds, which are adversely affecting the EAGGF budget, the Commission has since stepped up its inspections
         in the Member States as regards the checks made by customs authorities. According to the Commission, the inspections conducted
         in Italy have uncovered the existence of systematic errors in the procedures followed by the Italian customs authorities.
         
         
            
On the basis of the results of documentary checks carried out between and and of the results of on-the-spot checks,
         in particular those made during two inspections, one conducted between and April at the customs posts at Treviso,
         Trieste, Fernetti and Como, the other conducted between and December at the customs posts at Terni, Pisa, Livorno
         and Viareggio, the Commission considered that the Italian authorities were failing to comply adequately with the provisions
         of Regulations Nos 386/and 2221/relating to physical checks on the occasion of exportation of agricultural products.
         The details of the results of those checks are given in paragraph 2.8.of the summary report. 
         
            
First, the Commission criticised the partial nature of the physical checks during the direct export procedures, that is to
         say, procedures whereby the products are directly checked on the vehicles at the customs posts. The physical checks were inadequate
         since they were not made until the goods were loaded on to the trucks. In two cases observed on the spot at Treviso and Pisa
         Commission inspectors recorded that the checks were conducted without any serious attempt being made to check the full load,
         either by unloading the goods or by creating a passage inside the containers being examined. In addition, the representative
         sample of 5% of export declarations required under Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation No 386/was not achieved at several customs
         offices. Lastly, the reports on the physical checks were general and imprecise. 
         
            
Second, Commission staff found that no checks were being carried without prior warning during the so-called  
         off-site procedures, that is to say, those whereby the operator brings the export declaration to the customs office whilst the goods
         remain on the undertaking's premises. In such cases the Commission found that the procedures for the physical checks did not
         allow for the surprise effect. In some cases even, where the customs service did not have a vehicle available, operators were
         requested to provide transport themselves in order to take customs officers to the place where the check was to be carried
         out. The obvious risk of cheating and substitution resulting from this was aggravated by the fact that once the export declarations
         had been approved the operators themselves were required to send them to the paying body. 
         
            
The Commission informed the Italian authorities of its findings by letters of January and September 1997, to which the
         authorities replied by letters of March and November 1997. By letter of November the Commission invited the
         Italian authorities to a bilateral meeting. Since that meeting was inconclusive the Commission formally notified the Italian
         authorities of its conclusions by letter of July 1999. In them it proposed an adjustment of 5% of the expenditure incurred
         for all the products in respect of which export refunds had been granted between October and December 1998, thus
         applying the Belle Report, which provides for a flat-rate adjustment of 5% where the failings concern significant aspects
         of the system of scrutiny or the performance of checks which play a major role in determining whether the expenditure was
         lawful, so that it may reasonably be concluded that the risk of loss for the EAGGF is significant. 
         
            
In its final report of January 2000, the EAGGF Conciliation Body, to which the Italian authorities had referred the matter
         on August 1999, considered that, despite some uncertainties, the Commission's arguments appeared to be justified.  
         
            
The Commission therefore imposed in the contested decision the proposed adjustment, amounting to ITL 968. 
         The first plea: infringement of the audi alteram partem  rule and the rights of defence
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
Under its first plea the Italian Republic contends that the contested adjustment is unlawful on the grounds that the inspections
         carried out by the Commission officials were in breach of the  
          audi alteram partem   rule and the rights of defence. The Commission did not inform the Italian Government of the results of the inspections until
         a very long time after they took place, the criticisms made of the Italian customs officers were not specific and the officers
         concerned were not given the opportunity to put their points of view. No report was drawn up in conjunction with the customs
         officers. 
         
            
The Commission rejects those criticisms.  It observes that the inspections in question were all conducted in the presence
         of Italian officials and its own officials, and that the Italian administration was always informed in advance and in detail
         of the inspections. Moreover, it is common practice for Community officials to arrange a final meeting with national officers
         in order to discuss criticisms, and such meetings also took place at the time of the inspections in question, as is established
         by a report by the Italian Ministry of Finance, which the Commission submits to the Court. In the Commission's view discussions
         always take place in such cases and national officials may put forward their opinions. Furthermore, minutes are taken on every
         occasion in such cases by at least two officials from the competent Commission services, which then constitute the basis for
         letters of observations sent to the national authorities. All these stages were gone through in this case. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
It is appropriate to refer to Article of Regulation No 1663/95, which sets out the various stages which must be gone through
         during the procedure for the clearance of EAGGF accounts. It is clear from the case-law of the Court of Justice (see in particular
         Case C-61/Greece  v  
          Commission  [1998] ECR I-207, paragraph 39) that the procedure introduced by that regulation constitutes a specific procedure giving
         effect to the  
          audi alteram partem  rule, during which the Member States concerned are provided with all the guarantees necessary for them to present their point
         of view. 
         
            
In the present case, it is clear from the history of the correspondence exchanged (see paragraphs to of this judgment)
         that the Commission meticulously followed the various stages of the procedure laid down in Regulation No 1663/and that
         at each of those stages the Italian authorities had the opportunity to put their point of view. As the Advocate General stated
         in points to of his Opinion, on the one hand, the time which elapsed between the inspections and communication of the
         results to the Italian authorities, seven months, cannot be regarded as excessive and, on the other hand, the Commission's
         accusations were specific. As regards the drafting of a report in conjunction with the customs officers, there is no provision
         to that effect in the legislation in question. 
         
            
The complaint alleging infringement of the  
          audi alteram partem  rule and the principle of observance of the rights of defence cannot be upheld and the first plea relied on by the Italian
         Government must therefore be rejected. 
         The second plea: the unrepresentative nature of the customs offices inspected
         Arguments of the parties 
         
            
Under its second plea the Italian Government claims, although it does not set out its complaint in detail, that the customs
         posts and operators inspected by the Commission in were not sufficiently representative as regards either quantity or
         quality. In its submission, it cannot be inferred from findings made at certain customs posts that the same monitoring procedures
         as those highlighted by the Commission were generally followed during the or so export operations conducted each year
         in Italy in respect of which a refund application is made. 
         
            
The Commission contests those assertions.  It maintains, and is not contradicted on that point by the Italian Government,
         that the customs offices selected for the on-the-spot inspections, Terni, Pisa, Livorno, Viareggio, Treviso, Trieste, Fernetti
         and Como, are the main customs offices as regards payment of export refunds and accounted for 27% of the total number of export
         declarations recorded in Italy in 1995. They are therefore totally representative. The Commission inspectors took care in
         particular to divide their inspections between the various customs clearance procedures carried out by Italian customs officers.
         Inspections were also carried out on the premises of undertakings involved in simplified customs clearance procedures and
         failings were discovered during those inspections too. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
The Commission's statements shows that the customs offices selected by its inspectors for their inspections were indeed representative
         of the overall situation. Since the Italian Government has put forward no concrete evidence to dispute those statements, the
         plea alleging that the customs posts inspected were not representative must be rejected. 
         Third plea: the equivocal nature of the results of some inspections
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
In its third plea the Italian Government disputes the Commission's findings that the checks carried out by the customs posts
         at Terni, Pisa, Viareggio and Livorno were neither  
         complete nor  
         made without warning. 
         
            
As regards the Commission's complaint against the Italian authorities that the checks were only partial, the Italian Government
         states that following the Commission's inspections its own staff were asked to look into the facts at issue. At a meeting
         with the customs officers concerned in March the officers denied that the checks in question took place in the manner
         which the Commission staff stated. Since there is no record of the meeting the statements of the Commission staff can only
         be regarded as inaccurate, or at least unreliable. 
         
            
As regards whether the checks were made without prior notice, the Commission has provided an incorrect interpretation of that
         concept. Although the checks involved the exporter going to the customs offices, this does not mean that prior warning was
         given of the checks. In reality, the way the checks were carried out and the various methods used by the Italian authorities
         were irreproachable. 
         
            
Furthermore, the failings found by the Commission ended following a letter from the Italian Ministry of Finance of March
         in which Italian customs offices received appropriate instructions designed to avoid a repeat of such failings. 
         
            
The Commission disputes those claims. It contends that the version of the facts given by the Italian customs officers concerned
         in the present case as regards whether the checks were carried out in full is wrong. The meetings which the Italian Government
         states it had with those officers apparently did not take place until 1999, which was three years after the inspections carried
         out in 1996. Furthermore, the fact that those customs officers were aware of the purpose of the talks, namely to investigate
         the claim that the checks they had made were of a very poor quality, should be taken into account. Their evidence is therefore
         highly questionable. 
         
            
As for whether the checks were made without prior notice, the Commission points out that the Italian Government did not dispute
         the complaint made against the Italian customs officers that they always asked the operators concerned to come to the customs
         offices in their own vehicles in order to collect the customs officials who were to carry out the physical checks. Under that
         procedure operators were clearly warned in advance that they would be subjected to checks so that there could be no question
         of the checks being made without prior warning. The Court has already held in Case C-242/Belgium  v  
          Commission   [2000] ECR I-3421, paragraph 41, that if there is no official car it is very difficult to show that the physical checks were
         made without prior notice as required by Article of Regulation No 386/90. 
         
            
Moreover, as it is stated in detail in paragraph 2.8.of the summary report, consideration of the inspection reports submitted
         by the Italian Republic for and show the same irregularities and negligence as those found in 1996. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
It is clear from the case-law of the Court, in particular from  
          Belgium  v  
          Commission , cited above (paragraphs and 34) and from Case C-243/Greece  v  
          Commission  [2000] ECR I-(paragraph 53), that as regards the inspections carried out by Commission staff in connection with the
         clearance of EAGGF accounts, the Member State concerned cannot disprove the Commission's findings without substantiating its
         own claims by providing evidence of a reliable and operational supervisory system. If it is not able to show that they are
         inaccurate, the Commission's findings are likely to raise serious doubts as to the existence of an appropriate and effective
         body of supervisory measures and inspection procedures. 
         
            
In the present case the Italian Government has not succeeded in casting doubt on the Commission's findings concerning the
         inadequacy of the checks, which are set out in detail at point of the Advocate General's Opinion, by adducing evidence
         establishing the existence of reliable and effective monitoring from which it may be concluded that the irregularities complained
         of did not occur.  The Italian Government has not, moreover, challenged in any detail the Commission's findings as contained
         in the summary report, but has merely stated that it was clear from the evidence given by the Italian customs officers concerned
         that the conduct of their checks was generally irreproachable. 
         
            
That evidence given by the Italian customs officers concerned, which moreover was not taken until three years after the inspections
         were carried out by the Commission staff, cannot affect the veracity of the findings made on the spot by the Commission officials,
         which were subsequently set out in the summary report. 
         
            
As regards the irregularities found during consideration of the inspection reports submitted by the Italian Republic for and 1998, the Italian Government has not provided any specific argument establishing the existence of a reliable and operational
         system of checks, thus casting doubt on the Commission's findings. 
         
            
The third plea relied on by the Italian Government must therefore be rejected in its entirety. 
         The fourth plea: the excessive amount of the adjustment
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
Under its last plea, put forward in the alternative, the Italian Government contends that the amount of the adjustment imposed
         by the Commission is excessive. 
         
            
First, the checks carried out at the customs posts related to conduct which only lasted for a year at most, whilst the adjustment
         covered four consecutive years, namely to 1998. 
         
            
Second, the Commission imposed the adjustment on all the export refunds granted during those four financial years, although
         the physical checks related to only a 5% sample of the transactions. In the submission of the Italian Government the adjustment
         should have applied only to a maximum of 5% of the refunds granted during those years. 
         
            
The Commission maintains that the adjustment concerned was adopted in strict accordance with the Belle Report. As regards
         the years in respect of which it applies, it is clear from the documents before the Court, as the Commission explained in
         connection with the third plea, that the irregularities regarding the checks persisted into and 1998. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
As regards the first part of the fourth plea, it is common ground that the failings complained of by the Commission were established,
         as regards and 1996, by the on-the-spot checks referred to in paragraph above. As regards and 1998, the Commission
         arrived at the same result after considering the inspection reports submitted by the Italian Republic for and 1998. As
         the Italian Government had not put forward any arguments capable of casting doubt on those findings, as was pointed out in
         paragraph above, it follows that the Commission did not commit any error of law by extending the adjustment to cover four
         consecutive years. 
         
            
As regards the second part of the fourth plea, although Member States are required by Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation No 386/to carry out checks on a representative sample of not less than 5% of export declarations, that does not mean that only the
         5% of declarations that are checked must comply with the requirements laid down. It is inherent in the concept of checks by
         sampling that such checks are designed to ensure that all the declarations are made correctly, and not only those declarations
         that have actually been checked. 
         
            
It follows that the Commission, having found failings in the checks made by the Italian authorities, did not commit any error
         of law in imposing the adjustment in question, in accordance with the Belle Report, on all the export refunds on the agricultural
         products to which the export declarations related and not only on those corresponding to the products to which the 5% of declarations
         which were actually checked by those authorities related. 
         
            
Since all the pleas relied upon by the Italian Government with a view to contesting the adjustment of ITL are
         therefore unfounded the Italian Republic's application must be dismissed in so far as that adjustment is concerned. 
         The negative adjustment of ITL relating to export refunds for olive oil
            
Secondly, the Italian Republic challenges an adjustment of ITL concerning export refunds for olive oil paid
         by the Italian authorities in 1995. According to the Commission, the goods in question, namely olive oil of Community origin
         blended with olive oil coming from third countries, in particular Tunisia, and covered by inward processing arrangements,
         were not eligible for export refunds, so the payments made by the Italian authorities had no legal basis (paragraph 2.8.of the summary report). 
         Legal framework
         
            
Export refunds on Community-produced olive oil are provided for in Regulation No 136/66/EEC of the Council of September
         on the establishment of a common organisation of the market in oils and fats (OJ, English Special Edition 1965-1966,
         p. 221). The rules for implementing that regulation are laid down in Commission Regulation (EEC) No 3665/of November
         laying down common detailed rules for the application of the system of export refunds on agricultural products (OJ L 351, p. 1). 
         
            
Article of Regulation No 3665/provides:  
         
1.
 A refund shall be granted only in respect of products which come within the terms of Article 9(2) of the Treaty, even if the
         packaging does not come within those terms.
         ...
         
2.
 When compound products qualifying for a refund fixed on the basis of one or more of their ingredients are exported, that refund
         shall be paid in so far as the ingredient or ingredients in respect of which the refund is claimed come within the terms of
         Article 9(2) of the Treaty. 
         The refund shall also be paid where the ingredient or ingredients in respect of which the refund is claimed came originally
         within the terms of the said Article 9(2) and no longer do so by reason solely of their incorporation in other products.
         
3.
 For the purposes of paragraph 2, the following refunds are considered as refunds fixed on the basis of an ingredient:
         
─
refunds applicable to products of the cereals, eggs, rice, sugar, ...  and milk and milk products sectors, 
         
...
         
            
Article 9(2) of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article 23(2) EC), to which Article of Regulation No 3665/refers,
         provides: The provisions of Chapter 1, Section 1, and of Chapter of this Title [on the free movement of goods] shall apply to products
         originating in Member States and to products coming from third countries which are in free circulation in Member States.
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
The Italian Government argues, although it does not dispute the amount of the adjustment, that the Commission was wrong to
         refuse the financing of export refunds for volumes of olive oil of Community origin blended with olive oil coming from third
         countries, in particular Tunisia, which was covered by inward processing arrangements within the Community. 
         
            
The Italian Government contends that Article 8(1) of Regulation No 3665/applies to such volumes of olive oil of Community
         origin. The fact of having been blended with other oils is irrelevant. In particular, Article 8(2) and (3) of Regulation No
         3665/87, relating to certain cases of compound products, does not apply because the product in question is not a compound
         but rather a finished product. Olive oil is a basic product which can take the form of either a finished product or an ingredient
         and blending does not alter either the chemical composition or the nutritional characteristics of the product. In this case
         the volumes of olive oil of Community origin in question should have qualified for export refunds since they are finished
         products, despite the fact that they had been blended with oils from third countries. 
         
            
The Commission argues that Article 8(1) of Regulation No 3665/87, in conjunction with Article 9(2) of the Treaty, excludes
         any export refund on products coming from third countries which are not in free circulation within the Community but are subject
         to other arrangements such as, in this case, inward processing arrangements. The product in question in this case is a compound
         product which is not eligible for refunds unless the conditions laid down in Article 8(2) and (3) of Regulation No 3665/are met. Article 8(3) contains an exhaustive list of compound products which qualify for export refunds, a list which does
         not include olive oil. 
         Findings of the Court 
         
            
Article of Regulation No 3665/provides for the granting of export refunds either, under paragraph 1, for finished products
         or, under paragraphs and 3, by way of exception, for certain compound products. It is common ground that olive oil does
         not appear on the list of products qualifying for the exceptions provided for in Article 8(2) and (3). Moreover, the Italian
         Republic does not rely on those provisions but rather on Article 8(1), arguing that the product in question is a finished
         product which was exported as such. 
         
            
It is clear from the wording of Article 8(1) of Regulation No 3665/and from that of Article 9(2) of the Treaty, to which
         Article of the regulation refers, that in order to qualify for export refunds products must either originate in the Member
         States or, where they come from third countries, they must be in free circulation within the Member States. 
         
            
It is common ground that oils coming from third countries, with which the volumes of olive oil of Community origin in question
         had been blended, were covered by inward processing arrangements, as provided in Article et seq. of Council Regulation
         (EEC) No 2913/of October establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L 302, p. 1). It is clear from Article
         4(16) of that regulation that inward processing is a different procedure from release for free circulation. The oils coming
         from third countries which made up part of the product in question did not therefore meet the requirements of Article 8(1)
         of Regulation No 3665/87. 
         
            
In order for Article 8(1) of Regulation No 3665/to justify the payment of export refunds by the Italian authorities it
         would therefore have been necessary either for the olive oil of Community origin to have been exported as a separate product
         before being blended with oils coming from third countries, which was clearly not so in the present case, or for the product
         resulting from the blending itself to be regarded as a product originating in the Community, although some of the oils comprising
         it would not meet that condition. 
         
            
To interpret Article 8(1) of Regulation No 3665/as meaning that it also authorises export refunds for compound products,
         only some ingredients of which meet the requirements it specifies, must be excluded by reason of the mere fact that Article
         8(2) and (3) provides, by way of exception, for export refunds to be granted for compound products and that those products
         do not, as a result, fall within the scope of Article 8(1). 
         
            
It follows that the olive oil in question was not eligible for export refunds under Article 8(1) of Regulation No 3665/or under Article 8(2) and (3) of that regulation. The Commission was therefore right to make the contested adjustment, with
         the result that the Italian Republic's application must be dismissed as unfounded in so far as that adjustment is concerned.
         
         The negative adjustment of ITL corresponding to the amount of a security which should have been forfeited in
            connection with the sale of alcohol from intervention stocks
            
Thirdly, the Italian Republic challenges an adjustment of ITL imposed by the Commission in order to penalise
         the failure on the part of the competent Italian authorities to recover a security lodged in connection with the sale of alcohol
         from intervention stocks (paragraph 7.of the summary report). 
         General legal framework
         
            
Article 37(1) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 822/of March on the common organisation of the market in wine (OJ
         L 84, p. 1) provides: Disposal of the products of distillation held by intervention agencies must not cause any disturbance of the market in alcohol
         and spirituous beverages produced in the Community. To this end, they shall be disposed of in other sectors, and in particular in the fuel sector, each time disposal is likely
         to bring about such disturbance.
         
            
The disposal of alcohol in sectors other than the alcohol and spirituous beverages sector must, under Commission Regulation
         (EEC) No 1780/of June laying down detailed rules for the disposal of alcohol obtained from the distillation operations
         referred to in Articles 35, and of Regulation No 822/and held by intervention agencies (OJ L 178, p. 1), take
         place by tender. Article 24(2) of that regulation provides that successful tenderers must, within a certain period, provide
         proof that a performance guarantee has been lodged to ensure that the alcohol is used for the purposes specified in the notice
         of invitation to tender.  
         
            
Article 33(2) of Regulation No 1780/provides that  
         in the case of the performance guarantee, the primary requirement within the meaning of Article of Regulation (EEC) No
         2220/shall be that the alcohol must in fact be used for the purposes specified in the relevant invitation to tender.  
         
            
As regards the way in which such security is given, Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2220/of July laying down common
         detailed rules for the application of the system of securities for agricultural products (OJ L 205, p. 5) provides that
         a security may be given either by making a cash deposit [Article 8(1)(a)] or by providing a guarantoras defined in Article
         16(1) of that regulation [Article 8(1)(b)]. 
         
            
Article 16(2)(c) of Regulation No 2220/reads:  The written guarantee shall state at least: ...
         
(c)
that the guarantor undertakes jointly and severally with the party responsible for meeting the obligation to pay, within days of demand by the competent authority, any sum, within the limit of the guarantee, due once a security is declared forfeit.
         
            
Lastly, Article of Regulation No 2220/provides:  Once the competent authority is aware of circumstances giving rise to forfeiture of the security, in whole or in part, it
         shall without delay demand that the party required to meet the obligation to pay the sum forfeited, allowing up to days
         from the day of issue of demand for payment. Where payment has not been made at the end of this period, the competent authority shall: ...
         
(b)
without delay require the guarantor described in Article 8(1)(b) to pay, allowing up to days from the day of issue of demand
         for payment,  
         ...
         The contested tendering procedure
         
            
By Regulation (EEC) No 3390/of November opening a special sale by tender of vinous alcohol held by intervention
         agencies, for use as motor fuel within the Community (OJ L 327, p. 21), the Commission opened tendering procedure No
         8/EC for the sale of hectolitres of alcohol obtained from the distillation operations referred to in Articles
         35, and of Regulation No 822/87. The total quantity was made up of five lots of hectolitres each.  
         
            
The tender was awarded to Palma SpA, established in Naples (
         Palma). The terms of the award provided  
          inter alia  that a performance guarantee was to be lodged, due on demand, even if the successful tenderer objected, and was releasable
         upon receipt of a written declaration by the intervention agency. The guarantee would be released when the successful tenderer
         had provided evidence that the alcohol had actually been used for the purposes specified within a period of one year from
         the removal of each lot from storage. The guarantee was lodged by Palma in accordance with those requirements with an Italian
         bank acting as guarantor. 
         
            
Subsequently, after serious difficulties had arisen with regard to disposing of a large volume of alcohol on the motor fuel
         market, the Commission, by Regulation (EEC) No 2710/of September concerning certain special sales by tender of
         vinous alcohol held by intervention agencies, for use as motor fuel within the Community (OJ L 245, p. 131), on the one
         hand, cancelled tendering procedure No 8/EC with regard to the lots of alcohol that had not yet been removed from storage
         (three lots). On the other hand, with regard to the two lots which had already been removed from storage the Commission extended
         the time-limit for the use of the products until October 1995. Article of Regulation No 2710/stated that the performance
         guarantee concerning the lots already removed would be released by the intervention agency when all the alcohol had been used
         as motor fuel within the Community.  
         
            
By Commission Regulation (EC) No 416/of March amending Regulation No 2710/(OJ L 59, p. 5) the time-limit
         for using the lots already removed was extended again, but on that occasion this was done progressively. To that end, Article
         3(1) of Regulation No 2710/93, as amended by Regulation No 416/96, provided: Notwithstanding Article of Regulation (EEC) No 2220/and save in cases of  
          force majeure , where the deadline referred to in Article is not met, the performance guarantee of ECU per hectolitre of alcohol at
         100% volume shall be forfeited in the following proportions:
         
(a)
15% in all cases [that is to say on October 1995, as initially provided]; 
         
(b)
50% of the amount remaining after the deduction of 15%, where the use referred to in that Article has not taken place before
         June 1996. 
         The entire guarantee shall be forfeited in the case of failure to complete use of the lots by December 1996.
         
            
It is clear from the documents before the Court that even after the time-limit was extended Palma was unable to provide evidence
         that the two lots of alcohol already removed had actually been used, and that Commission officials requested the competent
         national authority, the Azienda di Stato per gli Interventi nel Mercato Agricolo (State authority for intervention in the
         agricultural market,  
         AIMA) to undertake the recovery of the various tranches of the security on the dates laid down in Regulation No 2710/93, as amended
         by Regulation No 416/96.  
         
            
It is also clear from those documents that AIMA, despite the Commission's repeated requests, 
         
─
as regards the first tranche of the security (15%), which was due on October 1995, did not send a demand for payment to
            Palma until April and did not call upon the guarantor institution to pay the secured amount until January 1997;
            
         
─
as regards the second tranche of the security (50%), which was due on June 1996, did not seek payment from Palma until
            December and only called on the guarantor institution to make payment on January 1997; 
         
─
as regards the balance (35%), which was due on December 1996, did not ask Palma for payment until January and only
            called on the guarantor institution on March 1997. 
         
            
Notwithstanding those requests, AIMA has so far not managed to obtain payment of the security. According to the information
         provided by the Italian Government, Palma brought a number of actions in order to gain time and finally brought an action
         before the Italian courts which is pending. 
         
            
The Commission, by letter of April 1997, imposed a final deadline on the Italian authorities for payment of the amounts
         concerned. As no action was taken in response to that letter the Commission, by letter of July 1997, formally made known
         its intention to deduct an amount corresponding to the security that should have been forfeited, namely ITL 831,
         from the payment advances under the EAGGF for August 1997.  
         
            
The Italian Republic subsequently instituted a conciliation procedure. On October the Conciliation Body rejected the
         application for conciliation as inadmissible on the grounds that  
         the Government concerned had not attended the bilateral meeting organised by the Conciliation Body. The Commission therefore confirmed the adjustment for the amount proposed in the contested decision. 
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
The Italian Government does not dispute the amount of the adjustment, the details concerning the conduct of the contested
         tendering procedure or the fact that the obligation to recover the security was not met. It claims, however, that the delay
         in the recovery of the security is exclusively attributable to the conduct of Palma and not that of the national authorities,
         which acted with due promptness. Palma, in addition to bringing further actions to gain time, even tried to negotiate the
         terms of the award directly with the Commission. The delays which resulted from this could not in any way be attributed to
         the Italian authorities. 
         
            
The Commission points out, however, that it is common ground that, irrespective of any actions brought by Palma in order to
         gain time, AIMA did not comply with its own obligation to recover the various tranches of the security as soon as possible
         each time they fell due. It is clear from the timetable of events that both the demands for payment sent to Palma and the
         orders for payment made against the guarantor institution were made much too long after the due dates in all three cases.
         The Italian authorities were thus in breach of Article of Regulation No 2220/85, which requires recovery of the amounts
         due  
         without delay, and so the contested adjustment is justified. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
It is common ground that the first paragraph of Article of Regulation No 2220/provides that a national authority, once
         it is aware of circumstances giving rise to forfeiture of a security falling within the scope of that provision, is to demand
         payment from the party  
         without delay. In the event of failure to pay the security within a maximum period of days from the date of issue of the demand for
         payment, the national authority must, under Article 29, second paragraph, subparagraph (b), of that regulation,  
         without delay require the guarantor to pay, which must also be done within a maximum of days. Moreover, under Article 16(2)(c) of that
         regulation, the guarantor must act upon any demand for payment. In addition, in the present case, under the special terms
         of the invitation to tender which are referred to in paragraph above, the security was due on demand even if the successful
         tenderer objected. 
         
            
AIMA's action in respect of the recovery of the various tranches of the security did not meet the specified requirements with
         regard to diligence. As is clear from the timetable of events mentioned in paragraph above, in the case of the first tranche
         of the security AIMA sent the demand for payment to Palma almost seven months after the due date and did not call upon the
         guarantor institution to pay the secured amount until almost nine months after the demand for payment was sent. As regards
         the second tranche, those periods were more than five months and one and a half months, respectively. As for the balance,
         AIMA sent the demand for payment within a slightly shorter period, approximately one month after the due date, and called
         upon the guarantor institution one month and one week later. 
         
            
As regards the first two tranches of the security, it is clear, given the length of the delays, that AIMA did not act  
         without delay. As regards the balance, it is common ground that the demand was sent, and the guarantor called upon to pay, more quickly
         than in the first two cases. However, in the context of this case, in which the debtor had persistently avoided its earlier
         obligations to pay, AIMA should not have waited one month, and one month and one week, respectively, before demanding payment
         of the outstanding balance, so that it did not act  
         without delay either. 
         
            
It must therefore be found that the national authorities have not in every case complied with their obligation to recover
         the amounts of the security in question without delay. 
         
            
The actions allegedly brought by the successful tenderer in order to gain time are not such as to affect the responsibility
         of the national authorities in the situation at issue in the present case, in which there were considerable delays on the
         part of those authorities in demanding payment from the successful tenderer. The security, as stated in paragraph above,
         was to be due on demand even if the successful tenderer objected, and releasable upon receipt of a declaration by the intervention
         agency. There was therefore no justification for AIMA not being able to obtain payment of the security from the guarantor
         institution, and that is so whatever actions may have been brought by the successful tenderer to gain time. 
         
            
It follows from all the foregoing considerations that the Commission was entitled to impose the contested adjustment on the
         Italian Republic, and that the argument that the Commission's conduct was unlawful is unfounded. The Italian Republic's application
         must therefore be dismissed in so far as it concerns the adjustment of ITL 831. 
         
            
As all the pleas submitted by the Italian Government have proved to be unfounded, the Italian Republic's application must
         be dismissed in its entirety. 
         
Costs
            
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party's pleadings. Since the Commission applied for costs and the Italian Republic has been
         unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT(Fifth Chamber)
hereby:  
         
1.
 Dismisses the application;
            
2.
 Orders the Italian Republic to pay the costs.
            
Wathelet
Edward
La Pergola
Jann
von Bahr
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on January 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
M. Wathelet  
Registrar
President of the Fifth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: Italian.
Top  
 