
Avis juridique important
|
61988JJudgment of the Court (Second Chamber) of May 1989.  -  SpA Maxi Di v Ufficio del registro di Bolzano.  -  Reference for a preliminary ruling: Commissione tributaria di secondo grado di Bolzano - Italy.  -  Indirect taxes on the raising of capital.  -  Case 15/88.  
European Court reports Page Pub.RJ Page Pub somm 
Summary
Parties
Operative part
Keywords
++++Tax provisions - Harmonization of legislation - Indirect taxes on the raising of capital - Issue of debentures - Charging of taxes not covered by the exemptions under Directive 69/- Not permitted .  ( Council Directive 69/335/EEC, Arts and )  
Summary
Article of Directive 69/concerning indirect taxes on the raising of capital must be interpreted as meaning that a Member State is not permitted to charge capital companies, as defined in Article thereof, tax of any kind other than the taxes and duties set out in Article of the directive in respect of the issue of debentures, operations covered by Articles and ( see judgment of February in Case 36/Dansk Sparinvest (( )) ECR ). 
Parties
In Case 15/REFERENCE to the Court under Article of the EEC Treaty, by the commissione tributaria di secondo grado ( Tax Appeals Board ), Bolzano, for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending before that court between  Maxi Di SpA  and  Ufficio del registro di Bolzano ( Registration Office, Bolzano )  on the interpretation of Article of Council Directive 69/335/EEC of July concerning indirect taxes on the raising of capital ( Official Journal, English Special Edition ( II ), p . ),  THE COURT ( Second Chamber ),  composed of : T . F . O' Higgins, President of Chamber, G . F . Mancini and F . A . Schockweiler, Judges,  ( the grounds of the judgment are not reproduced )  in answer to the question referred to it by the commissione tributaria di secondo grado di Bolzano, by order of December 1987, rules as follows :  
Operative part
Article of Directive 69/must be interpreted as meaning that a Member State is not permitted to charge capital companies, as defined in Article thereof, tax of any kind other than the taxes and duties set out in Article of the directive in respect of the issue of debentures, an operation covered by Article . 
Top  
 