
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
September (*)
      
(Appeal – Community trade mark – Word mark DANELECTRO – Figurative mark QWIK TUNE – Request for renewal of registration of the trade mark – Application for restitutio in integrum – Failure to observe the time-limit for submitting the request for renewal of registration of the trade mark)
In Case C‑479/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, brought on November 2009,
Evets Corp., established in Irvine, California (United States), represented by S. Ryan, Solicitor,
      
appellant,
the other party to the proceedings being:
Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM), represented by A. Folliard-Monguiral, acting as Agent,
      
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
composed of E. Levits, President of the Chamber, A. Borg Barthet (Rapporteur) and J.-J. Kasel, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By its appeal, Evets Corp. (‘Evets’) seeks to have set aside in part the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European
         Communities (now ‘the General Court’) of September in Joined Cases T‑20/and T-21/Evets v OHIM (DANELECTRO and QWIK TUNE) [2009] ECR II-(‘the judgment under appeal’), by which that Court dismissed Evets’ action for annulment of two decisions
         of the Fourth Board of Appeal of the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM) of November
         (Cases R 603/2007‑and R 604/2007-4) relating to its application for restitutio in integrum (‘the contested decisions’).
      
 Legal context
Council Regulation (EC) No 40/of December on the Community trade mark (OJ L 11, p. 1) was repealed by Council
         Regulation (EC) No 207/of February on the Community trade mark (codified version) (OJ L 78, p. 1), which
         entered into force on April 2009. However, in view of the date of the facts, the present proceedings remain governed by
         Regulation No 40/94.
      
Article of Regulation No 40/94, headed ‘Renewal’, provided:
      
‘1.      Registration of the Community trade mark shall be renewed at the request of the proprietor of the trade mark or any person
         expressly authorised by him, provided that the fees have been paid.
      
2.      The Office shall inform the proprietor of the Community trade mark, and any person having a registered right in respect of
         the Community trade mark, of the expiry of the registration in good time before the said expiry. Failure to give such information
         shall not involve the responsibility of the Office.
      
3.      The request for renewal shall be submitted within a period of six months ending on the last day of the month in which protection
         ends. The fees shall also be paid within this period. Failing this, the request may be submitted and the fees paid within
         a further period of six months following the day referred to in the first sentence, provided that an additional fee is paid
         within this further period.
      
…’
Article of Regulation No 40/94, headed ‘Restitutio in integrum’, provided:
      
‘1.      The applicant for or proprietor of a Community trade mark or any other party to proceedings before the Office who, in spite
         of all due care required by the circumstances having been taken, was unable to observe a time-limit vis-à-vis the Office shall,
         upon application, have his rights re-established if the non-observance in question has the direct consequence, by virtue of
         the provisions of this Regulation, of causing the loss of any right or means of redress.
      
2.      The application must be filed in writing within two months from the removal of the cause of non-compliance with the time-limit.
         The omitted act must be completed within this period. The application shall only be admissible within the year immediately
         following the expiry of the unobserved time-limit. In the case of non-submission of the request for renewal of registration
         or of non-payment of a renewal fee, the further period of six months provided in Article 47(3), third sentence, shall be deducted
         from the period of one year.
      
…’
Rule 76, headed ‘Authorisations’, of Commission Regulation (EC) No 2868/of December implementing Council Regulation
         (EC) No 40/(OJ L 303, p. 1), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1041/of June (OJ L 172,
         p. 4) (‘Regulation No 2868/95’), provides:
      
‘1.      Legal practitioners and professional representatives entered on the list maintained by the Office pursuant to Article 89(2)
         of the Regulation shall file with the Office a signed authorisation for insertion in the files only if the Office expressly
         requires it, or where there are several parties to the proceedings in which the representative acts before the Office, if
         the other party expressly asks for it.
      
2.      Employees acting on behalf of natural or legal persons pursuant to Article 88(3) of the Regulation shall file with the Office
         a signed authorisation for insertion in the files.
      
3.      The authorisation may be filed in any official language of the Community. It may cover one or more applications or registered
         trade marks or may be in the form of a general authorisation authorising the representative to act in respect of all proceedings
         before the Office to which the person giving the authorisation is a party. 
      
…
6.      Any representative who has ceased to be authorised shall continue to be regarded as the representative until the termination
         of his authorisation has been communicated to the Office.
      
…’
Rule of Regulation No 2868/95, headed ‘Representation’, provides:
      
‘Any notification or other communication addressed by the Office to the duly authorised representative shall have the same
         effect as if it had been addressed to the represented person. Any communication addressed to the Office by the duly authorised
         representative shall have the same effect as if it originated from the represented person.’
      
 Background to the dispute
On April 1996, Evets filed two applications for registration of Community trade marks with OHIM pursuant to Regulation No 40/94.
      
The marks for which registration was sought are the word mark DANELECTRO and the figurative mark QWIK TUNE covering goods
         in Classes and of the Nice Agreement concerning the International Classification of Goods and Services for the Purposes
         of the Registration of Marks of June 1957, as revised and amended.
      
The mark QWIK TUNE was registered on April and the mark DANELECTRO on May 1998.
      
On and September 2005, pursuant to Article 47(2) of Regulation No 40/and Rule of Regulation No 2868/95, OHIM informed
         Evets’ representative of the need to renew the abovementioned two Community trade marks before April 2006. The requests
         for renewal could still be submitted and the fees could still be paid within a further period of six months expiring on November 2006.
      
On and November 2006, OHIM issued notifications pursuant to Article of Regulation No 40/94, Rule 30(6), Rule 84(3)(1)
         and Rule 84(5) of Regulation No 2868/to inform Evets’ representative that the registrations of the trade marks QWIK TUNE
         and DANELECTRO had been cancelled from the Register of Community trade marks on October 2006, with effect from April 2006.
      
On January 2007, Evets’ representative filed, in respect of the two marks at issue, an application pursuant to Article
         of Regulation No 40/for restitutio in integrum, in which it requested that the right to renew the registrations in question be re-established.
      
By decisions of February 2007, the Trade Marks and Register Department of OHIM refused the application for restitutio in integrum on the ground that Evets had not taken all due care required by the circumstances to comply with the time-limit for renewal.
         Consequently, the registration of the marks QWIK TUNE and DANELECTRO was deemed to have been cancelled pursuant to Rule 30(6)
         of Regulation No 2868/95.
      
On June 2007, Evets filed a notice of appeal against the decisions of the Trade Marks and Register Department of OHIM of
         February 2007.
      
By the contested decisions, the Fourth Board of Appeal of OHIM dismissed the appeal and declared that the application for
         restitutio in integrum was deemed not to have been filed as the application had been made outside the two-month period provided for in Article 78(2)
         of Regulation No 40/and the fee required for re-establishment of rights had been paid outside that period. The Board of
         Appeal found that the dates of removal of the cause of non-compliance with the time-limit were November for QWIK TUNE
         and November for DANELECTRO, the dates on which OHIM had informed Evets’ representative that those marks had been
         cancelled, and that the application for restitutio in integrum submitted on January had been made after that two-month period had expired.
      
 Procedure before the General Court and the judgment under appeal
By applications lodged at the Registry of the General Court on January 2008, Evets brought an action for annulment of the
         contested decisions.
      
In support of its action for annulment, Evets put forward, in essence, three pleas alleging, first, infringement of the principle
         prohibiting reformatio in pejus, second, infringement of the rights of the defence and of the right to be heard and, third, breach of Article of Regulation
         No 40/94.
      
It is necessary to mention only the General Court’s assessment with regard to the breach of Article of Regulation No 40/94,
         which is set out in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, in so far as the appeal relates only to that plea.
      
The General Court first found, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the parties agreed, in principle, that the
         ‘removal of the cause of non-compliance with the time-limit’, within the meaning of Article 78(2) of Regulation No 40/94,
         occurred on the date on which Evets was informed of the loss of the rights in question.
      
As regards Evets’ argument that the application for restitutio in integrum was filed within the time-limit because the two-month period could start to run only on the date on which it, and not its
         representative, became aware of the loss of the rights in question, namely on November 2006, the General Court rejected
         this in paragraph of the judgment under appeal on the ground that, in its view, the date on which the loss of a right is
         brought to the attention of the representative must be deemed to be the date on which the represented person, namely Evets,
         became aware of it.
      
The General Court pointed out in that respect, as is apparent from paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, that,
         pursuant to Rule of Regulation No 2868/95, any notification or other communication addressed by OHIM to a duly authorised
         representative is to have the same effect as if it had been addressed to the represented person. With regard to OHIM, what
         matters are its communications with Evets’ representative and not the communications between Evets’ representative and Evets.
      
As for Evets’ argument relating to the overall time-limit of one year laid down by the Community legislature within which
         restitutio in integrum proceedings must be brought, the General Court pointed out, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that Article 78(2)
         of Regulation No 40/does not concern solely applications for restitutio in integrum in cases of non-submission within the time-limit of a request for renewal of registration of a mark, but also concerns applications
         for restitutio in integrum on account of failure to observe the time-limit where the non-observance in question has the direct consequence, by virtue
         of the provisions of that regulation, of causing the loss of any right or means of redress. It stated that the non-observance,
         and in particular the removal of its cause, can take many forms and, therefore, the one-year time-limit is laid down as an
         absolute deadline, with the result that, if the cause of non-compliance is removed only one year after the unobserved time-limit
         has passed, the application for restitutio in integrum is no longer admissible. According to the General Court, the two-month period laid down in Article 78(2) thus forms part
         of the one-year period.
      
As regards Evets’ argument relating to the practice of the European Patent Office’s (EPO) Boards of Appeal and to Article
         122(2) of the Convention on the Grant of European Patents of October 1973, as amended, the General Court held, in paragraphs
         to of the judgment under appeal, that that practice is not relevant in so far as the Community trade mark regime is
         an autonomous system with its own set of rules and objectives peculiar to it, which applies independently of any other system,
         and in so far as the provisions governing patents seek to regulate procedures different from those applicable in the area
         of trade marks.
      
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the General Court added that, in any event, the decision of the Technical Board
         of Appeal of the EPO of April 1985, to which Evets refers, in no way shows how the EPO would give a different interpretation
         to Article of Regulation No 40/94. In the case which gave rise to that decision, it was found that, where the employee
         of an agent discovers that failure to observe a time-limit has led to the loss of a right, the cause of non-compliance which
         is at the root of that failure is deemed not to have been removed as long as the agent concerned has not been personally informed
         of the situation, since it is for him to decide whether to file an application for restitutio in integrum and, if he decides to file such an application, to outline the grounds and circumstances which should be invoked before the
         EPO. According to the General Court, however, Evets’ representative did not, in the present case, claim that it had not been
         personally informed of the situation on the dates of the notifications mentioned in paragraph of the present judgment.
      
Consequently, the General Court held that the plea alleging breach of Article of Regulation No 40/had to be rejected.
      
 Procedure before the Court and forms of order sought
By its appeal, Evets claims that the Court should:
      
–        annul the judgment under appeal;
–        declare that the application for restitutio in integrum was brought within the time-limits prescribed by Article 78(2) of Regulation No 40/94;
      
–        refer the case back to the General Court so that it may in turn refer the case back to the Fourth Board of Appeal of OHIM
         for it to rule on the substantive issue as to whether all due care was taken to renew the trade marks in question; and
      
–        order OHIM to pay the costs incurred both in the appeal proceedings and in the proceedings before the General Court.
OHIM contends that the appeal should be dismissed and that Evets should be ordered to pay the costs.
      
 The appeal
 Arguments of the parties
Evets puts forward a single ground of appeal, alleging breach of Article of Regulation No 40/in so far as the General
         Court was wrong to hold that the two-month period from the removal of the cause of non-compliance with the time‑limit started
         to run on the date on which its representative became aware of the loss of the rights in question, that is to say, on November
         in respect of the mark QWIK TUNE and on November in respect of the mark DANELECTRO, and that, consequently, the
         application for restitutio in integrum submitted on January had been filed outside the time-limit.
      
Evets maintains that Rule of Regulation No 2868/95, according to which any notification addressed by OHIM to a duly authorised
         representative is to have the same effect as if it had been addressed to the represented person, applies only to notifications
         sent to a party’s representative in relation to matters for which that representative has authority to act. Rule is not,
         however, relevant in the present case in so far as the representative in question that received the notification from OHIM
         was not authorised by Evets to act in respect of the payment of renewal fees.
      
Evets takes the view that, given that Article of Regulation No 40/provides that registration of the Community trade
         mark may be renewed at the request of the proprietor of the trade mark or of ‘any person expressly authorised by him’, professional
         representation is not required for the purposes of renewal of registration of a trade mark. Regulation No 40/therefore
         distinguishes between, first, representation of the proprietor of the trade mark before OHIM, which must satisfy the requirements
         of Articles and of that regulation, and, secondly, mere payment of renewal fees, which any person may be authorised
         to do under Article of that regulation.
      
Evets therefore submits that the relevant person to be considered in the present case to ascertain the date of removal of
         the cause of non-compliance with the time-limit, and therefore the starting point of the two-month period for submitting an
         application for restitutio in integrum, is the person with responsibility for carrying out the act in question, that is to say, in the present case, the renewal
         of registration of the Community trade marks at issue and the payment of the fees relating to that registration.
      
Evets adds that the interpretation given by the EPO’s Boards of Appeal must be taken into consideration for the purposes of
         interpreting Article of Regulation No 40/94, even though the provisions of the Convention on the Grant of European Patents
         of October 1973, as amended, are not strictly binding in Community law.
      
OHIM submits that the ground of appeal is unfounded.
      
OHIM contends that, pursuant to Rule of Regulation No 2868/95, the authorisation given by the proprietor of a trade mark
         to a representative covers all procedural steps, whether that authorisation is an individual or a general authorisation, and
         thus includes the procedural steps relating to the renewal of registration of that trade mark. The fact that the proprietor
         of a trade mark has entrusted a third party with the specific task of requesting the renewal of his trade mark and paying
         the relevant fees cannot limit the extent of the representative’s authorisation vis-à-vis OHIM, unless that authorisation
         has been withdrawn.
      
OHIM maintains that the interpretation given by Evets to Rule of Regulation No 2868/would mean that the date on which
         OHIM’s notifications take effect may depend on provisions in the representative’s authorisation of which OHIM may never be
         informed. Such an interpretation would conflict with the principles provided for by Rule 67(2) of that regulation, according
         to which, if several representatives have been appointed for a single interested party, notification to any one of them is
         to be sufficient, unless a specific address for service has been indicated, and by Rule 76(8) of that regulation, which provides
         that, where several representatives are appointed by the same party, they may, notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary
         in their authorisations, act either jointly or singly.
      
 Findings of the Court
In order to establish whether the General Court was right in law to hold that the application for restitutio in integrum filed by Evets on January was submitted out of time, it is necessary to examine whether the starting point for the
         period of two months from the removal of the cause of non-compliance with the time-limit for submitting an application for
         restitutio in integrum within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 40/corresponds to the date on which Evets’ representative was informed
         that the rights in question had been lost or to that on which Evets itself became aware of that loss.
      
It must be borne in mind that the detailed rules of application governing representation within the context of Regulation
         No 40/are laid down in Title XI, Part G, of Regulation No 2868/95.
      
It is thus apparent from Rule 76(1) to (3) of that regulation, headed ‘Authorisations’, that the authorisation of the representative
         of a trade mark proprietor before OHIM covers all procedural steps relating to trade marks, including the procedural steps
         relating to the renewal of registration of a Community trade mark.
      
Pursuant to Rule of Regulation No 2868/95, headed ‘Representation’, any notification or other communication addressed by
         OHIM to a duly authorised representative is to have the same effect as if it had been addressed to the represented person.
         The same is true of any communication addressed to OHIM by the duly authorised representative, which is to have the same effect
         as if it originated from the represented person.
      
It must be pointed out that Rule does not lay down any distinction between a notification or communication which has the
         effect of causing a period to start to run and one which does not have such an effect, with the result that that rule applies
         irrespective of the effect produced by that notification or communication.
      
It therefore follows from the rules of representation in the context of Regulation No 40/that what matters with regard
         to OHIM are the communications and notifications exchanged between it and the representative of the proprietor of the trade
         mark in question, and not those exchanged between the representative of the proprietor of that mark and that proprietor.
      
It follows, in the present case, that the dates on which OHIM informed Evets’ representative of the expiry of the registration
         of the trade marks QWIK TUNE and DANELECTRO, namely and November respectively, must be deemed to be the dates on
         which Evets became aware of the loss of its rights, as the General Court correctly held in paragraph of the judgment under
         appeal.
      
None of the arguments put forward by Evets can call that finding into question.
      
First, the Court rejects the argument that, as Regulation No 40/establishes a distinction between, on the one hand, representation
         of the proprietor of a trade mark before OHIM in accordance with Articles and of that regulation and, on the other,
         performance of the formal requirements for renewal which any person may be authorised to carry out in accordance with Article
         of that regulation, the relevant person to be taken into consideration for the purpose of determining the starting point
         of the period for submitting an application for restitutio in integrum is the person with responsibility for carrying out the act in question.
      
It must be pointed out in this regard that it follows clearly from Rule of Regulation No 2868/that any notification
         or other communication addressed by OHIM to a duly authorised representative is to have the same effect as if it had been
         addressed to the represented person, irrespective of whether the proprietor of the Community trade mark in question has, in
         addition to the representative before OHIM, made a third party responsible for carrying out certain acts such as the renewal
         of registration of that mark.
      
Furthermore, Rule 76(6) of Regulation No 2868/provides that any representative who has ceased to be authorised is to continue
         to be regarded as the representative until the termination of his authorisation has been communicated to OHIM.
      
It must also be pointed out that, where the proprietor of a Community trade mark expressly appoints a third party to carry
         out the procedural requirements for renewal of registration of that mark, pursuant to Article of Regulation No 40/94, that
         third party does not have capacity, under the scheme established by that regulation, to receive a notification or communication
         from OHIM unless he has also been appointed as a representative before OHIM.
      
What is more, in a situation where that third party is appointed as a representative before OHIM, it is apparent from Rule
         67(2) of Regulation No 2868/that, if several representatives have been appointed for a single interested party, notification
         to any one of them is to be sufficient.
      
As regards, secondly, the argument relating to the practice of the EPO’s Boards of Appeal, suffice it to point out in that
         regard, as the General Court stated correctly in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, that the Community trade
         mark regime is an autonomous system with its own set of rules and objectives peculiar to it; it applies independently of any
         other system (see Case C‑238/P Develey v OHIM [2007] ECR I-9375, paragraph 71, and Case T‑32/Messe München v OHIM (electronica) [2000] ECR II‑3829, paragraph 47).
      
It follows from the foregoing that the appeal must be dismissed as unfounded.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court, applicable to appeal proceedings by virtue of Article of those
         rules, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings.
         Since OHIM has applied for costs to be awarded against Evets and the latter has been unsuccessful, Evets must be ordered to
         pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fifth Chamber) hereby:
1.      Dismisses the appeal;
2.      Orders Evets Corp. to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 