
Order of the President of the Court of Justice of April – Ziegler v Commission
(Case C‑113/P(R))
Appeal – Application for interim measures – Competition – Payment of a fine – Bank guarantee – Rejection of application for suspension of operation of a measure – Incorrect assessment of the conditions of urgency – Principles of equal treatment and of observance of the right to a fair hearing
1.                     Applications for interim measures – Conditions of admissibility – Application – Formal requirements – Statement of the pleas
            establishing a prima facie case for the interim measures applied for (Arts EC and EC; Rules of Procedure of the General
            Court, Art. 104(2)) (see paras 13-17)
2.                     Applications for interim measures – Procedure – Whether appropriate to hear the parties – Whether appropriate to admit further
            observations and documents after the end of the written or oral procedure – Discretion of the judge hearing the application
            for interim measures (Arts EC and EC; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 39, first para., and Art. 53, first para.;
            Rules of Procedure of the General Court, Art. 105) (see paras 29-30, 34)
3.                     Applications for interim measures – Formal requirements – Submission of applications (Arts EC and EC; Practice Directions
            to parties before the General Court, point 71) (see para. 33)
4.                     Applications for interim measures – Suspension of operation of a measure – Suspension of operation of the obligation to provide
            a bank guarantee as a condition for not proceeding to immediate recovery of a fine imposed for breach of the competition rules
            – Conditions for granting – Exceptional circumstances (Art. EC; Rules of Procedure of the General Court, Art. 104(2))
            (see paras 43-48)
Re: 
Appeal against the order of the President of the Court of First Instance of January in Case T‑199/R 
Ziegler
 v 
Commission
, rejecting for want of urgency the appellant’s application to be released from the obligation to provide a bank guarantee
                  as a condition for not proceeding to immediate recovery of the fine imposed by Commission Decision C(2008) final of March on a proceeding under Article [EC] and Article of the EEA Agreement  concerning international removal services
                  – Incorrect assessment of the conditions of urgency – Whether the appellant is likely to be caused serious, irreparable damage
                  – Whether or not necessary to take into account the financial resources possessed by the group to which that party belongs
                  – Breach of the obligation to state reasons and of the principles of equal treatment and of equality of arms.
               
Operative part
The Court:
1.
	Dismisses the appeal;
2.
	Orders Ziegler SA to pay the costs.
Top  
 