
Case C-213/Barsoum Chabo
v
Hauptzollamt Hamburg-Hafen
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Finanzgericht Hamburg)
(Customs union – Regulation (EC) No 1719/– Common Customs Tariff – Recovery of import customs duties – Imports of processed foodstuffs – Preserved mushrooms – CN subheading – Levy of an additional amount – Principle of proportionality)
Summary of the Judgment
Common Customs Tariff – Customs duties – Community tariff quotas
(Council Regulation No 2658/87, Annex I; Commission Regulations No 1864/and No 1719/2005)
The specific customs duty of EUR per kilograms of net drained weight, applicable under Regulation No 1719/amending
         Annex I to Regulation No 2658/on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff and charged on
         imports of preserved mushrooms of the genus Agaricus coming under subheading of the Combined Nomenclature in that
         annex and effected outside the quota opened by Regulation No 1864/opening and providing for the administration of tariff
         quotas for preserved mushrooms imported from third countries, as amended by Regulation No 1995/2005, is valid in the light
         of the principle of proportionality.
      
In order to assess the validity of the amount of that specific customs duty, which pursues both common commercial policy objectives
         and common agricultural policy objectives, it is important to examine whether that amount constitutes a manifestly disproportionate
         measure for achieving those objectives. In that regard, in view of the inherent complexity in deciding, at the outset, in
         the negotiations within the World Trade Organisation (WTO), upon the level of the specific customs duty at which the imports
         in question would become economically of little advantage, it cannot be claimed that the institutions of the Union concerned
         exceeded the limits of their broad discretion in the matter by fixing the amount of the maximum Union customs duty at EUR
         per kilograms of net drained weight. That amount cannot therefore be regarded as being manifestly disproportionate.
         Likewise, it cannot be inferred from the fact that the amount of the specific customs duty would have the effect of depriving
         imports, outside tariff quotas, of any prospect of economic profitability that that amount is manifestly disproportionate
         in relation to the objectives pursued because, in accordance with the most-favoured nation principle referred to in Article
         of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, it is not permitted to set the specific customs duty at a level which
         differs each time with regard to each member of the WTO. Therefore, the argument that the level of the specific customs duty
         prevents the sale, in the Union, of mushrooms from a particular third country, in view of the cost of production of those
         mushrooms, cannot establish that the Union legislature exceeded its broad discretion when it fixed the amount of the specific
         customs duty at EUR per kilograms of net drained weight, which is applicable to imports, outside tariff quotas, from
         all the Member States of the WTO.
      
(see paras 27, 31-35, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Customs union – Regulation (EC) No 1719/– Common Customs Tariff – Recovery of import customs duties – Imports of processed foodstuffs – Preserved mushrooms – CN subheading – Levy of an additional amount – Principle of proportionality)
In Case C‑213/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Finanzgericht Hamburg (Germany), made by decision of May
         2009, received at the Court on June 2009, in the proceedings
      
Barsoum Chabo
v
Hauptzollamt Hamburg-Hafen,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, R. Silva de Lapuerta, E. Juhász, G. Arestis (Rapporteur) and J. Malenovský,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: K. Malacek, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on April 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Mr Chabo, by M. Ehninger, Rechtsanwalt,
–        the Italian Government, by G. Palmieri, acting as Agent, assisted by G. Albenzio, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Council of the European Union, by M. Simm and F. Florindo Gijón, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by L. Bouyon and B.-R. Killmann, acting as Agents, 
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on June 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the validity of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1719/of October amending Annex I to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs
         Tariff (OJ L 286, p. 1) as regards the level of the additional amount on the importation, outside tariff quotas, of goods
         classified under subheading of the Combined Nomenclature in that annex.
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between Mr Chabo and the Hauptzollamt Hamburg-Hafen (Principal Customs Office,
         Hamburg-Hafen) concerning the latter’s dismissal of an objection to the payment of additional amounts which it had requested
         pursuant to Regulation No 1719/2005.
      
 Legal context
Chapter of Section IV of Part Two of Annex I to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July on the tariff and statistical
         nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff (OJ L 256, p. 1), as amended by Regulation No 1719/(‘Regulation No
         2658/87’), makes the importation, outside tariff quotas, of mushrooms of the genus Agaricus, other than those provisionally preserved, completely cooked, coming under subheading of the Combined Nomenclature
         subject to the levy of a conventional rate of ad valorem customs duty of 18.4% and to an additional amount, as a specific customs duty, of EUR per kilograms of net drained
         weight.
      
Annex to Section III of Part Three of Annex I to Regulation No 2658/provides for Community tariff quotas of a quantity
         of tonnes of net drained weight for mushrooms of the genus Agaricus, within the limits of which imports of mushrooms covered by subheading of the Combined Nomenclature are subject
         only to the levy of an ad valorem customs duty of 23%. Those quotas are divided between supplying countries in such a way that the quantity allocated to countries
         other than the Republic of Poland is fixed at tonnes drained weight.
      
Commission Regulation (EC) No 1864/of October opening and providing for the administration of tariff quotas for
         preserved mushrooms imported from third countries (OJ L 325, p. 30), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1995/of December (OJ L 320, p. 34) (‘Regulation No 1864/2004’), establishes Community tariff quotas for preserved mushrooms
         of the genus Agaricus, within the limits of which imports of preserved mushrooms coming under subheading of the Combined Nomenclature
         are generally subject only to the levy of an ad valorem customs duty of 23%. It is apparent from Annex I to that regulation that, as from January 2006, those quotas relate to
         a total quantity of 702.tonnes drained net weight, of which tonnes are allocated to the People’s Republic of China.
      
The levying of those duties and the opening of those quotas constitute a transposition into European Union law of the international
         commitments assumed by the European Union as regards the importation of those goods. Those commitments are expressly transcribed
         in the European Community Schedule CXL of concessions and commitments, which is an integral part of the General Agreement
         on Tariffs and Trade of (‘the GATT’) contained in Annex 1A to the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation
         (‘the WTO’), signed in Marrakech on April and approved by Council Decision 94/800/EC of December concerning
         the conclusion on behalf of the European Community, as regards matters within its competence, of the agreements reached in
         the Uruguay Round multilateral negotiations (1986-1994) (OJ L 336, p. 1).
      
Annex 1A also contains the Agreement on Agriculture (OJ L 336, p. 22), Article of which, headed ‘Market Access’, provides
         as follows:
      
‘1.      Market access concessions contained in Schedules relate to bindings and reductions of tariffs, and to other market access
         commitments as specified therein.
      
2.      Members shall not maintain, resort to, or revert to any measures of the kind which have been required to be converted into
         ordinary customs duties …, except as otherwise provided for in Article and Annex 5.’
      
In that regard, footnote 1, which is referred to in Article 4(2) of the Agreement on Agriculture, provides:
      
‘These measures include quantitative import restrictions, variable import levies, minimum import prices, discretionary import
         licensing, non-tariff measures maintained through State-trading enterprises, voluntary export restraints, and similar border
         measures other than ordinary customs duties, whether or not the measures are maintained under country-specific derogations
         from the provisions [of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade of 1947], but not measures maintained under balance-of-payments
         provisions or under other general, non-agriculture-specific provisions of GATT or of the other Multilateral Trade Agreements
         in Annex 1A to [the Agreement establishing] the WTO ...’
      
Furthermore, pursuant to Article 7(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 980/of June applying a scheme of generalised
         tariff preferences (OJ L 169, p. 1), the rate of ad valorem customs duty of 18.4% on the importation, outside tariff quotas, of mushrooms covered by subheading of the Combined
         Nomenclature in Annex I to Regulation No 2658/which come from the People’s Republic of China is reduced to 14.9%. Under
         Article 7(5) of Regulation No 980/2005, however, there is no reduction in the additional amount of EUR per kilograms
         of net drained weight which must, where relevant, be levied on such imports.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
On March 2006, Mr Chabo applied for customs clearance to place into free circulation boxes of preserved mushrooms
         imported, outside tariff quotas, from the People’s Republic of China. As the goods were described as coming under subheading
         of the Combined Nomenclature in Annex I to Regulation No 2658/87, the customs clearance was carried out by applying
         to them only a preferential rate of customs duty of 14.9%, in accordance with that annex, read in conjunction with Article
         7(2) of Regulation No 980/2005.
      
Following a goods classification report, it was established that those preserves were, in actual fact, covered by subheading
         of the Combined Nomenclature. Consequently, by an import duty notice of February 2007, the Hauptzollamt Hamburg-Hafen
         sought to recover post-clearance import customs duties in the total amount of EUR 507.13, in application of a preferential
         rate of customs duty of 14.9%, to which was added an additional amount of EUR per kilograms of net drained weight
         in accordance with Annex I to Regulation No 2658/87, read in conjunction with Article 7(2) and (5) of Regulation No 980/2005.
      
On March 2007, Mr Chabo lodged an objection to that notice, which was dismissed by decision of December 2007.
      
On January 2008, Mr Chabo brought an action for annulment of that decision before the Finanzgericht Hamburg (Finance Court,
         Hamburg). He considers the imposition of import customs duties referred to in that decision to be unlawful, in particular
         because the amount set out is tantamount to a prohibition on imports. For its part, the Hauptzollamt Hamburg-Hafen claims
         that that amount is based on the Common Customs Tariff applicable to goods covered by subheading of the Combined
         Nomenclature in Annex I to Regulation No 2658/87. This, it claims, is the regular rate of customs duty and does not amount
         to a prohibition on imports, but rather constitutes a legitimate tariff protection.
      
In that regard, the Finanzgericht Hamburg, first, stated that the preserved mushrooms at issue are covered by subheading of the Combined Nomenclature, since they are, in point of fact, mushrooms of the genus Agaricus, other than those provisionally preserved, completely cooked.
      
Secondly, referring to Case C‑26/Wünsche [1991] ECR I‑and Case C‑296/Pietsch [1996] ECR I-3409, in which the Court held to be contrary to the principle of proportionality the level of the additional
         amount which, at the time, was applicable to imports of preserved cultivated mushrooms or preserved mushrooms under the rules
         on the common organisation of the market in the sector of products processed from fruit and vegetables, the Finanzgericht
         Hamburg expressed doubts as to the validity of the amount of EUR per kilograms of net drained weight chargeable on
         the importation, outside tariff quotas, of goods classified under subheading of the Combined Nomenclature in Annex
         I to Regulation No 2658/87.
      
Lastly, taking the view that the decision resolving the dispute in the main proceedings depends on whether the preferential
         rate of customs duty of 14.9%, to which is added a supplement of EUR per kilograms of net drained weight, is valid
         and could therefore be applied in the main proceedings, the Finanzgericht Hamburg decided to stay the proceedings and to refer
         the following question to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Is the additional amount, arising under the third-country and preferential customs rate, of EUR per kilograms of
         net weight of goods charged on imports of preserved mushrooms of the genus Agaricus (subheading of the Combined Nomenclature) void for infringement of the principle of proportionality?’
      
 Consideration of the question referred
By its question the national court asks, in essence, whether the amount of the specific customs duty of EUR per kilograms
         of net drained weight, which applies under Regulation No 1719/and is charged on imports of preserved mushrooms of the
         genus Agaricus coming under subheading of the Combined Nomenclature effected outside the quota opened by Regulation No 1864/2004,
         is valid in the light of the principle of proportionality.
      
With regard to judicial review of the conditions for application of the principle of proportionality, having regard to the
         broad discretion of the European Union legislature in areas such as those in issue in the present case, which involve political,
         economic and social choices on its part, and in which it is called on to undertake complex assessments, the legality of a
         measure adopted in those areas can be affected only if the measure is manifestly disproportionate having regard to the objectives
         which the competent institutions are seeking to pursue (see Joined Cases C-453/03, C-11/04, C-12/and C-194/ABNA and Others [2005] ECR I‑10423, paragraph 69, and Case C-504/Agrarproduktion Staebelow [2006] ECR I‑679, paragraph 36).
      
It is therefore necessary to identify, first, the objectives pursued by the contested legislation in order then to ascertain
         whether the amount of the specific customs duty at issue in the main proceedings is manifestly disproportionate for achieving
         those objectives.
      
It must be noted at the outset that the legislation in question consists of a number of interdependent legal instruments forming
         an overall system applicable to imports of preserved mushrooms of the genus Agaricus coming under subheading of the Combined Nomenclature. The amount of the specific customs duty disputed in the
         main proceedings is therefore only one inherent and inseparable element of that system.
      
That system is presented as being the result of interaction between Annex I to Regulation No 2658/and Regulation No 980/2005,
         which respectively establish the common customs tariff and the scheme of generalised tariff preferences, on the one hand,
         and Regulation No 1864/2004, which governs the tariff quota, on the other hand. The conventional and specific customs duties
         resulting from the application of Article 7(2) and (5) of Regulation No 980/are charged, in accordance with that annex,
         on those imports of preserves only when they are effected outside the tariff quota opened by Regulation No 1864/2004.
      
In particular, first, as is apparent from, inter alia, the legal basis on which they were adopted, Annex I to Regulation No
         2658/and Regulation No 980/relate to the area of the common commercial policy of the European Union and consequently
         pursue objectives specific to that area.
      
Thus, the amount of the specific customs duty at issue in the main proceedings, which is referred to in that annex, constitutes
         the faithful transposition into European Union law of the international commitments  which the European Union has assumed in the context of the WTO. That amount corresponds, in actual fact, to the maximum authorised
         amount which the European Union accepted in the list of concessions and commitments annexed to the GATT. Furthermore,
         that list is consonant with the objective, pursued by the Agreement on Agriculture, of improving access to the agricultural
         markets of the members of that organisation and, in particular, with the objective pursued by Article of that agreement,
         which seeks, by means of a tariff determination process, to organise that access in a more transparent and predictable manner
         by requiring the conversion of all commercial non-tariff border measures in the agricultural sector, henceforth prohibited,
         into consolidated customs duties.
      
Secondly, as is also apparent from the legal basis on which it was adopted, Regulation No 1864/2004, which establishes tariff
         quotas for preserved mushrooms imported from third countries, relates to the area of the common agricultural policy and therefore
         pursues objectives specific to that area and linked to the organisation of the common market concerned. That regulation seeks,
         as is apparent from, inter alia, recital in its preamble, to guarantee an adequate supply of the goods concerned on the
         European Union market at stable prices whilst avoiding market disruptions in the form of severe price fluctuations and negative
         effects on European Union producers which are caused, or may be caused, by excessive imports of those goods from third countries.
      
Furthermore, Regulation No 1864/is also consonant with objectives of the common commercial policy in so far as, as is
         apparent from recital in its preamble, it transposes into European Union law the international commitments assumed by the
         European Union following the Agreement on Agriculture and transcribed in the European Community Schedule CXL of concessions
         and commitments, to open from July 1995, under certain conditions, Community tariff quotas for preserved mushrooms of the
         genus Agaricus coming under subheading of the Combined Nomenclature. Those commitments are, moreover, taken into account in Annex
         to Section III of Part Three of Annex I to Regulation No 2658/87.
      
As is apparent from recital in the preamble to Regulation No 1864/2004, that regulation also seeks to lay down detailed
         arrangements to ensure that quantities in excess of the tariff quotas are subjected to the levying of the full duty provided
         for in the Common Customs Tariff. It follows that the amount of the specific customs duty at issue in the main proceedings
         and applicable to imports of those preserves from third countries effected outside the quantities authorised by that regulation
         also pursues common-agricultural-policy objectives of dissuading those imports in economic terms and thus of avoiding unnecessary
         European Union market distortions resulting from excessive imports of those preserves.
      
Consequently, the abovementioned overall system and therefore the amount of the specific customs duty at issue in the main
         proceedings pursue both common-commercial-policy and common-agricultural-policy objectives.
      
In that regard, it must be pointed out that the case-law of the Court in the cases which gave rise to the judgments in Wünsche and Pietsch, to which the national court refers in its reference for a preliminary ruling, relates exclusively to safeguard measures
         adopted, at the time, autonomously, by the European Union under the rules on the common organisation of the market in the
         sector of products processed from fruit and vegetables, which relate to the area of the common agricultural policy. Those
         cases concerned measures chosen by the European Commission from among a very broad range of tariff and non-tariff measures
         capable of achieving the desired common-agricultural-policy objective.
      
By contrast, the imposition of a customs duty, such as that the amount of which is the subject of the question concerning
         validity referred by the national court in the present case, represents the only measure which the institutions of the European
         Union could adopt with regard to imports of the goods concerned in accordance with the international commitments subscribed
         to by the European Union in the context of the WTO. It follows from Article of the Agreement on Agriculture that all non-tariff
         trade barriers in the agricultural sector must be abolished and converted into customs duties, the maximum rates of the latter
         being set out in the lists of concessions by members of the WTO.
      
The abovementioned case-law does not, however, in any way take into consideration the common-commercial-policy objectives
         inherent in the legislation at issue in the main proceedings, which are the result of the situation following on from the
         international commitments assumed by the European Union in the context of the Uruguay Round multilateral negotiations, in
         which the common customs tariff is the only available measure for protecting the European Union market in that sector with
         regard to imports from third countries. It follows that, having regard to the legal context of the main proceedings, that
         case-law cannot be relevant for the purpose of examining the present question in respect of validity.
      
In the present case, in order to assess the validity of the amount of the specific customs duty at issue in the main proceedings,
         it is important to examine whether that duty constitutes a manifestly disproportionate measure for achieving the objectives
         of the legislation in question.
      
In view of the inherent complexity in deciding, at the outset, in the negotiations within the WTO, upon the level of the specific
         customs duty at which those imports would become economically of little advantage, it cannot be claimed that the European
         Union institutions concerned exceeded the limits of their broad discretion in the matter by fixing the amount of the maximum
         European Union customs duty at EUR per kilograms of net drained weight. That amount cannot therefore be regarded as
         being manifestly disproportionate.
      
Likewise, having regard to the legal context of the main proceedings, it cannot be inferred from the fact that the amount
         of the specific customs duty at issue in the main proceedings would have the effect of depriving imports, outside tariff quotas,
         of any prospect of economic profitability that that amount is manifestly disproportionate in relation to the objectives pursued.
      
As regards the argument of the applicant in the main proceedings that the level of the specific customs duty at issue in the
         main proceedings prevents the sale of mushrooms from the People’s Republic of China in the European Union, in view of the
         cost of their production, it must be pointed out that, in accordance with the most-favoured nation principle referred to in
         Article of the GATT, it is not permitted to set the specific customs duty at a level which differs each time with regard
         to each member of the WTO. Therefore, that argument based on the cost of production of mushrooms from one single Member State
         of the WTO, in the present case the People’s Republic of China, cannot establish that the European Union legislature exceeded
         its broad discretion when it fixed the amount of the specific customs duty at EUR per kilograms of net drained weight,
         which is applicable to imports, outside tariff quotas, from all the Member States of the WTO.
      
Having regard to all of the foregoing considerations, examination of the question referred has disclosed nothing capable of
         affecting the validity of the amount of the specific customs duty of EUR per kilograms of net drained weight, which
         applies under Regulation No 1719/and is charged on imports of preserved mushrooms of the genus Agaricus coming under subheading of the Combined Nomenclature and effected outside the quota opened by Regulation No 1864/2004.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
Examination of the question referred has disclosed nothing capable of affecting the validity of the amount of the specific
            customs duty of EUR per kilograms of net drained weight, which applies under Commission Regulation (EC) No 1719/of October amending Annex I to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and
            on the Common Customs Tariff and is charged on imports of preserved mushrooms of the genus Agaricus coming under subheading of the Combined Nomenclature in that annex and effected outside the quota opened by Commission
            Regulation (EC) No 1864/of October opening and providing for the administration of tariff quotas for preserved
            mushrooms imported from third countries, as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1995/of December 2005.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 