
Case C-518/Commission of the European Communities
v
Italian Republic
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Third‑party liability motor insurance – Articles EC and EC – Directive 92/49/EEC – National legislation imposing an obligation to contract on insurance undertakings – Restriction on the freedom of establishment and on the freedom to provide services – Social protection for victims of road traffic accidents – Proportionality – Insurance undertakings’ freedom to set rates – Principle of supervision by the home Member State)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Freedom to provide services – Restrictions
(Arts EC and EC)
2.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Freedom to provide services – Direct insurance other than life
            assurance – Directive 92/(Council Directive 92/49, Arts 6, and 39)
3.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Freedom to provide services – Direct insurance other than life
            assurance – Directive 92/(Council Directive 92/49, Art. 9)
1.        The obligation, imposed by the law of a Member State, to provide coverage for third‑party motor vehicle liability insurance,
         incumbent on insurance undertakings, including those which have their head office in another Member State, but which pursue
         their business in the first Member State, restricts the freedom of establishment and the freedom to provide services enshrined
         in Articles EC and EC. Such a measure affects the relevant operators’ access to the market, in particular where it subjects
         insurance undertakings not only to an obligation to cover any risks which are proposed to them, but also to requirements to
         moderate premium rates. Inasmuch as it involves changes and costs for those undertakings, the obligation to contract renders
         access to the market of that Member State less attractive and, if they obtain access to that market, reduces the ability of
         the undertakings concerned to compete effectively, from the outset, against undertakings traditionally established there.
         
      
However, that obligation is suitable for securing the attainment of the objective which it pursues and does not go beyond
         what is necessary to attain it. Thus, the very aim of obligatory third‑party liability motor insurance is to ensure that victims
         of road traffic accidents are compensated. That social protection objective, which amounts, essentially, to ensuring that
         such victims will be adequately compensated, can be taken into account as an overriding imperative relating to the public
         interest. On the other hand, it is not indispensable, with regard to the proportionality criterion, that the restrictive measure
         laid down by the authorities of a Member State should correspond to a view shared by all the Member States concerning the
         means of protecting the legitimate interest at issue. Therefore, the fact that some Member States have chosen to establish
         a different system to ensure that every vehicle owner is able to take out third‑party liability motor insurance for a premium
         that is not excessive does not indicate that the obligation to contract goes beyond what is necessary to attain the objectives
         pursued. Lastly, with regard to the criterion of proportionality, the obligation to insure does not prevent insurance undertakings
         from calculating a higher premium for a policyholder domiciled in an area characterised by a significant number of accidents
         than for a policyholder domiciled in an area where the risk is not so high.
      
(see paras 67, 70-71, 74-75, 83, 85, 91, 93)
2.        Articles 6, and of Directive 92/49, on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating
         to direct insurance other than life assurance and amending Directives 73/and 88/(third non‑life insurance Directive),
         prohibit Member States from introducing a system of prior approval or systematic notification of scales of premiums that an
         insurance undertaking intends to use in their territory in its dealings with policyholders. Such is not the case with a national
         law which,
      
- first, does not introduce a system of prior approval or systematic approval of rates,
- second, does not oblige insurance undertakings to base their premium rates on the market average but, quite to the contrary,
         provides that insurance undertakings are to calculate their premium rates according to their technical bases, while stating
         that, if those bases are not available, the insurance undertakings can use market statistics, and,
      
- third, to the extent that it is likely to have repercussions on premium rates in that they outline a technical framework
         within which insurance undertakings must calculate their premiums, it introduces a restriction on the freedom to set rates
         which is not prohibited by Directive 92/49. A full harmonisation in the field of non‑life insurance rates precluding any national
         measure liable to have effects on rates cannot be presumed in the absence of a clearly expressed intention to this effect
         on the part of the Community legislature.
      
(see paras 100, 103-106)
3.        Article of Directive 92/49, on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to direct insurance
         other than life assurance and amending Directives 73/and 88/(third non‑life insurance Directive), defines in a non‑exhaustive
         way the scope of home Member State supervision, stating that financial supervision is to ‘include’ the state of solvency and
         the establishment of technical provisions. Nevertheless, that provision cannot be interpreted as meaning that the Community
         legislature intended that the home Member State should have exclusive supervisory competence extending to the commercial conduct
         of insurance undertakings. It follows that that provision does not preclude the possibility of controls being exercised by
         the host Member State over the detailed rules according to which insurance undertakings, operating in that Member State under
         the freedom of establishment or the freedom to provide services, calculate their insurance premiums, together with the imposition
         of penalties.
      
(see paras 109, 116-117)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Third-party liability motor insurance – Articles EC and EC – Directive 92/49/EEC – National legislation imposing an obligation to contract on insurance undertakings – Restriction on the freedom of establishment and on the freedom to provide services – Social protection for victims of road traffic accidents – Proportionality – Insurance undertakings’ freedom to set rates – Principle of supervision by the home Member State)
In Case C-518/06,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on December 2006,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by E. Traversa and N. Yerrell, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Italian Republic, represented by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and by M. Fiorilli, avvocato dello Stato, with an address for service in
         Luxembourg,
      
defendant,
supported by:
Republic of Finland, represented by J. Himmanen, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
intervener,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas, K. Lenaerts and M. Ilešič (Rapporteur), Presidents
         of Chambers, A. Tizzano, A. Borg Barthet, J. Malenovský, J. Klučka, U. Lõhmus, E. Levits and J.-J. Kasel, Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on May 2008,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2008,
gives the following
Judgment
By its action, the Commission of the European Communities requests the Court to declare that: 
      
–      by implementing and maintaining legislation pursuant to which premiums for insurance against civil liability in respect of
         the use of motor vehicles (third-party liability motor insurance) must be calculated on the basis of specific parameters,
         and by making such premiums subject to controls ex post facto, the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 6, and of Council Directive 92/49/EEC of
         June on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to direct insurance other than
         life assurance and amending Directives 73/239/EEC and 88/357/EEC (third non‑life insurance Directive) (OJ L 228, p. 1);
      
–      by controlling the detailed rules in accordance with which insurance undertakings which have their head office in another
         Member State, but which pursue their business in Italy by virtue of the freedom of establishment or the freedom to provide
         services, calculate their insurance premiums, and by imposing in particular on such undertakings penalties for breach of the
         national rules concerning the calculation of insurance premiums, the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under Article of Directive 92/49, and
      
–      by maintaining an obligation to provide coverage for third-party motor vehicle liability insurance, incumbent on insurance
         undertakings, including those which have their head office in another Member State, but which pursue their business in Italy
         by virtue of the freedom of establishment or the freedom to provide services, the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its
         obligations under Articles EC and EC.
      
I –  Legal context
 Community legislation
 Directives 72/166/EEC, 84/5/EEC and 2005/14/EC 
In order to facilitate the movement of travellers between Member States, Council Directive 72/166/EEC of April on
         the approximation of the laws of Member States relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor
         vehicles, and to the enforcement of the obligation to insure against such liability (OJ, English Special Edition (II),
         p. 360) established a system based, first, on the abolition of checks on insurance green cards on the crossing of internal
         borders in the European Community and, second, on the obligation on each of the Member States to ensure that third-party liability
         in respect of the use of motor vehicles is covered by insurance.
      
The second recital in the preamble to Directive 72/states: 
      
‘… the only purpose of frontier controls of compulsory insurance cover against civil liability in respect of the use of motor
         vehicles is to safeguard the interests of persons who may be the victims of accidents caused by such vehicles …’
      
The seventh recital in the preamble to that directive states:
      
‘… the abolition of checks on green cards for vehicles normally based in a Member State entering the territory of another
         Member State can be effected by means of an agreement between the … national insurers’ bureaux, whereby each national bureau
         would guarantee compensation in accordance with the provisions of national law in respect of any loss or injury giving entitlement
         to compensation caused in its territory by one of those vehicles, whether or not insured’.
      
In addition, the fifth and sixth recitals in the preamble to that directive point out that the liberalisation of the rules
         regarding the movement of motor vehicles travelling between Member States contributes to the opening of the markets of those
         Member States. 
      
Article 3(1) of Directive 72/provides: 
      
‘Each Member State shall … take all appropriate measures to ensure that civil liability in respect of the use of vehicles
         normally based in its territory is covered by insurance. …’
      
The fifth and sixth recitals in the preamble to Second Council Directive 84/5/EEC of December on the approximation
         of the laws of the Member States relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles (OJ
         L 8, p. 17) state:
      
‘… the amounts in respect of which insurance is compulsory must in any event guarantee victims adequate compensation irrespective
         of the Member State in which the accident occurred;
      
… it is necessary to make provision for a body to guarantee that the victim will not remain without compensation where the
         vehicle which caused the accident is uninsured or unidentified; …’
      
Under Article 1(4) of Directive 84/5, the Member States are obliged to set up or authorise a guarantee fund to compensate
         the victims of accidents caused by vehicles in respect of which the third-party liability insurance obligation has not been
         satisfied.
      
It is stated, in the same provision, that that obligation is to be without prejudice to the right of the Member States to
         regard compensation by that body as subsidiary or non-subsidiary.
      
Directives 72/and 84/were amended most recently by Directive 2005/14/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
         of May amending Council Directives 72/166/EEC, 84/5/EEC, 88/357/EEC and 90/232/EEC and Directive 2000/26/EC of the
         European Parliament and of the Council relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles
         (OJ L 149, p. 14). Transposition of Directive 2005/did not have to be completed by the date on which the time-limit
         laid down in the last reasoned opinion issued in the present case expired.
      
As emphasised in recital in the preamble to Directive 2005/14, the reinforcement and consolidation of the single insurance
         market as regards motor insurance constitute a fundamental objective in the field of financial services, given the special
         importance of third-party liability motor insurance for European citizens, whether they are policyholders or victims of an
         accident, on the one hand, or insurance undertakings, on the other. 
      
Furthermore, recital in the preamble to Directive 2005/states that the right to invoke the insurance contract and to
         claim against the insurance undertaking directly is of great importance for the protection of victims of motor vehicle accidents.
      
 Directive 92/Recitals 1, 5, 6, and in the preamble to Directive 92/state:
      
‘(1)      … it is necessary to complete the internal market in direct insurance other than life assurance from the point of view both
         of the right of establishment and of the freedom to provide services, to make it easier for insurance undertakings with head
         offices in the Community to cover risks situated within the Community; 
      
…
(5)      … the approach adopted consists in bringing about such harmonisation as is essential, necessary and sufficient to achieve
         the mutual recognition of authorisations and prudential control systems, thereby making it possible to grant a single authorisation
         valid throughout the Community and apply the principle of supervision by the home Member State;
      
(6)      …, as a result, the taking up and the pursuit of the business of insurance are henceforth to be subject to the grant of a
         single official authorisation issued by the competent authorities of the Member State in which an insurance undertaking has
         its head office; … such authorisation enables an undertaking to carry on business throughout the Community, under the right
         of establishment or the freedom to provide services; …
      
(7)      … the competent authorities of home Member States will henceforth be responsible for monitoring the financial health of insurance
         undertakings, including their state of solvency, the establishment of adequate technical provisions and the covering of those
         provisions by matching assets;
      
…
(18)  … the harmonisation of insurance contract law is not a prior condition for the achievement of the internal market in insurance;
         …, therefore, the opportunity afforded to the Member States of imposing the application of their law to insurance contracts
         covering risks situated within their territories is likely to provide adequate safeguards for policyholders who require special
         protection’.
      
Under Title II of Directive 92/49, entitled ‘The taking up of the business of insurance’, Article provides:
      
‘Article of [First Council] Directive 73/239/EEC [of July on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions relating to the taking-up and pursuit of the business of direct insurance other than life assurance (OJ L 228,
         p. 3)] shall be replaced by the following.
      
“…
… Member States shall not … adopt provisions requiring the prior approval or systematic notification of general and special
         policy conditions, scales of premiums and forms and other printed documents which an undertaking intends to use in its dealings
         with policyholders. 
      
Member States may not retain or introduce prior notification or approval of proposed increases in premium rates except as
         part of general price-control systems. 
      
…”’
Under Title III which is entitled ‘Harmonisation of the conditions governing the business of insurance’, Article of that
         directive states:
      
‘Article of Directive 73/239/EEC shall be replaced by the following:
…
1.      The financial supervision of an insurance undertaking, including that of the business it carries on either through branches
         or under the freedom to provide services, shall be the sole responsibility of the home Member State.
      
2.      That financial supervision shall include verification, with respect to the insurance undertaking’s entire business, of its
         state of solvency, of the establishment of technical provisions and of the assets covering them in accordance with the rules
         laid down or practices followed in the home Member State under provisions adopted at Community level.
      
…’
Article of that directive provides: 
      
‘Article 19(2) and (3) of Directive 73/239/EEC shall be replaced by the following: 
…
3.       Every Member State shall take all steps necessary to ensure that the competent authorities have the powers and means necessary
         for the supervision of the business of insurance undertakings with head offices within their territories, including business
         carried on outwith those territories, in accordance with the Council Directives governing such business and for the purpose
         of seeing that they are implemented.
      
These powers and means must, in particular, enable the competent authorities to: 
…
(b)      take any measures with regard to an undertaking, its directors or managers or the persons who control it, that are appropriate
         and necessary to ensure that that undertaking’s business continues to comply with the laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions with which the undertaking must comply in each Member State …
      
…’
Article of Directive 92/provides: 
      
‘Member States shall not adopt provisions requiring the prior approval or systematic notification of general and special policy
         conditions, scales of premiums, or forms and other printed documents which an insurance undertaking intends to use in its
         dealings with policy-holders. They may only require non-systematic notification of those policy conditions and other documents
         for the purpose of verifying compliance with national provisions concerning insurance contracts, and that requirement may
         not constitute a prior condition for an undertaking’s carrying on its business.
      
Member States may not retain or introduce prior notification or approval of proposed increases in premium rates except as
         part of general price-control systems.’
      
Under Title IV of that directive, entitled ‘Provisions relating to right of establishment and the freedom to provide services’,
         Article 39(2) and (3) of Directive 92/states:
      
‘2.       The Member State of the branch or of the provision of services shall not adopt provisions requiring the prior approval or
         systematic notification of general and special policy conditions, scales of premiums, or forms and other printed documents
         which an undertaking intends to use in its dealings with policyholders. It may only require an undertaking that proposes to
         carry on insurance business within its territory, under the right of establishment or the freedom to provide services, to
         effect non-systematic notification of those policy conditions and other documents for the purpose of verifying compliance
         with its national provisions concerning insurance contracts, and that requirement may not constitute a prior condition for
         an undertaking’s carrying on its business.
      
3.       The Member State of the branch or of the provision of services may not retain or introduce prior notification or approval
         of proposed increases in premium rates except as part of general price-control systems.’
      
Article of that directive provides: 
      
‘…
3.       If the competent authorities of a Member State establish that an undertaking with a branch or carrying on business under the
         freedom to provide services within its territory is not complying with the legal provisions applicable to it in that State,
         they shall require the undertaking concerned to remedy that irregular situation.
      
4.       If the undertaking in question fails to take the necessary action, the competent authorities of the Member State concerned
         shall inform the competent authorities of the home Member State accordingly. The latter authorities shall, at the earliest
         opportunity, take all appropriate measures to ensure that the undertaking concerned remedies that irregular situation. The
         nature of those measures shall be communicated to the competent authorities of the Member State concerned.
      
5.       If, despite the measures taken by the home Member State or because those measures prove inadequate or are lacking in that
         State, the undertaking persists in infringing the legal provisions in force in the Member State concerned, the latter may,
         after informing the competent authorities of the home Member State, take appropriate measures to prevent or penalise further
         infringements, including, in so far as is strictly necessary, preventing that undertaking from continuing to conclude new
         insurance contracts within its territory. Member States shall ensure that within their territories it is possible to serve
         the legal documents necessary for such measures on insurance undertakings.
      
6.       Paragraphs 3, and shall not affect the emergency power of the Member States concerned to take appropriate measures to
         prevent irregularities within their territories. This shall include the possibility of preventing insurance undertakings from
         continuing to conclude new insurance contracts within their territories.
      
7.       Paragraphs 3, and shall not affect the powers of the Member States to penalise infringements within their territories.
…’
 National legislation
Article 11(1) of Law No relating to compulsory insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles
         and craft (assicurazione obbligatoria della responsabilità civile derivante dalla circolazione dei veicoli a motore e dei
         natanti) of December (GURI No of January 1970), in the version in force at the time of the pre-litigation procedure
         (‘Law No 990/69’), imposes on insurance undertakings the obligation to provide third-party liability motor insurance at the
         request of any potential customer. It provides: 
      
‘Insurance undertakings shall be required, on the basis of the contract terms and insurance rates which they must establish
         in advance for any risk in respect of the use of motor vehicles and craft, to accept the proposals regarding compulsory insurance
         which are submitted to them’. 
      
That obligation to contract was, in the main, retained in Article of the Code of Private Insurance (codice delle assicurazioni
         private), established by Legislative Decree No of September 2005, which entered into force on January (GURI,
         ordinary supplement, No of October 2005, ‘the Code of Private Insurance’) That article provides: 
      
‘1. Insurance undertakings shall be required, on the basis of the contract terms and insurance rates they must establish in
         advance for any risk in respect of the use of motor vehicles and craft, to accept the proposals regarding compulsory insurance
         which are submitted to them, without prejudice to the necessary assessment of the correctness of the data shown in the claims
         history certificate, and the identification of the policyholder and the vehicle’s owner, if other than the policyholder. 
      
2. Insurance undertakings may request that the authorisation be limited to fleet business for the purposes of compliance with
         the obligations arising from paragraph 1’.
      
Article 11(1a) of Law No 990/provides: 
      
‘In compliance with the obligations envisaged under paragraph 1, undertakings, when calculating their premium rates, shall
         calculate pure premiums and loadings separately, according to their technical bases that must be sufficiently broad and refer
         to at least five years. If these bases are not available undertakings can use market statistics. If [the Istituto per la vigilanza
         sulle assicurazioni private e di interesse collettivo (ISVAP)] ascertains that there is a circumvention of the obligation
         to contract in respect of specific territorial areas or specific categories of policyholders, a penalty is applied of 3% of
         the premium relating to motor liability insurance as shown in the last balance sheet approved, with a minimum of one million
         euros up to a maximum of five million euros. In case of repeated circumvention of the obligation to contract, the authorisation
         to pursue an activity in the field of civil liability insurance in respect of the use of motor vehicles may be withdrawn.’
      
The key elements of that provision were repeated in Articles 35(1) and 314(2) of the Code of Private Insurance. 
      
Article 12a of Law No 990/provides: 
      
‘1. To guarantee transparency and competition in the supply of insurance services as well as adequate information for users,
         undertakings which operate in the field of compulsory insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles
         and craft shall make available to the public the premiums and the general and special contract terms applied in the territory
         of the Italian Republic. 
      
2. The premiums applied, as fixed by each insurance undertaking, to policyholders which are in the category with the maximum
         bonus over the previous two years, must be uniform for the whole of the national territory. 
      
3. Advertising of premiums and contract terms pursuant to paragraph shall be undertaken at each point of sale of the insurance
         undertaking and through internet sites thereby enabling users to calculate premiums and obtain information on the terms of
         insurance contracts ….
      
…
5. Each incorrect or incomplete execution of the obligations contained in paragraphs and shall be subject to an administrative
         penalty ranging from EUR to EUR 300. In the event of an omission or delay which exceeds days, the penalty shall
         be doubled.’
      
Those rules were, in the main, repeated in Articles and in the Code of Private Insurance. 
      
Lastly, Article 12d of Law No 990/provides: 
      
‘1. Breach or circumvention by insurance undertakings of the obligation to accept the proposals of potential policyholders
         in accordance with Article in relation to compulsory insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles
         and craft shall be subject to a financial penalty … ’
      
By analogy, Article 314(1) of the Code of Private Insurance provides:
      
‘1. Breach or circumvention of the obligation to contract referred to in Article 132(1) shall be punished with an administrative
         fine ranging from EUR to EUR 500.’
      
II –  Pre-litigation procedure
By letter of March 2004, the Commission drew to the attention of the Italian Republic difficulties relating to the compatibility
         of Law No 990/69, and the application of that law by the ISVAP, with Articles 6, and of Directive 92/49. In that regard,
         the Commission indicated that it had received complaints from insurance undertakings in regard to penalties imposed by the
         ISVAP, on the ground that the obligation to contract set out in Article 11(1) of that law had been circumvented by the charging
         of excessive premiums. 
      
By letter of June 2004, the Italian Republic replied that Law No 990/and its application by ISVAP complied with Community
         law. It explained that Law No 990/required neither prior approval of premium rates nor systematic notification of them
         to the ISVAP. That law left insurance undertakings free to decide their premium rates, while ensuring that consumers could
         obtain compulsory third-party liability motor insurance. In that latter regard, it emphasised the social nature of civil liability
         for injury caused by road traffic. 
      
By letter of formal notice of July 2004, the Commission asked the Italian Republic to send to the Commission its observations
         on the compatibility with Directive 92/of Articles 11(1), 11(1a), 12a and 12d of Law No 990/69, as interpreted and applied
         by the ISVAP.
      
By letter of August 2004, the Italian Republic sent its observations, which were, in essence, the same as those communicated
         in its letter of June 2004.
      
On December 2004, the Commission sent a supplementary letter of formal notice in which it maintained that, following the
         principles set out by the Court in Case C‑442/CaixaBank France [2004] ECR I‑8961, the obligation to contract was also contrary to Articles EC and EC. The Italian Republic was granted
         a period of one month to reply to that supplementary letter of formal notice.
      
In the absence of any reply to the supplementary letter of formal notice, on October the Commission sent to the Italian
         Republic a reasoned opinion confirming the complaints set out in the two letters of formal notice and requesting that Member
         State to comply with the reasoned opinion within two months of its receipt. 
      
By letter of November 2005, the Italian Republic notified the Commission of the publication of the Code of Private Insurance.
         
      
By letter of December 2005, the Italian Republic replied to the reasoned opinion, insisting that the national legislation
         was in compliance with Community law.
      
In the light of the Italian Republic’s reply, the Commission considered it necessary to make clear its grounds for complaint
         and thus issued, on April 2006, an additional reasoned opinion. The Italian Republic was requested to comply with it within
         two months of its receipt.
      
By letter of May 2006, the Italian Republic replied to the additional reasoned opinion. It reaffirmed that its legislation
         was in compliance with Community law.
      
As the Commission was not satisfied with the Italian Republic’s reply, it brought the present action. 
      
III –  Procedure before the Court
By application filed at the Registry of the Court on December 2006, the Commission brought this action, asking the Court
         to make the declarations set out in paragraph of this judgment and to order the Italian Republic to pay the costs. 
      
The Italian Republic requests the Court to dismiss the action. 
      
By order of June 2007, the President of the Court granted the Republic of Finland leave to intervene in support of the
         form of order sought by the Italian Republic.
      
 The action
In its reply, the Commission indicated that the principal infringement of Community law alleged against the Italian Republic
         is the incompatibility of the obligation to contract with Articles EC and EC. That complaint, therefore, falls to be
         examined first of all.
      
 The complaint alleging infringement of Articles EC and EC by reason of the obligation to contract 
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission claims that the obligation to contract, which is imposed on all insurance undertakings operating in the field
         of third-party liability motor insurance and in relation to all vehicle owners, and, likewise, the possibility offered to
         the ISVAP of imposing penalties in the event of infringement of that obligation, are incompatible with Articles EC and
         EC. 
      
That obligation dissuades insurance undertakings established in other Member States from establishing themselves or offering
         services in Italy, thus hindering access to the Italian market. In particular, those undertakings are prevented from freely
         determining the insurance services they offer and the recipients of those services. Thus, they are required to bear costs
         that are excessive in relation to their commercial strategy. Those costs are even more significant for undertakings which
         intend solely to operate in Italy occasionally. 
      
The restrictive effect of the obligation to contract is comparable to the restrictive effect found by the Court in CaixaBank France.
      
The Commission argues, next, that the obligation to contract is unjustified and disproportionate to the objective pursued.
      
As regards the objective, cited by the Italian Republic, of protecting vehicle owners, the Commission acknowledges that the
         obligation to contract contributes to guaranteeing that a vehicle owner will find an insurance undertaking prepared to issue
         a third-party liability motor insurance policy. However, the obligation to contract goes beyond what is necessary to attain
         the objective of consumer protection, since it is imposed on insurance undertakings in respect of all vehicle owners throughout
         Italian territory, whereas the Italian Republic has referred to difficulties in finding an insurance undertaking prepared
         to issue a third-party liability motor insurance policy for a specific geographical area and category of persons, that is
         to say, the south of Italy and new drivers. 
      
In relation to the other objective cited by the Italian Republic, which consists of guaranteeing appropriate compensation
         for victims of road traffic accidents, the Commission takes the view that that is already achieved by the obligation imposed
         on vehicle owners – following transposition of Article of Directive 72/– to take out a third‑party liability motor insurance
         policy, and the existence in each Member State of a guarantee fund pursuant to Directive 84/5.
      
Lastly, the Commission notes that other Member States have less restrictive systems for obtaining the same results as the
         Italian legislation is claimed to be pursuing. It refers, in that regard, to the Bureau central de tarification (Central Rates
         Office) established both in Belgium and in France, the Consorcio de Compensación de Seguros (Insurance Compensation Consortium)
         established in Spain, the consortium of major insurance undertakings established in the Netherlands, and the mutual insurance
         system established in Portugal.
      
The Italian Republic points out that third-party liability motor insurance, while being a private form of insurance, has a
         social purpose, in particular the need to ensure that victims of road traffic accidents receive compensation. That is the
         reason why an obligation was introduced for vehicle owners to take out insurance in order to compensate third parties. 
      
By choosing to impose that obligation to contract both on insurance undertakings and motor vehicle users, the Italian Republic
         wished to offer maximum protection to, on the one hand, policyholders, in their capacity as consumers, against discrimination
         in relation to access to insurance and use of public highways and, on the other, the victims of road traffic accidents. 
      
According to the Italian Republic, those objectives should not be frustrated by the commercial freedom of undertakings. It
         considers that, if the Court were to accept the Commission’s reasoning, third-party liability motor insurance would become
         insurance based solely on market logic and would lose, to a large extent, its social character. 
      
The Italian Republic points out, next, that the obligation to contract has no dissuasive effect on insurance undertakings
         established in a Member State other than the Italian Republic which wish to penetrate the Italian market. 
      
In the event that the Court were, nevertheless, to hold that the obligation to contract restricts the freedom of establishment
         and the freedom to provide services, the Italian Republic contends that that obligation is appropriate to achieve the abovementioned
         objectives of consumer protection and protection for victims of road traffic accidents.
      
The obligation to contract is, furthermore, compatible with the principle of proportionality. Contrary to what the Commission
         claims, it would be neither practical nor lawful to limit the obligation to contract to certain areas of Italian territory
         or to certain types of consumer. To limit the obligation to certain categories of consumers would raise discrimination issues,
         while a geographical limitation of that obligation would encourage insurance undertakings not to operate in those areas subject
         to the obligation to insure.
      
As regards, lastly, alternative mechanisms established in other Member States, the Italian Republic points out that, in the
         absence of harmonised rules on the means of implementing the obligation to insure motor vehicles in respect of third-party
         liability, each Member State remains free to choose the solution which best suits the national social situation. It is, moreover,
         precisely because of the differences between the various national situations that the Community legislature was not able to
         lay down rules on harmonisation in that regard. 
      
The Republic of Finland argues that, irrespective of whether the obligation to contract restricts the freedom of establishment
         and the freedom to provide services, it is in any event justified.
      
In that regard, it contends that there is a close link between third-party liability motor insurance and social security,
         on account of the reimbursement of hospital and recuperation costs for victims of road traffic accidents and costs relating
         to loss of earnings suffered by those victims.
      
According to the Republic of Finland, the obligation to contract is necessary for and proportionate to the attainment of the
         objectives pursued. It is, for consumers, the most straightforward means of fulfilling their legal obligation.
      
 Findings of the Court
–       The existence of a restriction on the freedom of establishment and the freedom to provide services 
It is not in dispute that the obligation to contract applies without distinction to all undertakings providing third-party
         liability motor insurance on Italian territory. 
      
The Commission takes the view, nevertheless, that that obligation, in so far as it reduces the ability of insurance undertakings
         to implement their strategic market choices independently, hinders, in Italy, the establishment of and provision of services
         by undertakings having their head office in another Member State.
      
It is settled case-law that the term ‘restriction’ within the meaning of Articles EC and EC covers all measures which
         prohibit, impede or render less attractive the freedom of establishment or the freedom to provide services (CaixaBank France, paragraph 11; Case C‑465/Commission v Italy [2007] ECR I‑11091, paragraph 17; and Case C‑389/Commission v France [2008] ECR I-1057, paragraph 52).
      
As regards the question of the circumstances in which a measure applicable without distinction, such as the obligation to
         contract at issue in the present case, may come within that concept, it should be borne in mind that rules of a Member State
         do not constitute a restriction within the meaning of the EC Treaty solely by virtue of the fact that other Member States
         apply less strict, or more commercially favourable, rules to providers of similar services established in their territory
         (see, to that effect, Case C‑384/Alpine Investments [1995] ECR I‑1141, paragraph 27, and Case C‑403/Schempp [2005] ECR I‑6421, paragraph 45).
      
By contrast, the concept of restriction covers measures taken by a Member State which, although applicable without distinction,
         affect access to the market for undertakings from other Member States and thereby hinder intra-Community trade (see, to that
         effect, Alpine Investments, paragraphs and 38, and CaixaBank France, paragraph 12).
      
In the present case, it is common ground that the obligation to contract does not have any repercussions for the acceptance
         by the Italian authorities of the administrative authorisation, referred to in paragraph of this judgment, which insurance
         undertakings having their head office in a Member State other than the Italian Republic obtain in the Member State in which
         they have their head office. It therefore leaves intact the right of access to the Italian market as regards third-party liability
         motor insurance resulting from that authorisation. 
      
Nevertheless, the imposition by a Member State of an obligation to contract such as that at issue constitutes a substantial
         interference in the freedom to contract which economic operators, in principle, enjoy.
      
In a sector like that of insurance, such a measure affects the relevant operators’ access to the market, in particular where
         it subjects insurance undertakings not only to an obligation to cover any risks which are proposed to them, but also to requirements
         to moderate premium rates. 
      
Inasmuch as it obliges insurance undertakings which enter the Italian market to accept every potential customer, that obligation
         to contract is likely to lead, in terms of organisation and investment, to significant additional costs for such undertakings.
      
If they wish to enter the Italian market under conditions which comply with Italian legislation, such undertakings will be
         required to re-think their business policy and strategy, inter alia, by considerably expanding the range of insurance services
         offered.
      
Inasmuch as it involves changes and costs on such a scale for those undertakings, the obligation to contract renders access
         to the Italian market less attractive and, if they obtain access to that market, reduces the ability of the undertakings concerned
         to compete effectively, from the outset, against undertakings traditionally established in Italy (see, to that effect, CaixaBank France, paragraphs and 14).
      
Therefore, the obligation to contract restricts the freedom of establishment and the freedom to provide services.
      
–       Justification for the restriction
A restriction on the freedom of establishment and the freedom to provide services may be justified where it serves overriding
         requirements relating to the public interest, is suitable for securing the attainment of the objective which it pursues and
         does not go beyond what is necessary in order to attain it (see, inter alia, Joined Cases C‑94/and C‑202/Cipolla and Others [2006] ECR I‑11421, paragraph 61; Case C-250/United Pan-Europe Communications Belgium and Others [2007] ECR I‑11135, paragraph 39; and Case C‑212/Government of the French Community and Walloon Government [2008] ECR I‑1683, paragraph 55).
      
In order to justify the obligation to contract, the Italian Republic has cited a number of objectives, including the social
         protection for victims of road traffic accidents.
      
That social protection objective, which amounts, essentially, to ensuring that such victims will be adequately compensated,
         can be taken into account as an overriding requirement relating to the public interest.
      
As is clear from the Community legislation cited in paragraphs to of this judgment, and as the Italian Republic and the
         Republic of Finland have pointed out, the very purpose of compulsory third-party liability motor insurance is to guarantee
         compensation for victims of road traffic accidents.
      
Under that same legislation, such compensation is to be principally financed on the basis of contracts underwritten by insurance
         undertakings, while the guarantee fund set up in each Member State has only a subsidiary role in compensating victims of road
         traffic accidents, namely in cases where the accident was caused by a vehicle in respect of which the insurance requirement
         has not been met.
      
Article of Directive 72/accordingly requires the Member States to take all appropriate measures to ensure that their
         citizens comply with the obligation to take out third-party liability motor insurance. 
      
Clearly, one of the ways in which Member States may fulfil that obligation imposed by Article of Directive 72/is to
         ensure that every owner of a vehicle is able to take out such insurance for a premium which is not excessive.
      
In that regard, the Commission’s argument that the objective of social protection for victims of road traffic accidents is,
         in any event, achieved by the existence in each Member State of a guarantee fund cannot be accepted.
      
Admittedly, the existence of the guarantee fund ensures that the victims of accidents caused by vehicles in respect of which
         the insurance requirement has not been met will be compensated. It is therefore not in dispute that, even in the absence of
         an obligation to contract such as that introduced by the Italian Republic, every victim of a road traffic accident will receive
         compensation.
      
However, as has been pointed out in paragraph of this judgment, it is also apparent from the Community legislation that
         the existence of an individual contract for third-party liability motor insurance, and the possibility of invoking that insurance
         contract directly against the insurance undertaking, constitutes the principal basis for the protection of victims of road
         traffic accidents. In those circumstances, Member States cannot be criticised for taking initiatives aimed at preventing the
         owners of vehicles from being unable to meet the requirement to take out third-party liability motor insurance.
      
It follows from the foregoing that the obligation to contract at issue in the present case is apt to contribute to implementing
         the Community legislation relating to the obligation, for every vehicle owner, to take out third-party liability motor insurance
         and, therefore, to the attainment of the objective of that legislation, which is to guarantee adequate compensation for victims
         of road traffic accidents.
      
As regards whether the obligation to contract as it is in force in the Italian Republic goes beyond what is necessary to achieve
         the objective of social protection for victims of road traffic accidents, it must be borne in mind, first of all, that it
         is not essential, with regard to the proportionality criterion, that a restrictive measure laid down by the authorities of
         a Member State should correspond to a view shared by all the Member States concerning the means of protecting the legitimate
         interest at issue.
      
The situation relating to road traffic, and to the relevant public interest objectives in that area, varies from one Member
         State to another. Consequently, Member States must be recognised as having some discretion in that area. Whilst it is true
         that it is for a Member State which relies on an imperative requirement to justify a restriction within the meaning of the
         EC Treaty to demonstrate that its rules are appropriate and necessary to attain the legitimate objective being pursued, that
         burden of proof cannot be so extensive as to require the Member State to prove, positively, that no other conceivable measure
         could enable that objective to be attained under the same conditions (Case C‑110/Commission v Italy [2009] ECR I‑0000, paragraphs and 66). 
      
Therefore, the fact that some Member States have chosen to establish a system different from that introduced by the Italian
         Republic to ensure that every vehicle owner is able to take out third-party liability motor insurance for a premium that is
         not excessive does not indicate that the obligation to contract goes beyond what is necessary to attain the objectives pursued.
         The explanations given by the Commission concerning the systems in place in a number of Member States other than the Italian
         Republic do not, moreover, enable the conclusion to be drawn that those systems are, ultimately, less restrictive and more
         advantageous for insurance undertakings than the obligation to contract introduced by the Italian legislature. 
      
It is appropriate, next, to consider the Commission’s argument that it is disproportionate to impose on insurance undertakings
         an obligation to contract vis-à-vis all potential customers and throughout Italian territory.
      
On that point, the Italian Republic contended, without being challenged by the Commission, that, in the southern part of its
         territory, there are difficult circumstances which require corrective measures on the part of the public authorities in order
         that third-party liability motor insurance can be provided under conditions which are acceptable both for policyholders and
         insurance undertakings.
      
It appears, inter alia, that the number of road traffic accidents declared to insurance undertakings is particularly high
         in certain areas in the south of Italy. That situation has led to a considerable increase in the financial risks incurred
         by those undertakings in that region.
      
In those circumstances, the Italian Republic could consider that it was appropriate to impose on all undertakings operating
         in its territory an obligation to contract vis-à-vis all vehicle owners domiciled in Italy, in order to avoid those undertakings
         withdrawing from the southern part of Italian territory and thereby depriving vehicle owners domiciled there of the possibility
         of taking out third‑party liability motor insurance, which is nevertheless compulsory.
      
It follows, moreover, from Article 11(1a) of Law No 990/and from Article 35(1) of the Code of Private Insurance that in
         taking that measure the Italian Republic did not prohibit insurance undertakings from applying premium rates differentiated
         on the basis of past statistics on the average cost of the risk within categories of insured that have been sufficiently broadly
         defined. 
      
In particular, it is not in dispute that the obligation to insure does not prevent insurance undertakings from calculating
         a higher premium for a policyholder domiciled in an area characterised by a significant number of accidents than for a policyholder
         domiciled in an area where the risk is not so high.
      
Furthermore, it is not inconceivable that an obligation to contract limited to only the southern part of Italian territory
         would give rise, as the Italian Republic has claimed, to a questionable legal situation, inasmuch as vehicle owners domiciled
         in other regions of Italy could complain of unequal treatment if, in a region in which there was no such obligation to contract,
         they experienced difficulties in finding an insurance undertaking prepared to enter into a contract for third-party liability
         motor insurance with them.
      
It follows from all of the foregoing that the obligation to contract is appropriate to ensure the achievement of the objective
         which it pursues and does not go beyond what it necessary to attain it. 
      
It follows that the complaint alleging breach of Articles EC and EC must be rejected.
      
 The complaint alleging infringement of Articles 6, and of Directive 92/by reason of the criteria to be used in calculating
            insurance premiums and by reason of the control ex post facto to which such premiums are subjected
 Arguments of the parties
According to the Commission, once it has been established that the obligation to contract imposed by Article 11(1) of Law
         No 990/is incompatible with Community law, it inevitably follows that Article 11(1a) of that law is incompatible with Articles
         6, and of Directive 92/49. As the Italian Republic itself asserted, the criteria fixed for the calculation of insurance
         premiums are aimed at ensuring compliance with the obligation to contract. 
      
In particular, the obligation on insurance undertakings to fix their insurance premiums in accordance with their ‘technical
         bases that must be sufficiently broad and refer to at least five years’ and to make them correspond to a specific market average,
         and the fact that those premiums are subject to control ex post facto, with the ISVAP able to impose significant fines, constitute an infringement of the freedom to set premium rates laid down
         in those articles of Directive 92/49. 
      
The Italian Republic observes that the sole objective of the premium rate-setting principles laid down in Law No 990/is
         to contain the phenomenon of consumers being discouraged by some insurance undertakings from taking out a policy of insurance
         with them by means of the exorbitant premium rate they calculate for those consumers. Those principles correspond to the ordinary
         technical rules for determining premium rates, and to the actuarial principles followed by insurance undertakings. 
      
According to the Italian Republic, those provisions in no way oblige insurance undertakings to offer prices similar to the
         market average or not to deviate substantially from the premium rates applied during the previous five years. It explains
         that undertakings fix their premium rates on the basis of past trends, and they have the right to raise, even substantially,
         the level of insurance premiums if the situation worsens in terms of the number of accidents.
      
As regards the ISVAP, the Italian Republic notes that that authority intervenes only against undertakings which apply insurance
         premiums lacking any valid technical justification, reflecting manifestly improper rates and discriminatory conduct against
         some policy holders. It contends that those cases in which the ISVAP intervenes do not concern premium rates that are simply
         high but rather genuinely abnormal rates, where the intention is to deny insurance cover. For example, annual premiums of
         more than EUR have been proposed to some consumers.
      
 Findings of the Court
Articles 6, and of Directive 92/prohibit Member States from introducing a system of prior approval or systematic
         notification of scales of premiums that an insurance undertaking intends to use in their territory in its dealings with policyholders.
         
      
As the Court has already stated, the Community legislature thus meant to secure the principle of freedom to set rates in the
         non-life insurance sector, including third-party liability motor insurance (Case C-59/Commission v Italy [2003] ECR I-1759, paragraph 29, and Case C‑346/Commission v Luxembourg, paragraph 21).
      
In the present case, Article 11(1a) of Law No 990/and Article 35(1) of the Code of Private Insurance oblige undertakings
         providing third‑party liability motor insurance to calculate pure premiums and loadings separately, according to their technical
         bases that must be sufficiently broad and refer to at least five years.
      
On the question whether that rule is compatible with the principle of freedom to set rates as set out previously, it must
         first be noted that it does not introduce a system of prior approval or systematic notification of premium rates. 
      
Second, contrary to the Commission’s assertion, that rule does not oblige insurance undertakings to base their premium rates
         on the market average. Quite to the contrary, Article 11(1a) of Law No 990/and Article 35(1) of the Code of Private Insurance
         provide that insurance undertakings are to calculate their premium rates according to their technical bases, while stating
         that, if those bases are not available, the insurance undertakings can use market statistics.
      
Third, to the extent that Article 11(1a) of Law No 990/and Article 35(1) of the Code of Private Insurance are likely to
         have repercussions on premium rates in that they outline a technical framework within which insurance undertakings must calculate
         their premiums, it is clear that such a restriction on the freedom to set rates is not prohibited by Directive 92/49.
      
It should be recalled, in that regard, that full harmonisation in the field of non-life insurance rates precluding any national
         measure liable to have effects on rates cannot be presumed in the absence of a clearly expressed intention to this effect
         on the part of the Community legislature (Commission v Luxembourg, paragraph 24). 
      
The Commission has not, moreover, proved or even alleged, that the rule for calculation imposed by the Italian legislature
         is incompatible with the technical rules for determination of premium rates, or the actuarial principles which are followed
         in the insurance sector. 
      
It follows from the foregoing that the complaint alleging infringement of Articles 6, and of Directive 92/must be
         rejected.
      
 The complaint alleging infringement of Article of Directive 92/by reason of the controlling of the detailed rules on
            calculating insurance premiums and the imposition of penalties
 Arguments of the parties
According to the Commission, the control, exercised by the ISVAP, pursuant to Article 11(1a) of Law No 990/and, most recently,
         pursuant to Articles 35(1) and 314(2) of the Code of Private Insurance, of the detailed rules according to which insurance
         undertakings operating in Italy under the freedom of establishment or the freedom to provide services calculate their insurance
         premiums, together with the imposition of penalties, constitute an infringement of the division of competences between the
         home Member State and the host Member State set out in Article of Directive 92/49.
      
It follows from recital in the preamble to Directive 92/that the principal of supervision by the home Member State constitutes
         one of the essential objectives of that directive. Any derogation from that principle should be construed narrowly.
      
There is no provision which legitimises the interventions of the ISVAP at issue. On the contrary, certain provisions of Directive
         92/49, such as Articles and 40, confer on the principle of supervision by the home Member State a very broad scope. 
      
It follows from those provisions that, when the ISVAP intends to intervene in connection with premiums for third-party liability
         motor insurance set by insurance undertakings having their head office in a Member State other than the Italian Republic,
         it must notify the supervision authorities in the home Member State of the alleged irregularities and ask those authorities
         to take appropriate measures to bring the infringements to an end.
      
The Italian Republic observes that interventions in connection with premium rates the purpose of which is to protect consumers
         do not fall under the financial supervision of insurance undertakings within the meaning of Article of Directive 92/49.
         The instruments for the protection of financial stability the use of which is reserved to the authorities of the home Member
         State comprise the solvency margins and the coverage of technical reserves. Such instruments have nothing to do with the protection
         of consumer rights.
      
 Findings of the Court
As the Commission has pointed out, Directive 92/establishes, in recital in its preamble and in Article 9, a principle
         of home Member State supervision.
      
However, as is entirely clear from recital in the preamble to, and Article of, that directive, that principle extends
         only to the financial supervision of insurance undertakings.
      
It is of course true that Article of Directive 92/defines, in a non‑exhaustive way, the scope of the principle of home
         Member State supervision, stating that financial supervision is to ‘include’ the state of solvency and the establishment of
         technical provisions. Nevertheless, that provision cannot be interpreted as meaning that the Community legislature intended
         that the home Member State should have exclusive supervisory competence extending to the commercial conduct of insurance undertakings.
         
      
It follows that Article does preclude the possibility of controls such as those exercised by the ISVAP.
      
The foregoing considerations are not inconsistent with Articles and of Directive 92/on which the Commission relies
         in its reply. 
      
As regards Article of Directive 92/49, that provision amends a provision of Directive 73/which, like all the other
         provisions in that same section of Directive 73/239, concerns the financial soundness of insurance undertakings. The Commission
         cannot therefore rely on Article to claim that the supervisory competence set out in that provision goes beyond the question
         of financial soundness.
      
As regards Article of Directive 92/49, suffice it to state, first, that the Commission has not criticised the Italian Republic
         for having disregarded the obligations laid down in paragraphs to of that article and, second, Article 40(7) of that directive
         confirms the power of the host Member State to penalise infringements committed on its territory.
      
It follows from all of the foregoing considerations that that complaint must be rejected. 
      
IV –  Costs
Under the first subparagraph of Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the
         costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. In this case the Commission has failed in its claims.
         As the Italian Republic omitted, however, to ask that the Commission be ordered to pay the costs, the Italian Republic and
         the Commission must each be ordered to bear their own costs.
      
Under the first subparagraph of Article 69(4) of the Rules of Procedure, Member States which intervene in the proceedings
         are to bear their own costs. The Republic of Finland, as intervener, must therefore bear its own costs. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby:
1.      Dismisses the action;
2.      Orders the Commission of the European Communities, the Italian Republic and the Republic of Finland to bear their own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 