
Avis juridique important
|
61988JJudgment of the Court of May 1989.  -  Commission of the European Communities v Kingdom of the Netherlands.  -  Failure of a State to fulfil its obligations - Obligation to become affiliated to a supervisory body for importing and exporting plant propogation material.  -  Case 43/88.  
European Court reports Page Pub.RJ Page Pub somm 
Summary
Parties
Operative part
Keywords
++++Member States - Obligations - Failure to fulfil - Justification - Not acceptable  ( EEC Treaty, Art . )  
Summary
As the Court has consistently held, a Member State may not rely on the provision, practices or situations in its internal legal order to justify failure to fulfil its obligations under Community law . 
Parties
In Case 43/Commission of the European Communities, represented by René Barents, a members of its Legal Department, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of Georgios Kremlis, a Member of its Legal Department, Wagner Centre, Kirchberg,  applicant,  v  Kingdom of the Netherlands, represented by its Agents G . M . Borchardt and M . A . Fierstra, Deputy Legal Advisers in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Netherlands Embassy, rue C . M . Spoo,  defendant,  APPLICATION for a declaration that, by laying down an affiliation requirement for the importing, exporting and offering for export plant propagation material by way of trade, the Kingdom of the Netherlands has failed to fulfil its obligations under Regulation No 234/of the Council of February ( Official Journal, English Special Edition ( I ), p . ) and Regulation No 2358/of the Council of October ( Official Journal, English Special Edition ( III ), p . ) as well as under Articles to of the EEC Treaty,  THE COURT  composed of : O . Due, President, T . Koopmans and F . Grévisse ( Presidents of Chambers ), G . F . Mancini, C . N . Kakouris, F . A . Schockweiler, J . C . Moitinho de Almeida, M . Díez de Velasco and M . Zuleeg, Judges,  ( the grounds of the judgment are not reproduced )  hereby :  
Operative part
( 1)Declares that, by requiring traders who import, export and offer for export by way of trade propagation material for agricultural plants, vegetables and spices and for fruit trees and certain hardwood oils to be affiliated to certain supervisory bodies, the Kingdom of the Netherlands has failed to fulfil its obligations under Regulation No 234/of the Council of February on the establishment of a common organization of the market in live trees and other plants, bulbs, roots and the like, cut flowers and ornamental foliage and under Regulation No 2358/of the Council of October on the common organization of the market in seeds, and that, by making traders who import or export propagation material for seed potatoes subject to the same obligation, it has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles to of the EEC Treaty;  ( 2)Orders the Kingdom of the Netherlands to pay the costs .  
Top  
 