
Avis juridique important
|
61988JJudgment of the Court (Third Chamber) of June 1989.  -  Claude Brus v Commission of the European Communities.  -  Officials - Annulment of a decision of appointment.  -  Case 104/88.  
European Court reports Page Pub.RJ Page Pub somm 
Summary
Parties
Operative part
Keywords
++++. Officials - Promotion - Statement of reasons - Obligation - None  ( Staff Regulations of Officials, Art . )  . Officials - Promotion - Discretion of the administration - Review by the Court - Limits  ( Staff Regulations of Officials, Art . )  
Summary
. The appointing authority is under no obligation to give reasons for a promotion decision either as regards the person to whom it is addressed or as regards the candidates who were not promoted and for whom a statement of the reasons for such a decision, taken in the light not only of the ability and professional aptitude of those concerned but also of certain aspects of their personality, might moreover prove to be prejudicial ( see judgment of March in Case 27/Raponi v Commission (( )) ECR ).  . As the Court has consistently held, the appointing authority has a wide discretion as regards promotion and the Court must restrict its review to consideration of the question whether the appointing authority has used its power in a manifestly incorrect way ( see judgment of December in Case 111/Delauche v Commission (( )) ECR ).  The Court may not, in any event, substitute its assessment of the merits and qualifications of the candidates for that of the appointing authority ( see judgment of April in Case 282/Ragusa v Commission (( )) ECR ).  
Parties
In Case 104/Claude Brus, an official of the Commission of the European Communities, residing in Brussels, represented by G . Vandersanden, of the Brussels Bar, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Chambers of A . Schmitt, avenue Guillaume,  applicant,  v  Commission of the European Communities, represented by S . van Raepenbusch, a member of its Legal Department, acting as Agent, assisted by C . Verbraeken, of the Brussels Bar, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of Georgios Kremlis, a member of the Commission' s Legal Department, Centre Wagner, Kirchberg,  defendant,  APPLICATION for the annulment of a decision of appointment,  THE COURT ( Third Chamber ),  composed of : F . Grévisse, President of Chamber, J . C . Moitinho de Almeida and M . Zuleeg, Judges,  ( the grounds of the judgment are not reproduced )  hereby :  
Operative part
( ) Dismisses the application;  ( ) Orders the parties to bear their own costs .  
Top  
 