
Case C-249/Novo Nordisk AS
v
Ravimiamet
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Tartu ringkonnakohus)
(Medicinal products for human use – Directive 2001/83/EC – Advertising – Medical journal – Information not included in the summary of product characteristics)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Approximation of laws – Medicinal products for human use – Directive 2001/– Advertising – Extent
(European Parliament and Council Directive 2001/83, as amended by Directive 2004/27, Art. 87(2))
2.        Approximation of laws – Medicinal products for human use – Directive 2001/– Advertising
(European Parliament and Council Directive 2001/83, as amended by Directive 2004/27, Art. 87(2))
1.        Article 87(2) of Directive 2001/on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use, as amended by Directive
         2004/27, must be interpreted as extending also to quotations taken from medical journals or other scientific works which are
         included in advertisements for medicinal products directed at persons qualified to prescribe or supply medicines. It follows,
         both from the position of Article of Directive 2001/in its structure, and from the wording and content of Article 87,
         that Article 87(2) is a general rule applicable to all advertising for medicinal products, including that directed at persons
         qualified to prescribe or supply medicinal products. That interpretation is confirmed by the purpose of the directive. Incorrect
         or incomplete information can clearly endanger people’s health and thus jeopardise the fundamental objective pursued by that
         directive. 
      
(see paras 30-31, 34-35, operative part 1)
2.        Article 87(2) of Directive 2001/on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use, as amended by Directive
         2004/27, prohibits the publication, in advertising of medicinal products directed at persons qualified to prescribe or supply
         them, of claims which conflict with the summary of product characteristics, but it does not lay down a requirement that all
         the claims in such advertisements should be included in that summary or that it should be possible for them to be deduced
         from it. Such advertisements may include claims supplementing the information referred to in Article of that directive,
         provided that those claims:
      
- confirm or clarify, and are compatible with, that information, and do not distort it, and 
- are consistent with the requirements of Articles 87(3) and 92(2) and (3) of that directive.
Accordingly, such information, firstly, may not be misleading and must encourage the rational use of the medicinal product,
         by presenting it objectively and without exaggerating its properties. Secondly, it must be accurate, up-to-date, verifiable
         and sufficiently complete to enable the recipient to form his or her own opinion of the therapeutic value of the medicinal
         product concerned. Finally, quotations, tables and other illustrative matter taken from medical journals or other scientific
         works are to be clearly identified and the precise sources indicated, so that health professionals are informed of them and
         can verify them. 
      
(see paras 50-51, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Medicinal products for human use – Directive 2001/83/EC – Advertising – Medical journal – Information not included in the summary of product characteristics)
In Case C‑249/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Tartu ringkonnakohus (Estonia), made by decision of June
         2009, received at the Court on July 2009, in the proceedings
      
Novo Nordisk AS
v
Ravimiamet,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, D. Šváby (Rapporteur), R. Silva de Lapuerta, E. Juhász and J. Malenovský,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: N. Jääskinen,
Registrar: R. Şereş, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Novo Nordisk AS, by M. Männik, advokaat, and A. Kmiecik, solicitor,
–        the Estonian Government, by L. Uibo and M. Linntam, acting as Agents,
–        the Belgian Government, by A. Wespes and T. Materne, acting as Agents,
–        the Czech Government, by M. Smolek, acting as Agent,
–        the Polish Government, by M. Dowgielewicz, acting as Agent,
–        the Portuguese Government, by L. Inez Fernandes and A.P. Antunes, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by M. Šimerdová and E. Randvere, acting as Agents, 
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on October 2010,
gives the following,
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 87(2) of Directive 2001/83/EC of the European
         Parliament and of the Council of November on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use (OJ L 311, p. 67), as amended by Directive 2004/27/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of March (OJ L 136, p. 34) (‘Directive 2001/83’).
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between the company Novo Nordisk AS (‘Novo Nordisk’) and Ravimiamet (Medicines
         Office of the Republic of Estonia) concerning the latter’s order requiring Novo Nordisk to withdraw its advertisement for
         Levemir (insulin detemir), on the ground that it infringed the Law on medicines (Ravimiseadus) (‘RavS’), in particular the
         last part of Paragraph 83(3), which provides that advertisements for medicinal products may not contain information that is
         not in the summary of product characteristics.
      
 Legal context
 European Union law
Recitals 47, and in the preamble to Directive 2001/state as follows:
      
‘(47) The advertising of medicinal products to persons qualified to prescribe or supply them contributes to the information available
         to such persons. Nevertheless, this advertising should be subject to strict conditions and effective monitoring, referring
         in particular to the work carried out within the framework of the Council of Europe.
      
(48)      Advertising of medicinal products should be subject to effective, adequate monitoring. Reference in this regard should be
         made to the monitoring mechanisms set up by Directive 84/450/EEC.
      
…
(52)      Persons qualified to prescribe or supply medicinal products must have access to a neutral, objective source of information
         about products available on the market. Whereas it is nevertheless for the Member States to take all measures necessary to
         this end, in the light of their own particular situation.’
      
Pursuant to Article of Directive 2001/83, the summary of product characteristics is to contain a detailed list of information,
         including the qualitative and quantitative composition in terms of the active substances and constituents of the excipient,
         knowledge of which is essential for proper administration of the medicinal product, pharmacological properties, therapeutic
         indications, contra-indications, adverse reactions (frequency and seriousness), precautions for use, interaction with other
         medicaments, posology and method of administration and major incompatibilities.
      
Title VIII of Directive 2001/83, headed ‘Advertising’, contains Articles to 88, and Title VIIIa, headed ‘Information and
         Advertising’, contains Articles 88a to 100.
      
Article of Directive 2001/provides:
      
‘1.   For the purposes of this Title, “advertising of medicinal products” shall include any form of door-to-door information, canvassing
         activity or inducement designed to promote the prescription, supply, sale or consumption of medicinal products; it shall include
         in particular:
      
–        the advertising of medicinal products to the general public,
–        advertising of medicinal products to persons qualified to prescribe or supply them,
–        visits by medical sales representatives to persons qualified to prescribe medicinal products,
–        the supply of samples,
–        the provision of inducements to prescribe or supply medicinal products by the gift, offer or promise of any benefit or bonus,
         whether in money or in kind, except when their intrinsic value is minimal,
      
–        sponsorship of promotional meetings attended by persons qualified to prescribe or supply medicinal products,
–        sponsorship of scientific congresses attended by persons qualified to prescribe or supply medicinal products and in particular
         payment of their travelling and accommodation expenses in connection therewith.
      
 …’
Article of Directive 2001/provides:
      
‘1.   Member States shall prohibit any advertising of a medicinal product in respect of which a marketing authorisation has not
         been granted in accordance with Community law.
      
2.     All parts of the advertising of a medicinal product must comply with the particulars listed in the summary of product characteristics.
3.     The advertising of a medicinal product:
–        shall encourage the rational use of the medicinal product, by presenting it objectively and without exaggerating its properties,
–        shall not be misleading.’
Article of Directive 2001/provides:
      
‘1.   Any advertising of a medicinal product to persons qualified to prescribe or supply such products shall include:
–        essential information compatible with the summary of product characteristics,
–        the supply classification of the medicinal product.
Member States may also require such advertising to include the selling price or indicative price of the various presentations
         and the conditions for reimbursement by social security bodies.
      
2.      Member States may decide that the advertising of a medicinal product to persons qualified to prescribe or supply such products
         may, notwithstanding paragraph 1, include only the name of the medicinal product or its international non-proprietary name,
         where this exists, or the trademark, if it is intended solely as a reminder.’
      
Article of Directive 2001/is worded as follows:
      
‘1.   Any documentation relating to a medicinal product which is transmitted as part of the promotion of that product to persons
         qualified to prescribe or supply it shall include, as a minimum, the particulars listed in Article 91(1) and shall state the
         date on which it was drawn up or last revised.
      
2.     All the information contained in the documentation referred to in paragraph shall be accurate, up-to-date, verifiable and
         sufficiently complete to enable the recipient to form his or her own opinion of the therapeutic value of the medicinal product
         concerned.
      
3.     Quotations as well as tables and other illustrative matter taken from medical journals or other scientific works for use in
         the documentation referred to in paragraph shall be faithfully reproduced and the precise sources indicated.’
      
 National law
Paragraph of the RavS lays down the general requirements for advertising medicinal products. According to the Tartu ringkonnakohus
         (Tartu Court of Appeal) (Estonia), Paragraph 83(3) provides:
      
‘An advertisement for a medicinal product must comply with the basic general requirements for advertising in the Law on advertising
         (Reklaamiseadus) and be based on the summary of product characteristics determined by the Medicines Office, and may not contain
         information which is not in the summary of product characteristics.’
      
Paragraph of the RavS concerns the advertising of medicinal products to medical professionals. According to the referring
         court, Paragraph 85(1) provides: 
      
‘Quotations from scientific literature used in advertisements for medicinal products directed at persons qualified to prescribe
         medicines, dispensers and pharmacists must be presented without alterations and together with a reference to the source. The
         holder of the marketing authorisation must, on request, make a copy of the original source of the quotation available within
         three days of receipt of the corresponding request.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
In April 2008, Novo Nordisk published in the medical journal ‘Lege Artis’ an advertisement for Levemir (insulin detemir),
         a medicine available only on prescription.
      
By order of June 2008, the Ravimiamet required Novo Nordisk to cease publication of the advertisements for the medicine
         Levemir and not to publish, in advertisements for that medicine, information which was not in its summary of product characteristics
         (‘the contested decision’).
      
According to the contested decision, the following claims, made in the advertisement for Levemir, do not comply with Paragraph
         83(3) of the RavS:
      
–        Effective blood sugar control with lower risk of hypoglycaemia;
–      Body weight of 68% of patients does not increase or even decreases;
–        82% of patients inject Levemir (insulin detemir) once a day in clinical practice.
It appears from the summary of product characteristics, however, that:
      
–        hypoglycaemia is precisely the most frequent side effect of Levemir;
–        comparative tests with NPH insulin and insulin glargine showed that body weight rose slightly or not at all in the Levemir
         group, and
      
–        Levemir is taken once or twice a day. 
The contested decision states that the advertisement at issue is unlawful in that:
      
–        it does not state that the risk of hypoglycaemia is lower at night; 
–        it claims that body weight falls, which is not stated in the summary of product characteristics, and 
–        the figure of 82% that is cited does not appear in the summary of product characteristics. 
On July 2008, Novo Nordisk brought an action for annulment of the contested decision before the Tartu halduskohus (Tartu
         Administrative Court) (Estonia). It claimed inter alia that the purpose of advertising a medicinal product to persons who
         are entitled to prescribe medicines is to disseminate to those persons supplementary information based on data published in
         scientific journals, and that it is therefore lawful to use quotations from medical and scientific literature which are not
         expressly stated in the summary of product characteristics.
      
By judgment of November 2008, the Tartu halduskohus dismissed that action. It pointed out, in particular, that under Article
         87(2) of Directive 2001/83, all parts of an advertisement for a medicinal product must comply with the information in the
         summary of product characteristics and that neither Articles 91(1) and 92(1) of Directive 2001/83, nor recital in the preamble
         to that directive, provide that information about the medicinal product which does not appear in the summary may be included
         in an advertisement for a medicinal product. 
      
Novo Nordisk appealed against that judgment before the referring court.
      
In those circumstances, the Tartu ringkonnakohus decided to stay the proceedings and to refer to the Court the following questions
         for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1) Must Article 87(2) of Directive 2001/… be interpreted as extending also to quotations taken from medical journals or other
         scientific works which are included in advertisements for medicinal products directed to persons qualified to prescribe medicines?
      
(2)      Must Article 87(2) of Directive 2001/… be interpreted as prohibiting the publication in advertisements for medicinal products
         of claims which conflict with the summary of product characteristics, but not requiring that all the claims in advertisements
         for medicinal products must be included in the summary of product characteristics or be derivable from information in the
         summary?’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred 
 The first question
By its first question the national court asks, in essence, whether Article 87(2) of Directive 2001/applies only to advertisements
         for medicinal products aimed at the general public or whether it also applies to quotations taken from medical journals or
         other scientific works contained in advertisements for medicinal products directed at persons qualified to prescribe or supply
         medicines.
      
It is observed, first of all, that, as the Advocate General stated in point of his Opinion, a systematic analysis of Titles
         VIII and VIIIa of Directive 2001/reveals four groups of rules. Under Title VIII of that directive, entitled ‘Advertisement’,
         the general and fundamental principles relating to advertising for medicinal products are first set out in Articles to
         88; next, under Title VIIIa, headed ‘Information and Advertising’, the detailed rules on advertising to the general public
         are set out in Articles to 90, followed by those on advertising to health professionals in Articles to 96; and, finally,
         the rules concerning the obligations of the Member States and of authorisation holders and those relating to advertisements
         for homeopathic medicinal products are set out in Articles to 100.
      
It is observed that the provisions of Title VIII of Directive 2001/are general in nature. 
      
Thus, Article of the Directive, which defines the concept of ‘advertising of medicinal products’ and states that it includes,
         in particular, the advertising of medicinal products to the general public and to persons qualified to prescribe or supply
         them, is a general rule applicable to any situation where it is necessary to determine whether an activity constitutes advertising
         of medicinal products.
      
Similarly, it is clear from the wording and the content of Article of Directive 2001/that that provision contains general
         principles applicable to all types and parts of advertising for medicinal products.
      
Firstly, the prohibition of any advertising of a medicinal product in respect of which a marketing authorisation has not been
         granted in accordance with Community law, as provided by Article 87(1) of Directive 2001/83, necessarily applies to all types
         of advertising since that authorisation procedure is obligatory for all medicinal products.
      
Secondly, it is clear that the general principles stated in Article 87(3) of the Directive, according to which advertising
         of a medicinal product is to encourage its rational use, by presenting it objectively and without exaggerating its properties,
         and is not to be misleading, are applicable to all types of advertising for medicinal products, including that directed at
         the general public or at health professionals.
      
As regards Article 87(2) of Directive 2001/83, interpretation of which is sought by the present question, it appears from
         its wording that it contains a general rule applicable inter alia to advertisements for medicinal products directed at the
         general public or at health professionals. That provision, in contrast to the provisions under Title VIIIa of that directive,
         does not specify that it concerns only advertising to the general public or only that directed at persons qualified to prescribe
         or supply medicinal products.
      
Furthermore, the wording ‘all parts of the advertising’, used in that provision, underlines the general nature of the obligation
         that information contained in advertising for medical products must comply with the particulars in the summary of product
         characteristics. Thus, that formulation encompasses quotations from medical and scientific literature, as it does any other
         part of an advertisement for a medical product.
      
Consequently, it follows, both from the position of Article of Directive 2001/in its structure, and from the wording
         and content of Article 87, that Article 87(2) is a general rule applicable to all advertising for medicinal products, including
         that directed at persons qualified to prescribe or supply medicinal products.
      
Such an interpretation is consistent with the objective of Directive 2001/83.
      
Indeed, as the Court has held, advertising of medicinal products is liable to harm public health, the safeguarding of which
         is the essential aim of Directive 2001/(see Case C‑421/Damgaard [2009] ECR I‑2629, paragraph 22, and Case C‑62/Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry [2010] ECR I-0000, paragraph 34). 
      
Article of Directive 2001/seeks to uphold that objective through the regulation of advertising for medicinal products,
         first, by prohibiting or limiting the use of information that could mislead the recipient or is inaccurate or unfounded, which
         could lead to misuse of a medical product and, second, by requiring that certain essential information be provided.
      
As all of the intervening Member States pointed out, those rules also apply to all parts of advertisements directed at persons
         qualified to prescribe or supply medicinal products, since, in that type of advertising too, incorrect or incomplete information
         can clearly endanger people’s health and thus jeopardise the fundamental objective pursued by Directive 2001/83.
      
In light of the above considerations, the answer to the first question is that Article 87(2) of Directive 2001/must be
         interpreted as extending also to quotations taken from medical journals or other scientific works which are included in advertisements
         for medicinal products directed at persons qualified to prescribe or supply medicines.
      
 The second question
By its second question the national court asks, in essence, whether Article 87(2) of Directive 2001/prohibits only the
         publication in advertisements for medicinal products of claims which conflict with the summary of product characteristics,
         or whether it requires that all the claims in advertisements for medicinal products must be included in that summary or may
         be derivable from information in the summary.
      
As a preliminary point, it should be noted that, as is stated in the second recital in the preamble to Directive 2001/83,
         the safeguarding of public health is the essential aim of that directive (Damgaard, paragraph 22).
      
Thus, according to recital in the preamble to Directive 2001/83, whilst the advertising of medicinal products to persons
         qualified to prescribe or supply them contributes to the information available to such persons, it should, nevertheless, be
         subject to strict conditions and effective monitoring.
      
Similarly, according to recital 48, advertising of medicinal products should be subject to effective, adequate monitoring.
      
The same concern can be detected in recital in the preamble to Directive 2001/83, according to which persons qualified
         to prescribe or supply medicinal products must have access to a neutral, objective source of information about products available
         on the market.
      
As regards, specifically, Article 87(2) of that directive, interpretation of which is sought by the referring state, it is
         observed, first of all, that its wording prohibits the publication, in advertising of medicinal products, of claims which
         conflict with the summary of product characteristics.
      
Specifically, no part of an advertisement for medicinal products may ever suggest, inter alia, therapeutic indications, pharmacological
         properties, or other characteristics that conflict with the summary of the product characteristics approved by the competent
         authorities upon granting marketing authorisation for that medicinal product.
      
It is observed, however, that the European Union legislature did not specify, in Article 87(2) of Directive 2001/83, that
         all the information in the advertising of a medicinal product must be identical to that contained in the summary of product
         characteristics. That provision requires only that that information must comply with the summary.
      
In the case of advertising intended for medical professionals, which is at issue in the main proceedings, Article 87(2) of
         Directive 2001/should be read in conjunction with Articles and of that directive.
      
According to Article 91(1) of Directive 2001/83, any advertising of a medicinal product to persons qualified to prescribe
         or supply such products should include essential information that is compatible with the summary of product characteristics.
      
Similarly, Article 92(1) of that Directive states that any documentation relating to a medicinal product which is transmitted
         as part of the promotion of that product to persons qualified to prescribe or supply it is to include, ‘as a minimum’, the
         particulars listed in Article 91(1) and is to state the date on which it was drawn up or last revised.
      
Lastly, Article 92(3) of Directive 2001/specifically provides for the use, in advertising for a medicinal product directed
         at persons qualified to prescribe or supply it, of quotations, tables and other illustrative matter taken from medical journals
         or other scientific works, provided that they are faithfully reproduced and that the precise sources are indicated.
      
In those circumstances, Article 87(2) of Directive 2001/cannot be interpreted as requiring that all claims in advertisements
         for medicinal products directed at persons qualified to prescribe or supply them should be included in that summary of product
         characteristics or be derivable from information in that summary. Indeed, such an interpretation would render Article 91(1)
         and Article of that directive meaningless, since those provisions authorise the publication of supplementary information
         in advertisements directed at health professionals, provided that it is compatible with the summary.
      
In order to contribute, in accordance with recital in the preamble to Directive 2001/83, to the information available to
         persons qualified to prescribe or supply medicinal products, and taking account of the greater level of scientific knowledge
         of those persons compared with the general public, advertising of medicinal products to such persons may, therefore, include
         information that is compatible with the summary of product characteristics, that confirms or clarifies the specifications
         contained in that summary, pursuant to Article of the Directive, provided that the additional information is consistent
         with the requirements of Articles 87(3) and 92(2) and (3) of the Directive.
      
In other words, such information, firstly, may not be misleading and is to encourage the rational use of the medicinal product,
         by presenting it objectively and without exaggerating its properties. Secondly, it must be accurate, up-to-date, verifiable
         and sufficiently complete to enable the recipient to form his or her own opinion of the therapeutic value of the medicinal
         product concerned. Finally, quotations, tables and other illustrative matter taken from medical journals or other scientific
         works are to be clearly identified and the precise sources indicated, so that health professionals are informed of them and
         can verify them.
      
In the light of the above considerations, the answer to the second question is that Article 87(2) of Directive 2001/must
         be interpreted as prohibiting the publication, in advertising of medicinal products directed at persons qualified to prescribe
         or supply them, of claims which conflict with the summary of product characteristics, but it does not require that all the
         claims in such advertisements are included in that summary or can be derived from it. Such advertisements may include claims
         supplementing the information referred to in Article of that directive, provided that those claims:
      
–        confirm or clarify – and are compatible with – that information, and do not distort it, and
–        are consistent with the requirements of Articles 87(3) and 92(2) and (3) of that directive.
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article 87(2) of Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of November on the Community code
            relating to medicinal products for human use, as amended by Directive 2004/27/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
            of March 2004, must be interpreted as extending also to quotations taken from medical journals or other scientific works
            which are included in advertisements for medicinal products directed at persons qualified to prescribe or supply medicines.
2.      Article 87(2) of Directive 2001/83, as amended by Directive 2004/27, must be interpreted as prohibiting the publication, in
            advertising of medicinal products directed at persons qualified to prescribe or supply them, of claims which conflict with
            the summary of product characteristics, but it does not require that all the claims in such advertisements are included in
            that summary or can be derived from it. Such advertisements may include claims supplementing the information referred to in
            Article of that directive, provided that those claims:
–        confirm or clarify – and are compatible with – that information, and do not distort it, and
–        are consistent with the requirements of Articles 87(3) and 92(2) and (3) of that directive.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Estonian.
      
Top  
 