
Order of the Court (Seventh Chamber) of March —Emram v OHIM(Case C‑354/P)
Appeal — Article of the Rules of Procedure — Community trade mark — Regulation (EC) No 40/— Article 8(1)(b) — Application for registration of the figurative mark G — Trade marks
1.                     Community trade mark — Definition and acquisition of the Community trade mark — Relative grounds for refusal — Opposition
            by the proprietor of an earlier identical or similar mark registered for identical or similar goods or services — Likelihood
            of confusion with the earlier mark — Earlier mark only weakly distinctive — Effect (Council Regulation No 40/94, Art. 8(1)(b))
            (see para. 44)
2.                     Appeals — Grounds — Incorrect assessment of the facts and evidence — Inadmissibility — Review by the Court of the assessment
            of the facts and evidence — Possible only where the clear sense of the evidence has been distorted (Art. 256(1), TFEU; Statute
            of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.) (see para. 48)
3.                     Community trade mark — Decisions of the Office — Whether lawful — Examination by the Community judicature — Criteria (Council
            Regulation No 40/94) (see para. 92)
Re: 
Appeal brought against the judgment of the General Court (Second Chamber) of May in Case T‑187/Emram
 v 
OHIM 
dismissing the action brought against the decision of the First Board of Appeal of OHIM of February (Case R 1281/2008-1)
                  relating to opposition proceedings between Guccio Gucci SpA and Mr Emram — Article 8(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EC) No 207/of February on the Community trade mark (OJ L 78, p. 1) — Application for Community figurative mark G — Likelihood
                  of confusion — Distortion of the evidence — Incorrect assessment of the distinctive character — Infringement of the principle
                  of equal treatment.
               
Operative part 
1.
	The appeal is dismissed.
2.
	Mr Emram is ordered to pay the costs.
Top  
 