
Joined Cases C-410/to C-412/Swiss Caps AG
v
Hauptzollamt Singen
(References for a preliminary ruling from the Finanzgericht Baden-Württemberg)
(Common Customs Tariff – Combined Nomenclature – Tariff classification – Tariff headings 1515, 1517, and – Gelatin capsules – Fish oil, wheat-germ oil and black cumin oil – Concept of ‘packaging’)
Summary of the Judgment
Common Customs Tariff – Tariff headings – Food supplements composed of vegetable or animal oil and vitamins, contained in
            gelatine capsules
(Council Regulation No 2658/87, Annex I; Commission Regulations No 3513/1992, No 2388/and No 438/2007)
The Combined Nomenclature, set out in Annex I to Regulation No 2658/on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the
         Common Customs Tariff, as amended by Regulation No 2388/2000, must be interpreted as meaning that:
      
– edible preparations presented in the form of capsules containing mg of cold-pressed concentrated fish oil and 22.mg
         of concentrated vitamin E in a casing consisting of 212.mg of gelatin, 77.mg of glycerol and 159.mg of purified water
         and intended for use as a food supplement;
      
– edible preparations presented in the form of capsules containing mg of wheat-germ oil in a casing consisting of mg of granulated starch and intended for use as a food supplement; and
      
– edible preparations presented in the form of capsules containing mg of cold-pressed black cumin oil, 38.mg of soya
         oil, 18.mg of vitamin E, mg of butterfat, mg of lecithin, 8.mg of wax, mg of calcium pantothenate, 0.mg of folic
         acid and 0.mg of biotin in a casing consisting of 313.mg of gelatin mass (47.3% gelatin, 17.2% glycerine, 35.5% water),
         4.mg of paste consisting of 50% titanium dioxide and 50% glycerine, and 1.mg of paste consisting of 25% quinoline yellow
         lacquer and 75% glycerine and intended for use as a food supplement
      
come under heading of the abovementioned Combined Nomenclature.
(see para. 32, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
December (*)
      
(Common Customs Tariff – Combined Nomenclature – Tariff classification – Tariff headings 1515, 1517, and – Gelatin capsules – Fish oil, wheat-germ oil and black cumin oil – Concept of ‘packaging’)
In Joined Cases C‑410/to C‑412/08,
THREE REFERENCES for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Finanzgericht Baden-Württemberg (Germany), made by
         decisions of September 2008, received at the Court on September 2008, in the proceedings
      
Swiss Caps AG
v
Hauptzollamt Singen,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
composed of E. Levits (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, M. Ilešič and J.‑J. Kasel, Judges,
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: C. Strömholm, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on October 2009,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Swiss Caps AG, by H.-J. Prieß and B. Sachs, Rechtsanwälte,
–        the European Commission, by L. Bouyon and B.‑R. Killmann, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
The present references for a preliminary ruling concern the interpretation of headings 1515, 1517, and of, and General
         Rule in the explanatory notes to, the Combined Nomenclature (‘the CN’) set out in Annex I to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff (OJ L 256, p. 1), as last
         amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 2388/of October (OJ L 264, p. 1). By a corrigendum to that regulation
         (OJ L 276, p. 92), the original number 2263/was replaced with No 2388/2000.
      
The references have been made in the course of three disputes between Swiss Caps AG (‘Swiss Caps’) and the Hauptzollamt (Principal
         Customs Office) Singen concerning the CN classification of three types of capsules respectively containing mainly fish oil,
         wheat-germ oil and black cumin oil imported by that company into Germany as food preparations.
      
 Legal context
The CN, established by Regulation No 2658/87, is based on the international Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System
         (‘the HS’) drawn up by the Customs Cooperation Council, now the World Customs Organisation, adopted by the International Convention
         concluded in Brussels on June and approved on behalf of the European Community by Council Decision 87/369/EEC of April (OJ L 198, p. 1). The CN reproduces the headings and subheadings of the HS to digits, with only the 7th
         and 8th figures creating subheadings which are unique to it.
      
Part One of the CN contains a series of preliminary provisions. In that part, in Section I, devoted to general rules, Sub-section
         A, entitled ‘General rules for the interpretation of the [CN]’ (‘the General Rules’) provides:
      
‘Classification of goods in the [CN] shall be governed by the following principles:
1.      The titles of sections, chapters and sub-chapters are provided for ease of reference only; for legal purposes, classification
         shall be determined according to the terms of the headings and any relative section or chapter notes and, provided such headings
         or notes do not otherwise require, according to the following provisions.
      
2.      (a)   Any reference in a heading to an article shall be taken to include a reference to that article incomplete or unfinished, provided
         that, as presented, the incomplete or unfinished article has the essential character of the complete or finished article.
         It shall also be taken to include a reference to that article complete or finished (or falling to be classified as complete
         or finished by virtue of this rule), presented unassembled or disassembled.
      
         (b)   Any reference in a heading to a material or substance shall be taken to include a reference to mixtures or combinations of
         that material or substance with other materials or substances. Any reference to goods of a given material or substance shall
         be taken to include a reference to goods consisting wholly or partly of such material or substance. The classification of
         goods consisting of more than one material or substance shall be according to the principles of rule 3.
      
3.      When, by application of rule 2(b) or for any other reason, goods are prima facie classifiable under two or more headings,
         classification shall be effected as follows:
      
         (a)   the heading which provides the most specific description shall be preferred to headings providing a more general description.
         However, when two or more headings each refer to part only of the materials or substances contained in mixed or composite
         goods or to part only of the items in a set put up for retail sale, those headings are to be regarded as equally specific
         in relation to those goods, even if one of them gives a more complete or precise description of the goods;
      
         (b)   mixtures, composite goods consisting of different materials or made up of different components, and goods put up in sets for
         retail sale, which cannot be classified by reference to 3(a), shall be classified as if they consisted of the material or
         component which gives them their essential character, in so far as this criterion is applicable;
      
         (c)   when goods cannot be classified by reference to 3(a) or (b), they shall be classified under the heading which occurs last
         in numerical order among those which equally merit consideration.
      
…
5.      In addition to the foregoing provisions, the following rules shall apply in respect of the goods referred to therein:
…
(b)      subject to the provisions of rule 5(a), packing materials and packing containers… presented with the goods therein shall be
         classified with the goods if they are of a kind normally used for packing such goods. However, this provision is not binding
         when such packing materials or packing containers are clearly suitable for repetitive use.
      
…’
Footnote to General Rule 5(b), relating to the terms ‘packing materials’ and ‘packing containers’, states:
      
‘The terms “packing materials” and “packing containers” mean any external or internal containers, holders, wrappings or supports
         other than transport devices (e.g. transport containers), tarpaulins, tackle or ancillary transport equipment. The term “packing
         containers” does not cover the containers referred to in general rule 5(a).’
      
Section III of Part Two of the CN contains a Chapter entitled ‘Animal or vegetable fats and oils and their cleavage products;
         prepared edible fats; animal or vegetable waxes’.
      
Sections IV and VI of the CN contain, respectively, a Chapter entitled ‘Miscellaneous edible preparations’ and a Chapter
         entitled ‘Pharmaceutical products’.
      
The explanatory note relating to heading reads as follows:
      
‘Provided that they are not covered by any other heading of the Nomenclature, this heading covers:
(A)      Preparations for use, either directly or after processing (such as cooking, dissolving or boiling in water, milk, etc.), for
         human consumption.
      
(B)      Preparations consisting wholly or partly of foodstuffs, used in the making of beverages or food preparations for human consumption.
         The heading includes preparations consisting of mixtures of chemicals (organic acids, calcium salts, etc.) with foodstuffs
         (flour, sugar, milk powder, etc.), for incorporation in food preparations either as ingredients or to improve some of their
         characteristics (appearance, keeping qualities, etc.) (see the General Explanatory Note to Chapter 38).
      
…
The heading includes, inter alia:
…
(16)      Preparations, often referred to as food supplements, based on extracts from plants, fruit concentrates, honey, fructose, etc.,
         and containing added vitamins and sometimes minute quantities of iron compounds. These preparations are often put up in packagings
         with indications that they maintain general health or well-being. Similar preparations, however, intended for the prevention
         or treatment of diseases or ailments are excluded (heading 30.or 30.04).’
      
 The actions in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 Case C‑410/On February Swiss Caps declared for importation into Germany two crates of Omega-soft gelatin capsules, not put up
         for retail sale, under subheading of the CN.
      
Each capsule contains mg of cold-pressed concentrated fish oil and 22.mg of concentrated vitamin E. The casing of each
         capsule consists of 212.mg of gelatin, 77.mg of glycerol and 159.mg of purified water.
      
By decision of December 2001, the Hauptzollamt Singen took the view that the Omega‑capsules should be classified under
         subheading CN and accordingly increased the initial import duties from DM 525.(approximately EUR 263) to EUR 058.30.
         Swiss Caps brought the present action before the Finanzgericht (Finance Court) Baden-Württemberg against that decision.
      
Having regard to the contents of the capsules in issue in the main proceedings, the manner in which they are used, their packaging
         and the fact that they are undeniably edible preparations intended for use as a supplement, the national court expresses doubts
         with regard to the classification of those goods under heading 1517.
      
In those circumstances, the Finanzgericht Baden-Württemberg decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Is heading of the [CN] to be interpreted as meaning that preparations of only one (concentrated) oil or fat, to which
         vitamin E alone has been added and which have not otherwise been treated, are to be classified under that heading?
      
2.      If the first question is to be answered in the affirmative:
         Is heading of the [CN] to be interpreted as meaning that the addition of concentrated vitamin E (d-alpha-tocopherol concentrate)
         in a quantity of 22.mg to mg of concentrated fish oil (Incromega EPA SR TG) leads to the exclusion of the goods
         from that heading?
      
3.      If the first question is to be answered in the affirmative and the second in the negative:
         Is [General Rule 5] to be interpreted as meaning that capsule casings consisting of 212.mg of gelatin, 77.mg of glycerol
         and 159.mg of purified water and containing food supplement substances are to be regarded as packing material?
      
4.      If the third question is answered in the negative:
         Is heading of the [CN] to be interpreted as meaning that a capsule casing consisting of 212.mg of gelatin, 77.mg
         of glycerol and 159.mg of purified water leads to the exclusion of the capsules described above from that heading?’
      
 Case C‑411/On April Swiss Caps declared for importation into Germany a pallet of wheat-germ oil capsules, not put up for retail
         sale, under subheading of the CN.
      
Each capsule contains mg of wheat-germ oil, the casing consisting of mg of granulated starch.
      
By decision of December 2001, the Hauptzollamt Singen took the view that the wheat-germ oil capsules should be classified
         under subheading and accordingly increased the initial import duties from DM 100.(approximately EUR 50) to EUR 125.74.
         Swiss Caps brought the present action before the Finanzgericht Baden-Württemberg against that decision.
      
In view of the packaging of the capsules at issue in the main proceedings and the fact that they are edible preparations intended
         for use as a supplement, the national court expresses doubts with regard to the classification of those goods under heading
         1515.
      
In those circumstances, the Finanzgericht Baden-Württemberg decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Is [General Rule 5] to be interpreted as meaning that capsule casings which consist of granulated starch and contain substances
         for supplementing the diet are to be regarded as packing material?
      
2.      If the reply to the first question is in the negative:
Is heading of the [CN] to be interpreted as meaning that granulated starch capsule casings containing mg of concentrated
         wheat-germ oil determine the character of the goods in such a way that the goods are excluded from heading of the [CN]?’
      
 Case C‑412/On October Swiss Caps declared for importation into Germany a pallet of black cumin oil capsules, not put up for retail
         sale, under subheading of the CN.
      
Each capsule contains mg of cold-pressed black cumin oil, 38.mg of soya oil, 18.mg of vitamin E, mg of butterfat,
         mg of lecithin, 8.mg of wax, mg of calcium pantothenate, 0.mg of folic acid and 0.mg of biotin. The casing of
         each capsule consists of 313.mg of gelatin mass (47.3% gelatin, 17.2% glycerine, 35.5% water), 4.mg of paste consisting
         of 50% titanium dioxide and 50% glycerine, and 1.mg of paste consisting of 25% quinoline yellow lacquer and 75% glycerine.
      
By decision of May 2001, the Hauptzollamt Singen took the view that the black cumin oil capsules should be classified under
         subheading of the CN and accordingly increased the initial import duties from DM 226.(approximately EUR 613)
         to EUR 672.84. Swiss Caps brought the present action before the Finanzgericht Baden-Württemberg against that decision.
      
In view of the contents of the capsules at issue in the main proceedings, their packaging and the fact that they are edible
         preparations intended for use as a supplement, the national court expresses doubts with regard to the classification of those
         goods under heading of the CN.
      
In those circumstances, the Finanzgericht Baden-Württemberg decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Is heading of the [CN] to be interpreted as meaning that the addition of mg of lecithin, 18.mg of vitamin E, 8.mg of wax, mg of calcium pantothenate, 0.mg of folic acid and 0.mg of biotin to a mixture consisting of mg of cold-pressed
         black cumin oil (62.5% or 83.3%), 38.mg of soya oil and mg of butterfat is to be regarded as so small that it does not
         affect the classification of such a preparation under that heading?
      
2.      If the reply to the first question is in the affirmative:
         Is [General Rule 5] to be interpreted as meaning that capsule casings containing the substances specified above are to be
         regarded as packing material?
      
3.      If the reply to the second question is in the negative:
         Is heading of the [CN] to be interpreted as meaning that a capsule casing consisting of 313.mg of gelatin mass (47.3%
         gelatin, 17.2% glycerine, 35.5% water), 4.mg of paste consisting of 50% titanium dioxide and 50% glycerine, and 1.mg
         of paste consisting of 25% quinoline yellow lacquer and 75% glycerine leads to the exclusion of the capsules described above
         from that heading?’
      
 The questions referred to the Court
As a preliminary point, it must be noted that, in these three cases, the goods which the national court is, in essence, asking
         the Court to classify have similar characteristics, namely that they are, in the view of the national court, edible preparations
         intended for use as supplements and are composed principally of vegetable or animal oil to which a certain quantity of vitamins
         has been added. These preparations are contained in casings composed principally of gelatin and presented in capsule form.
      
Consequently, as all of the questions referred in these three cases seek to determine, essentially, under which heading of
         the CN the goods concerned are to be classified, a single answer should be given to those questions.
      
Being unconvinced by the classification of the goods concerned under headings and of the CN, the national court
         advocates their classification under heading of the CN. It also takes the view that classification in Chapter of the
         CN would not be relevant.
      
It should be recalled that is settled case-law that, in the interests of legal certainty and for ease of verification, the
         decisive criterion for the classification of goods for customs purposes is in general to be sought in their objective characteristics
         and properties as defined in the wording of the relevant heading of the CN and the notes to the sections or chapters (see,
         inter alia, Case C‑173/Kloosterboer Services [2009] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
The explanatory notes drawn up by the Commission as regards the CN and by the World Customs Organisation as regards the HS
         are an important aid to the interpretation of the scope of the various tariff headings but do not have legally binding force
         (Kloosterboer Services, paragraph 25).
      
In addition, the intended use of an article may constitute an objective criterion for classification if it is inherent to
         the article, and that inherent character must be capable of being assessed on the basis of the article’s objective characteristics
         and properties (see Case C‑16/Schenker [2009] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 25).
      
In the present cases, it is apparent from both the orders for reference and the explanations provided by Swiss Caps at the
         hearing that the capsules at issue in the main proceedings in the three cases are edible preparations composed of animal or
         vegetable oils which are intended to be used as food supplements.
      
In that regard, the wording of heading of the CN refers to food preparations not elsewhere specified or included. The
         Explanatory Notes to the HS concerning that heading state that it includes preparations, often referred to as ‘food supplements’,
         which are put up in packagings with indications that they maintain general health or well-being.
      
In that respect, it must be pointed out that the casing which contains the oils at issue in the main proceedings is not a
         ‘packing material’ within the meaning of General Rule 5. That form of presentation of the oils at issue in the main proceedings
         is a decisive factor which reveals their function as a food supplement, since it determines the dosage of the edible preparations,
         the way in which they are absorbed and the place where they are supposed to become active. Consequently, the casing is a factor
         which, together with their content, determines the use and character of the goods at issue in the respective main proceedings.
      
However, classification of those goods under heading can be envisaged only if the food preparations in question are not
         specified or included elsewhere.
      
First, the defendant in the main proceedings in the three cases takes the view that the goods at issue should in fact be classified
         under a heading in Chapter of the CN, that is to say, as ‘Animal or vegetable fats and oils and their cleavage products;
         prepared edible fats; animal or vegetable waxes’.
      
Thus, the goods defined in headings and of the CN concern fats for all types of uses.
      
However, on the one hand, the fact that the raw materials of which the edible preparations at issue in the main proceedings
         are composed, namely animal and vegetable oils, are partly covered by headings and of the CN does not preclude their
         classification under heading inasmuch as, as has been pointed out in paragraph of the present judgment, their packaging
         in a capsule determines both their content and their objective characteristics and properties. Headings and of the
         CN, however, do not allow account to be taken of that characteristic of the goods.
      
On the other hand, since it follows from General Rule 3(a) that the heading which provides the most specific description is
         to be preferred to headings providing a more general description, the goods at issue in the main proceedings in the three
         cases fall under heading of the CN, since, in the context of the main proceedings, heading of the CN is more specific
         than headings and of the CN.
      
Secondly, classification of the goods under heading of the CN cannot be envisaged in so far as, as has been established
         by the national court, the goods at issue in the main proceedings do not have a therapeutic or prophylactic use, as required
         by the actual wording of heading of the CN.
      
Thirdly, and finally, the fact that Commission Regulation (EEC) No 3513/of December concerning the classification
         of certain goods in the combined nomenclature (OJ L 355, p. 12) classifies a specific preparation in gelatin capsules
         under subheading of the CN does not preclude the classification of the goods at issue in the main proceedings in
         the present three cases under heading 2106.
      
On the one hand, those goods are not identical to the goods referred to in Regulation No 3513/92. On the other hand, Commission
         Regulation (EC) No 438/of April concerning the classification of certain goods in the Combined Nomenclature (OJ
         L 104, p. 18) provides, in regard to goods similar in their composition, presentation and use to those in the main proceedings
         in the present cases, for classification under heading of the CN.
      
It thus follows that the CN, set out in Annex I to Regulation No 2658/87, must be interpreted as meaning that:
      
–        edible preparations presented in the form of capsules containing mg of cold-pressed concentrated fish oil and 22.mg
         of concentrated vitamin E in a casing consisting of 212.mg of gelatin, 77.mg of glycerol and 159.mg of purified water
         and intended for use as a food supplement;
      
–        edible preparations presented in the form of capsules containing mg of wheat-germ oil in a casing consisting of mg
         of granulated starch and intended for use as a food supplement; and
      
–        edible preparations presented in the form of capsules containing mg of cold-pressed black cumin oil, 38.mg of soya oil,
         18.mg of vitamin E, mg of butterfat, mg of lecithin, 8.mg of wax, mg of calcium pantothenate, 0.mg of folic
         acid and 0.mg of biotin in a casing consisting of 313.mg of gelatin mass (47.3% gelatin, 17.2% glycerine, 35.5% water),
         4.mg of paste consisting of 50% titanium dioxide and 50% glycerine, and 1.mg of paste consisting of 25% quinoline yellow
         lacquer and 75% glycerine and intended for use as a food supplement
      
come under heading of the CN.
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the actions pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fifth Chamber) hereby rules:
The Combined Nomenclature, set out in Annex I to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July on the tariff and statistical
            nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff, as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 2388/of October 2000, must
            be interpreted as meaning that:
–        edible preparations presented in the form of capsules containing mg of cold-pressed concentrated fish oil and 22.mg
            of concentrated vitamin E in a casing consisting of 212.mg of gelatin, 77.mg of glycerol and 159.mg of purified water
            and intended for use as a food supplement;
–        edible preparations presented in the form of capsules containing mg of wheat-germ oil in a casing consisting of mg
            of granulated starch and intended for use as a food supplement; and
–        edible preparations presented in the form of capsules containing mg of cold-pressed black cumin oil, 38.mg of soya oil,
            18.mg of vitamin E, mg of butterfat, mg of lecithin, 8.mg of wax, mg of calcium pantothenate, 0.mg of folic
            acid and 0.mg of biotin in a casing consisting of 313.mg of gelatin mass (47.3% gelatin, 17.2% glycerine, 35.5% water),
            4.mg of paste consisting of 50% titanium dioxide and 50% glycerine, and 1.mg of paste consisting of 25% quinoline yellow
            lacquer and 75% glycerine and intended for use as a food supplement
come under heading of the abovementioned Combined Nomenclature.
[Signatures]
* Language of the cases: German.
      
Top  
 