
         				Ordonnance de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-244/Kauppatalo Hansel OyvImatran kaupunki(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Korkein hallinto-oikeus (Finland))
         
«(Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure – Procurement contracts – Directive 93/36/EEC – Procedures for the award of public supply contracts – Incorrect assessment as regards the criterion for determining the most economically advantageous tender – Procurement procedure discontinued)»
Order of the Court (Second Chamber), October I - Summary of the Order
Approximation of laws – Procedures for the award of public supply contracts – Directive 93/– Withdrawal of the invitation to tender – Condition – Compliance with the fundamental rules of Community law on public contracts(Council Directives 92/50, 93/and 93/37)Directive 93/coordinating procedures for the award of public supply contracts must be interpreted, in accordance with the
         Court's case-law with respect to Directives 92/and 93/37, as meaning that a contracting authority which has commenced a
         procedure for the award of a contract on the basis of the lowest price may discontinue the procedure, without awarding a contract,
         when it discovers after examining and comparing the tenders that, because of errors committed by itself in its preliminary
         assessment, the content of the invitation to tender makes it impossible for it to accept the most economically advantageous
         tender, provided that, when it adopts such a decision, it complies with the fundamental rules of Community law on public procurement
         such as the principle of equal treatment. see para 36, operative part
      
  
ORDER OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)October (1)
((Article 104(3) Rules of Procedure – Procurement contracts – Directive 93/36/EEC – Procedures for the award of public supply contracts – Incorrect assessment as regards the criterion for determining the most economically advantageous tender – Procurement procedure discontinued))
In Case C-244/02, 
         REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Korkein hallinto-oikeus (Finland) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings
         pending before that court between
         
 Kauppatalo Hansel Oy
and
 Imatran kaupunki,
on the interpretation of Council Directive 93/36/EEC of June coordinating procedures for the award of public supply
         contracts (OJ L 199, p. 1), as amended by European Parliament and Council Directive 97/52/EC of October amending
         Directives 92/50/EEC, 93/36/EEC and 93/37/EEC concerning the coordination of procedures for the award of public service contracts,
         public supply contracts and public works contracts respectively (OJ L 328, p. 1),
         
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of: R. Schintgen, President of the Chamber, V. Skouris (Rapporteur) and N. Colneric, Judges, 
         
Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed, Registrar: R. Grass, 
         
the national court having been informed that the Court proposes to give its decision by reasoned order in accordance with
            Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure, the persons referred to in Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice having
            been invited to submit any observations which they might wish to make in this regard, after hearing the Advocate General,
            makes the following 
         
Order
            
By order of July 2002, received at the Court on July 2002, the Korkein hallinto-oikeus referred to the Court for a preliminary
         ruling under Article EC two questions on the interpretation of Council Directive 93/36/EEC of June coordinating
         procedures for the award of public supply contracts (OJ L 199, p. 1), as amended by European Parliament and Council Directive
         97/52/EC of October amending Directives 92/50/EEC, 93/36/EEC and 93/37/EEC concerning the coordination of procedures
         for the award of public service contracts, public supply contracts and public works contracts respectively (OJ L 328,
         p. 1) (
         Directive 93/36). 
         
            
Those questions arose in proceedings between the company Kauppatalo Hansel Oy (
         Hansel) and Imatran Kaupunki (
         City of Imatra) regarding the City of Imatra's decision not to award a public supply contract for electricity for which Hansel had put in
         a tender. 
         
Legal background
Community legislation
         
            
Article 7(2) of Directive 93/provides: Contracting authorities shall promptly inform candidates and tenderers of the decisions taken on contract awards, including
         the reasons why they have decided not to award a contract for which there has been an invitation to tender or to start the
         procedure again, and shall do so in writing if requested. They shall also inform the Office for Official Publications of the
         European Communities of such decisions.
         National legislation
         
            
Directive 93/was transposed into Finnish law by the Julkisista hankinnoista annettu laki (Law on public procurement) 1505/1992,
         as amended by Laws 1523/1994, 725/1995, 1247/and 633/(
         Law 1505/1992). 
         
            
Under Paragraph of Law 1505/1992, national and local authorities and other contracting authorities specified in the law
         must comply with the provisions of that law in order to create competition and ensure fair and non-discriminatory treatment
         of participants. Under Paragraph of Law 1505/1992, contracting authorities include municipal authorities. 
         
            
Paragraph 5(1) of Law 1505/states that all the competition possibilities in existence are to be made use of for the award
         of the contract. 
         
            
Paragraph 7(1) of Law 1505/provides that the contract is to be awarded as advantageously as possible; the tender to be
         accepted is the one which is lowest in price or overall the most economically advantageous. 
         
            
Procedures for the award of public contracts are regulated in more detail by the Asetus kynnysarvot ylittävistä tavara- ja
         palveluhankinnoista sekä rakennnusurakoista (Regulation on supply, service and works contracts exceeding the threshold values)
         380/(Suomen säädökokoelma No 378-381, p. 1210,  
         Regulation 380/1998). 
         
            
Subparagraph of Paragraph of Regulation 380/provides: The contracting authority must inform on request, candidates or tenderers of the reasons why it has decided not to award a
         contract for which an invitation to tender has been published, or to start the procedure for the award of the contract again.
         The contracting authority must also notify its decision to the Office for Official Publications of the European Communities.
         The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
It is clear from the order for reference that, as the contracting authority, the City of Imatra in Finland addressed an invitation
         to tender to electricity companies for the award of an electricity supply contract for certain areas in that city, specified
         in the invitation to tender, for the period July to June 2001. The invitation to tender, which was published on
         March in the Julkiset Hankinnat (the public procurement section in the Finnish Official Journal), mentioned the lowest
         price as the criterion for the award of the contract. 
         
            
Of the tenders received by the City of Imatra within the prescribed period, that from Hansel was the lowest in price. 
         
            
During a meeting on May 2000, the Imatran tekninen lautakunta (City of Imatra Technical Committee,  
         the Technical Committee) realised that changing the supplier would give rise to additional costs which had not been taken into consideration and
         decided that the tender submitted by its then supplier, Imatran Seudun Sähkö Oy, was overall the most economically advantageous
         tender. 
         
            
The City of Imatra's Technical Office prepared a draft decision, according to which the electricity supply contract with Imatran
         Seudun Sähkö Oy would be extended for the period July to June 2001. However, that draft decision was taken off the
         agenda of the Technical Committee's meeting, so that the award of the contract was not made on the basis of the invitation
         to tender at issue. 
         
            
On August 2000, the City of Imatra published a new invitation to tender in which, following a more comprehensive assessment
         of the overall cost of the contract, the estimated amount of electricity required was now stated to be GWh per year instead
         of the GWh per year stipulated in the first invitation to tender, in order to ensure that the best tender was also overall
         the most economically advantageous. In the new procedure, the best tender was submitted by Lappeenrannan Energia Oy, to which
         the contract was awarded. 
         
            
Hansel lodged an appeal before the Kilpailuneuvosto (Finnish Competition Board) against the decision of the contracting authority
         to discontinue the procedure for the award of a contract commenced by publication of the invitation to tender of March 2000,
         asking it to set aside that decision and to order the City of Imatra to compare the tenders submitted in accordance with the
         national legislation on public procurement or, in the alternative, to pay it compensation of 15% of the total value of the
         contract. 
         
            
In support of its appeal, Hansel argued,  
          inter alia , that the City of Imatra did not have any valid reason to reject a tender satisfying the required criteria and to discontinue
         the procedure for the award of the contract, and that the organisation of a new procedure, replacing the original criterion
         for the award of the contract, namely the lowest price, with the criterion of the overall most economically advantageous tender,
         was unlawful. Hansel further submitted that the new procedure for the award of the contract amounted to a bargaining round.
         In its view, the City of Imatra had sought, by way of the first invitation to tender, to obtain information on prices and
         had subsequently commenced a new procedure in order to negotiate the price of the tenders submitted, using the information
         which had become public during the first invitation to tender. 
         
            
The Kilpailuneuvosto dismissed the appeal. In particular, it held that, with the exception of the obligation to publish a
         notice, there are no express provisions on the discontinuance of a procedure for the award of a contract which is under way.
         Taking the view that such discontinuance is only possible for duly justified reasons, the Kilpailuneuvosto held that the city
         of Imatra had a valid reason, in accordance with Article of Law 1505/1992, taking into account the public interest and the
         efficient use of public funds. 
         
            
In that regard, the Kilpailuneuvosto held that the preparation of the invitation to tender was defective, since not all the
         factors influencing the costs of the project had been taken into consideration. The City of Imatra could not, however, be
         compelled to award a contract which would lead to an increase in its overall costs. Moreover, the Kilpailuneuvosto held that
         the new procedure initiated by the second invitation to tender could not be regarded as a bargaining round. 
         
            
Hansel appealed against the Kilpailuneuvosto's decision to the Korkein hallinto-oikeus, seeking annulment of that decision
         and an order that the city of Imatra pay as compensation 15% of the total value of the contract. 
         
            
In its order for reference the Korkein hallinto-oikeus states that there are no specific provisions in the Finnish legislation
         governing the discontinuance of a procedure for the award of a contract which is under way, apart from the provisions concerning
         the obligation to publish a notice. Accordingly consideration of the case requires an interpretation of the relevant provisions
         of Community law in order to determine whether the City of Imatra acted wrongly when it discontinued a procurement procedure
         which had been started and was based on the criterion of the lowest price, without awarding the contract, on the ground that
         the content of the invitation to tender did not enable it to accept the overall most economically advantageous tender. 
         
            
In that regard, the national court assumes, first, that the contracting authority became aware only after receipt of the tenders
         of the fact that the total cost of the purchase of electricity is also affected by other factors, and does not depend exclusively
         on the price of the electricity and, second, that discontinuing the procedure for the award of a contract on the basis of
         the criterion stated in the first invitation to tender was dictated by the concern to avoid accepting what was not overall
         the most economically advantageous tender. 
         
            
Referring to Case C-27/Fracasso and Leitschutz  [1999] ECR I-5697, the Korkein hallinto-oikeus states that that judgment does not resolve the issue of whether the contracting
         authority has discretion to discontinue the procedure for the award of a contract in the absence of express provisions, or
         whether the fact that the reason for discontinuing the procedure is an error of assessment affecting the content of the invitation
         to tender is relevant for assessing the justification for the discontinuance of the procedure. 
         
            
In the light of those considerations, the Korkein hallinto-oikeus stayed  proceedings and referred the following questions
         to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling: 1. Is Council Directive 93/36/EEC of June coordinating procedures for the award of public supply contracts to be interpreted
         as meaning that a contracting authority which has commenced a procedure for the award of a contract on the basis of the lowest
         price may discontinue the procedure, without awarding a contract, when it discovers after examining and comparing the tenders
         that, because of the content of the invitation to tender, it is not possible for it to accept the tender which is overall
         the most economically advantageous? 2. Is it of importance, as regards the acceptability of discontinuing the procedure, that the content of the invitation to
         tender is defective because of the incorrectness of the assessment previously made by the contracting authority?
         The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
By its two questions, which may appropriately be considered together, the national court asks, essentially, whether Directive
         93/must be interpreted as meaning that a contracting authority which has commenced a procedure for the award of a contract
         on the basis of the lowest price may discontinue the procedure, without awarding a contract, when it discovers after examining
         and comparing the tenders that, because of errors committed by itself in its preliminary assessment, the content of the invitation
         to tender makes it impossible for it to accept the most economically advantageous tender. 
         
            
Taking the view that the answer to the questions as thus reformulated may be clearly deduced from its existing case-law, the
         Court, in accordance with Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure, informed the national court that it intended to give its
         decision by reasoned order and invited the persons referred to in Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice to submit
         any observations which they might wish to make in this regard. 
         
            
None of those persons raised any objection to the Court's intention to give its decision by reasoned order referring to the
         existing case-law. 
         
            
It must be observed that the only provision in Directive 93/relating specifically to the decision to discontinue a procedure
         for the award of a contract put out to tender is Article 7(2), which provides,  
          inter alia , that where the contracting authorities have decided not to award a contract, they must promptly inform candidates and tenderers
         of the reasons for their decision. 
         
            
The Court of Justice has already had occasion to define the scope of the obligation to notify reasons for abandoning the award
         of a contract in the context of Council Directive 93/37/EEC of June concerning the coordination of procedures for
         the award of public works contracts (OJ L 199, p. 54), in the version thereof resulting from Directive 97/(
         Directive 93/37) and in that of Directive 92/50/EEC of June relating to the coordination of procedures for the award of public service
         contracts (OJ L 209, p. 1), in the version arising from Directive 97/(
         Directive 92/50), which contain in Articles 8(2) and 12(2) provisions with wording substantially identical to that of Article 7(2) of Directive
         93/36. 
         
            
In particular, in paragraphs and of its judgment in  
          Fracasso and Leitschutz , cited above, the Court held that Article 8(2) of Directive 93/does not provide that the option of the contracting authority
         to decide not to award a public works contract put out to tender, implicity allowed by that directive, is limited to exceptional
         cases or must necessarily be based on serious grounds. 
         
            
Moreover, in paragraph of its judgment in Case C-92/HI  [2002] ECR I-5553, the Court held that on a proper interpretation of Article 12(2) of Directive 92/50, although that provision
         requires the contracting authority to notify candidates and tenderers of the grounds for its decision if it decides to withdraw
         the invitation to tender for a public service contract, there is no implied obligation on that authority to carry the award
         procedure to its conclusion. 
         
            
In paragraph of  
          HI , the Court stated that even though, apart from the duty to notify the reasons for the withdrawal of the invitation to tender,
         Directive 92/contains no specific provision concerning the substantive or formal conditions for that decision, the fact
         remains that the latter is still subject to fundamental rules of Community law, and in particular to the principles laid down
         by the EC Treaty on the right of establishment and the freedom to provide services. 
         
            
More particularly, in interpreting the duty to notify reasons for a decision to withdraw an invitation to tender, laid down
         by Article 12(2) of Directive 92/in the light of the two-fold objective of exposure to competition and transparency pursued
         by that directive, the Court held that that duty is dictated precisely by concern to ensure a minimum level of transparency
         in the contract-awarding procedures to which that directive applies and hence compliance with the principle of equal treatment
         (
          HI , cited above, paragraphs to 46). 
         
            
Therefore the Court held that, even though Directive 92/does not specifically govern the detailed procedures for withdrawing
         an invitation to tender for a public service contract, the contracting authorities are nevertheless required, when adopting
         such a decision, to comply with the fundamental rules of the Treaty in general, and the principle of non-discrimination on
         the ground of nationality, in particular (
          HI , paragraph 47). 
         
            
Thus it is clear from the case-law of the Court that Directives 92/50, 93/and 93/which, taken as a whole, constitute
         the core of Community law on public contracts, are intended to attain similar objectives in their respective fields (Case
         C-513/Concordia Bus Finland  [2002] ECR I-7213, paragraph 90). 
         
            
In those circumstances, there is no reason to give a different interpretation to provisions which fall within the same field
         of Community law and have substantially the same wording (
          Concordia Bus Finland , cited above, paragraph 91). 
         
            
Therefore, the answer to the questions referred by the national court must be that Directive 93/is to be interpreted as
         meaning that a contracting authority which has commenced a procedure for the award of a contract on the basis of the lowest
         price may discontinue the procedure, without awarding a contract, when it discovers after examining and comparing the tenders
         that, because of errors committed by itself in its preliminary assessment, the content of the invitation to tender makes it
         impossible for it to accept the most economically advantageous tender, provided that, when it adopts such a decision, it complies
         with the fundamental rules of Community law on public procurement such as the principle of equal treatment. 
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the Austrian and Finnish Governments and by the Commission, which have submitted observations to the
         Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings
         pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
in answer to the questions referred to it by the Korkein hallinto-oikeus by order of July 2002, hereby rules:
         Council Directive 93/36/EEC of June coordinating procedures for the award of public supply contracts, as amended by
            Directive 97/52/EC of the European Parliament and the Council of October amending Directives 92/50/EEC, 93/36/EEC
            and 93/37/EEC concerning the coordination of procedures for the award of public service contracts, public supply contracts
            and public works contracts respectively, must be interpreted as meaning that a contracting authority which has commenced a
            procedure for the award of a contract on the basis of the lowest price may discontinue the procedure, without awarding a contract,
            when it discovers after examining and comparing the tenders that, because of errors committed by itself in its preliminary
            assessment, the content of the invitation to tender makes it impossible for it to accept the most economically advantageous
            tender, provided that, when it adopts such a decision, it complies with the fundamental rules of Community law on public procurement
            such as the principle of equal treatment.Luxembourg, October 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
V. Skouris  
Registrar
President 
 –
            
 Language of the case: Finnish
Top  
 