
Case C-552/P
Unilever Bestfoods (Ireland) Ltd, formerly Van den Bergh Foods Ltd 
v
Commission of the European Communities
(Appeal – Articles and of the EC Treaty (now Articles EC and EC) – Ice creams for immediate consumption – Supply of freezer cabinets to retailers – Exclusivity clause – Right to a fair hearing – Burden of proof)
Summary of the Order
1.        Competition – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Adverse effect on competition 
(EC Treaty, Art. 85(1) (now Art. 81(1) EC))
2.        Competition – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Adverse effect on competition
(EC Treaty, Art. 85(1) (now Art. 81(1) EC))
3.        Competition – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Not allowed – Exemption 
(EC Treaty, Art. 85(3) (now Art. 81(3) EC))
4.        Competition – Community rules – Assessment of the compatibility with Community law of an exclusivity clause given effect to
            by the national courts 
5.        Competition – Dominant position – Abuse – Meaning 
(EC Treaty, Art. (now Art. EC))
1.        Contractual restrictions imposed on retailers by a series of distribution agreements incorporating an exclusivity clause and
         allowing the retailers to terminate the agreements at any time with a very short notice period must be examined not just in
         a purely formal manner from the legal point of view but also by taking into account the specific economic context in which
         those agreements operate. It follows that, since the possibility of terminating the distribution agreements does not in any
         way preclude the effective enforcement of those agreements during the period in which that option is not used, it is necessary
         to take into account the actual duration of those agreements in assessing their effects on the relevant market.
      
(see paras 2, 54-55)
2.        
3.        The effects of an agreement on competition must be assessed in the context in which it occurs and where it might combine with
         others to have a cumulative effect on competition. Thus, in order to assess whether a number of distribution agreements incorporating
         an exclusivity clause impede access to the market in question, it is necessary to define the nature and extent of all similar
         agreements tying a large number of outlets to a number of national producers. The effect of those networks of contracts on
         access to the market depends specifically on the number of outlets thus tied to producers in relation to those which are not
         so tied, the duration of the commitments entered into and the quantities of goods to which those commitments relate.
      
(see paras 84-85)
4.        Where an exemption is being applied for under Article 85(3) of the Treaty (now Article 81(3) EC), it is for the undertakings
         concerned in the first place to present to the Commission the evidence intended to establish that the agreement in question
         fulfils the conditions laid down by that provision 
      
 (see para. 102)
5.        The Community Courts cannot be bound by a finding of a national court that an exclusivity clause in a distribution agreement
         is compatible with Community law.
      
 (see para. 128)
6.        The concept of abuse of a dominant position is an objective concept relating to the behaviour of an undertaking in a dominant
         position which is such as to influence the structure of a market where, as a result of the very presence of the undertaking
         in question, the degree of competition is already weakened and which, through recourse to methods different from those which
         condition normal competition in products or services on the basis of the transactions of economic operators, has the effect
         of hindering the maintenance of the degree of competition still existing in the market or the growth of that competition.
         In that regard, the fact that agreements were entered into at the request of the contracting partners of the undertaking in
         a dominant position does not mean that there is not an abuse. 
      
(see para. 129)
  
  
ORDER OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
September (*)
      
(Appeal – Articles and of the EC Treaty (now Articles EC and EC) – Ice creams for immediate consumption – Supply of freezer cabinets to retailers – Exclusivity clause – Right to a fair hearing – Burden of proof)
In Case C-552/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, brought on December 2003,
Unilever Bestfoods (Ireland) Ltd, formerly Van den Bergh Foods Ltd, established in Dublin (Ireland), represented by M. Nicholson and M. Rowe, Solicitors, and
         by M. Biesheuvel and M. De Grave, advocaten, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
Commission of the European Communities, represented by  W. Wils, B. Doherty and A. Whelan, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant at first instance,
Masterfoods Ltd, established in Dublin, represented by P. Collins and M. Levitt, Solicitors,
      
Richmond Ice Cream Ltd, formerly Richmond Frozen Confectionery Ltd, established in Northallerton (United Kingdom), represented by I. Forrester QC,
         with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
interveners at first instance,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
composed of J. Malenovský, President of Chamber, J.‑P. Puissochet (Rapporteur) and U. Lõhmus, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: R. Grass,
after hearing the Advocate General,
makes the following
Order
By its appeal, Unilever Bestfoods (Ireland) Ltd, formerly Van den Bergh Foods Ltd and previously named HB Ice Cream Ltd (‘HB’),
         requests the setting aside of the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities in Case T-65/Van den Bergh Foods v Commission [2003] ECR II‑(‘the judgment under appeal’), by which that Court dismissed its application for annulment of Commission
         Decision 98/531/EC of March relating to a proceeding under Articles and of the EC Treaty (Case Nos IV/34.073,
         IV/34.and IV/35.– Van den Bergh Foods Limited) (OJ L 246, p. 1) (‘the contested decision’). HB also requests
         the Court to annul the contested decision or, in the alternative, to refer the case back to the Court of First Instance for
         judgment.
      
 Facts 
The facts of the case, together with the contested decision, the procedure and forms of order sought before the Court of First
         Instance are summarised in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, to which reference is made. The main points are
         apparent from the paragraphs of the judgment set out below:
      
‘2.       [HB], a wholly-owned subsidiary of Unilever plc, is the principal manufacturer of ice cream products in Ireland, particularly
         single‑wrapped ice creams for immediate consumption (hereinafter “impulse ice creams”). For a number of years HB has supplied
         ice cream retailers with freezer cabinets, in which it retains ownership, and which are supplied free of charge or at a nominal
         rent, provided that they are used exclusively for HB ice creams (hereinafter “the exclusivity clause”). Pursuant to the standard
         terms of the freezer agreements, they can be terminated at any time on two months’ notice on either side. HB maintains the
         cabinets at no cost to the retailer, save in cases of negligence. 
      
3.      Masterfoods Ltd (hereinafter “Mars”), a subsidiary of the US corporation Mars Inc., entered the Irish ice cream market in
         1989. 
      
4.       In the summer of many retailers with freezer cabinets supplied by HB began to stock and display Mars products. This led
         to a demand by HB that they comply with the exclusivity clause.’
      
As a result, a dispute arose between Mars and HB and proceedings were brought before the Irish courts which gave rise inter
         alia to a reference for a preliminary ruling from the Supreme Court (Ireland), which was the subject of a judgment of the
         Court of Justice in Case C-344/Masterfoods and HB [2000] ECR I‑11369.
      
By the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance also held as follows:
      
‘9.       In parallel to those proceedings before the Irish courts, on September Mars lodged a complaint [against HB] with the
         Commission [of the European Communities] under Article of Regulation No [of the Council] of February 1962, First Regulation
         implementing Articles and of the Treaty (OJ, English Special Edition 1959-1962, p. 87). The complaint related to the
         provision by HB, to large numbers of retailers, of freezer cabinets to be used exclusively for HB products. 
      
10.      On July 1992, Valley Ice Cream (Ireland) Ltd also lodged a complaint against HB with the Commission. 
11.       On July 1993, the Commission issued a statement of objections to HB in which it concluded that HB’s distribution arrangements
         infringed Articles and of the [EC] Treaty [now Articles EC and EC] … . 
      
12.      Following negotiations with the Commission, HB, while contesting the Commission’s view, proposed changes to its distribution
         arrangements, with a view to qualifying for an exemption under Article 85(3) of the Treaty. Those changes were notified to
         the Commission on March and in a press release of March the Commission stated that, at first sight, the new
         distribution arrangements might enable HB to obtain an exemption. On August a notice pursuant to Article 19(3) of
         Regulation [No] was published in the Official Journal of the European Communities (OJ C 211, p. 4).   
      
13.       On January the Commission sent HB a new statement of objections in which it expressed the view that the changes had
         not achieved the expected results of free access to sales outlets … . HB replied to those objections. 
      
14.       On March the Commission adopted the contested decision. 
… 
15.       In the contested decision the Commission states that HB’s distribution agreements containing the exclusivity clause are incompatible
         with Articles and of the Treaty. It defines the relevant product market as the market for single-wrapped items of impulse
         ice cream and the relevant geographic market as Ireland (recitals and 140). It states that HB’s position on the relevant
         market is particularly strong, as is shown by its market share over many years (see paragraph below). That strength is
         further illustrated by the degree of both numeric (79%) and weighted distribution (94%) of the relevant HB products during
         August and September and by the strength of the brand and the breadth and popularity of its range of products. HB’s position
         on that market is further reinforced by the strength of Unilever’s position, not only on the other ice cream markets in Ireland
         (take‑home and catering), but also in the international ice cream markets and the markets for frozen foods and consumer products
         generally (recital 141). 
      
16.       The Commission observes that the network of HB’s distribution agreements relating to freezer cabinets installed in outlets
         has the effect of restricting the ability of retailers who are parties to those agreements to stock and offer for sale in
         their outlets impulse products from competing suppliers, in circumstances where the only freezer cabinet or cabinets for the
         storage of impulse ice cream in place in their outlets have been provided by HB, where the HB freezer cabinet or cabinets
         is or are unlikely to be replaced by a cabinet owned by the retailer and/or supplied by a competitor, and where it is not
         economically viable to allocate space to the installation of an additional cabinet. It considers that the effect of this restriction
         is that the competing suppliers are precluded from selling their products to those outlets, thereby restricting competition
         between suppliers in the relevant market (recital 143). … The assessment of this restrictive effect was made against the background
         of the effect of all similar networks of freezer cabinet agreements operated by other ice cream suppliers in the relevant
         market, as well as in the light of any further relevant market conditions (recitals and 145). 
      
17.      The Commission then quantified the restrictive effect of HB’s distribution agreements in order to show their significance.
         It observes that the restrictive effect of the networks of agreements for the supply of freezer cabinets reserved exclusively
         for the supplier’s products are the result of the space constraints inevitably experienced by retail outlets. …  
      
18.       The Commission states that only a small proportion of retail outlets in Ireland, 17% according to the Lansdowne survey, have
         freezer cabinets which are not subject to an exclusivity clause. … As regards the other outlets, 83% according to the Lansdowne
         survey, in which the suppliers have installed freezer cabinets, the Commission considers that other suppliers cannot have
         direct access to them for sale of their products without first overcoming substantial barriers. It submits that “newcomers
         to the outlet are foreclosed” from them and that “although this foreclosure is not absolute, in the sense that the retailer
         is not contractually precluded from selling other suppliers’ products, the outlet can be said to be foreclosed in so far as
         entry thereto by competing suppliers is rendered very difficult” (recital 149). 
      
19.       The Commission finds that in some 40% of all outlets in Ireland the only freezer cabinet/s for the storage of impulse ice
         cream in place in the outlet has or have been provided by HB (recital 156). It observes that “a supplier who wishes to gain
         access for the sale of his impulse ice cream products to a retail outlet (that is, a new entrant to the outlet) in which at
         least one supplier-exclusive freezer cabinet is in place can only do so if that outlet has a non‑exclusive cabinet ... or
         if he can persuade the retailer either to replace an in situ supplier-exclusive freezer cabinet or to install an additional freezer cabinet alongside the in situ supplier-exclusive cabinet/s” (recital 157). It considers (recitals to 183), on the basis of the Lansdowne survey, that
         it is unlikely that retailers will adopt one or other of those measures if they have one (or more) freezers supplied by HB
         and concludes that 40% of the outlets in question are de facto tied to HB (recital 184). Other suppliers are therefore foreclosed from access to those outlets, contrary to Article 85(1)
         of the Treaty. 
      
20.       The contested decision also finds that the agreements containing the exclusivity clause cannot be exempted under Article 85(3)
         of the Treaty, as they do not contribute to an improvement in the distribution of the products (recitals to 238), do not
         allow consumers a fair share of the resulting benefit (recitals and 240), are not indispensable to the attainment of those
         benefits (recital 241) and afford HB the possibility of eliminating a substantial part of competition on the relevant market
         (recitals to 246). 
      
21.       As regards the application of Article of the Treaty, the Commission takes the view that HB has a dominant position on the
         relevant market, in particular because it has for a long time had a share in volume and value of over 75% of that market (recitals
         and 261).   
      
22.       The Commission states that “HB abuses its dominant position in the relevant market ... in that it induces retailers ... who
         do not have a freezer cabinet for the storage of impulse ice cream either procured by themselves or provided by another ice
         cream supplier than HB to enter into freezer-cabinet agreements subject to a condition of exclusivity” and that “the inducement
         takes the form of an offer to supply the freezer cabinets to retailers, and to maintain them, at no direct charge to the retailer”
         (recital 263).’
      
 The judgment under appeal
Paragraph of the judgment under appeal states that HB raised seven pleas in law against the contested decision: ‘first,
         manifest errors of assessment of the facts, resulting in errors of law; second, infringement of Article 85(1) of the Treaty;
         third, infringement of Article 85(3) of the Treaty; fourth, infringement of Article of the Treaty; fifth, infringement
         of the right to property, by failing to observe general principles of law and Article of the EC Treaty [now Article EC]; sixth, infringement of Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC); and, seventh, failure to observe fundamental
         principles of Community law and infringement of essential procedural requirements’.
      
The Court of First Instance examined together the first two pleas relied on by HB, by which the latter criticised the Commission
         for having made a series of manifest errors in its analysis of the existence and the degree of foreclosure of the relevant
         market arising by virtue of the distribution agreements entered into by that company with retailers in Ireland (‘the distribution
         agreements’). 
      
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance held that it had, in the first place, to determine
         whether the Commission had adequately proved that the exclusivity clause in reality imposed purchasing exclusivity on some
         sales outlets and whether the Commission had correctly quantified the degree of foreclosure of the relevant market which it
         gave rise to. The Court of First Instance stated that it was necessary, in the second place, to determine, as appropriate,
         whether the degree of foreclosure is sufficiently high to constitute an infringement of Article 85(1) of the Treaty. In that
         regard, the Court of First Instance held in paragraph of the judgment that it could not confine itself to looking at the
         effects of the exclusivity clause, considered in isolation, referring only to the contractual restrictions imposed by the
         distribution agreements. In paragraph of the judgment, it held:
      
‘… it is appropriate, in accordance with the case-law, to consider whether all the similar agreements entered into in the
         relevant market and the other features of the economic and legal context of the agreements at issue, show that those agreements
         cumulatively have the effect of denying access to that market to new competitors. If, on examination, that is found not to
         be the case, the individual agreements making up the bundle of agreements cannot impair competition within the meaning of
         Article 85(1) of the Treaty. If, on the other hand, such examination reveals that it is difficult to gain access to the market,
         it is then necessary to assess the extent to which the agreements at issue contribute to the cumulative effect produced, on
         the basis that only those agreements which make a significant contribution to any partitioning of the market are prohibited
         ([Case C-234/89] Delimitis [[1991] ECR I-935], paragraphs and 24, and [Case T-7/93] Langnese‑Iglo v Commission [[1995] ECR II-1533], paragraph 99).’
      
Relying on unchallenged survey data on which the Commission had based its findings, the Court of First Instance held in paragraph
         of the judgment under appeal that only 17% of the retail sales outlets for impulse ice cream had freezer cabinets belonging
         to the retailer, in which ice cream of any brand could therefore be stocked.  In the other outlets, which represent 83% of
         the total, the freezers are the property of the ice cream suppliers, in which only ice cream of the supplier’s brand could
         be stocked. Furthermore, according to the documents on which the Court of First Instance based its judgment, over 60% of the
         freezer cabinets belonging to a supplier come from HB.
      
The Court of First Instance also held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the majority of sales of impulse
         ice cream were made in outlets which were small in area and which, having regard to their limited space, would find it very
         difficult to install another freezer. The Court of First Instance rejected HB’s arguments seeking to show that the Commission
         had overestimated the space constraints. In paragraphs and of the judgment, it confirmed the Commission’s finding that
         the provision of freezers by HB ‘free of charge’, the popularity of its products, the breadth of its range and the benefits
         produced by the sale of those products did not encourage retailers which had only one or a number of freezer cabinets belonging
         to HB to alter their situation, emphasising in that regard the dominant position held by that company on the market. 
      
In order to confirm that the exclusivity clause gave rise to a restriction on competition, the Court of First Instance, in
         paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, relied on various items of factual evidence, in particular the fact that
         Mars had succeeded, in the year in which retailers had paid little observance to the clause, in achieving a 42% share of the
         market by volume, only for it to fall to under 20% following an injunction granted against Mars by the High Court (Ireland)
         in 1990, prohibiting that company from inducing retailers to stock its ice creams in freezer cabinets belonging to HB. It
         thus stated in paragraph 98:
      
‘… the Commission rightly held, having regard to the specific features of the product in question and the economic context
         of this case, that the network of HB’s distribution agreements together with the supply of freezer cabinets “without charge”
         subject to the condition of exclusivity, have a considerable dissuasive effect on retailers with regard to the installation
         of their own cabinet or that of another manufacturer and operate de facto as a tie on sales outlets that have only HB freezer cabinets, that is to say 40% of sales outlets in the relevant market.
         Despite the fact that it is theoretically possible for retailers who have only an HB freezer cabinet to sell the ice creams
         of other manufacturers, the effect of the exclusivity clause in practice is to restrict the commercial freedom of retailers
         to choose the products they wish to sell in their sales outlets.’
      
In paragraphs to of the contested judgement, the Court of First Instance also rejected the various arguments put forward
         by HB seeking to show that the proportion of sales outlets foreclosed to ice cream competition from ice cream other than HB’s
         was not 40%, as the Commission held in the contested decision, but only 6% and did not lead to an appreciable restriction
         of competition on the relevant market. 
      
In paragraph of the judgment, the Court of First Instance added:
      
‘As to HB’s argument alleging that the freezer cabinet exclusivity imposed by the exclusivity clause cannot be regarded as
         an outlet exclusivity because the retailers have the option of terminating their distribution agreements with HB at any time,
         the Court considers that this possibility in no way precludes the effective enforcement of the agreements in question during
         the period in which that option is not used. Consequently, in assessing the effects of the distribution agreements on the
         relevant market, the Court must take their actual duration into consideration (see, by analogy, Langnese-Iglo v Commission, paragraph 111). … However, as the Commission has shown, … HB’s distribution agreements are terminated on average every eight
         years. It follows that the argument to the effect that it is possible to terminate the HB distribution agreements is unsound,
         since the possibility of so doing does not in fact operate to reduce the degree of foreclosure of the relevant market.’
      
The Court of First Instance also rejected HB’s argument that no finding of an infringement of Article 85(1) of the Treaty
         could be made until it had been established that, applying a ‘rule of reason’, any restriction on the freedom of conduct of
         the retailers does indeed constitute a restriction on competition.
      
In addition, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance held that, over and above
         the identified part of the network of distribution agreements involving around 40% of all sales outlets on the market, the
         networks of agreements put in place on the relevant market by suppliers of ice cream other than HB also foreclose that market
         by imposing similar conditions on retailers, even though those suppliers do not have either the same position or the same
         popularity as HB on the relevant market. The Court of First Instance accordingly held that the true position is that those
         networks of agreements affect 83% of sales outlets in that market.
      
The Court of First Instance also found in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal that, as well as the degree of
         dependence which the networks of agreements give rise to, other evidence of the economic and legal context of those agreements,
         such as, in particular, the expense involved in acquiring a stock of freezer cabinets for installation in outlets which will
         ensure that the supplier’s products can achieve stable distribution levels, and the fact that the other suppliers of impulse
         ice cream hold only very small shares in the relevant market, show that the distribution agreements are liable to have an
         appreciable effect on competition for the purposes of Article 85(1) of the Treaty and contribute significantly to a foreclosure
         of the relevant market. 
      
The Court of First Instance accordingly rejected the first two pleas relied on by HB in support of its application. 
      
As regards the third plea raised by HB, alleging errors of law in the application of Article 85(3) of the Treaty, the Court
         of First Instance held in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that the Commission had analysed the distribution agreements
         in the light of each of the four conditions laid down by that provision.
      
As regards the first of those conditions, according to which agreements capable of being exempted from the prohibition laid
         down by Article 85(1) of the Treaty, must contribute ‘to improving the production or distribution of goods or to promoting
         technical or economic progress’, the Court of First Instance stated in paragraph of the judgment under appeal:
      
‘… the improvement cannot be identified with all the advantages which the parties obtain from the agreement in their production
         or distribution activities. The improvement must in particular display appreciable objective advantages of such a character
         as to compensate for the disadvantages which they cause in the field of competition (Joined Cases 56/and 58/Consten and Grundig v Commission [1966] ECR 299, at 348, and Langnese-Iglo, paragraph 180).’
      
The Court of First Instance held in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal that the Commission had consequently
         rightly taken into consideration the barriers to the relevant market resulting from the exclusivity clause, and the consequent
         weakening of competition, when it assessed the distribution agreements in the light of the first condition laid down by Article
         85(3) of the Treaty. In paragraph of the judgment, the Court of First Instance stated that the benefits ensured by the
         agreements are the result of the provision to retailers of freezer cabinets ‘free of charge’ and can be achieved without the
         exclusivity clause.
      
The Court of First Instance also held in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that the Commission’s analysis to the
         effect that, were the power to impose an exclusivity clause to be restricted, it appeared unlikely that HB would definitely
         cease to supply freezer cabinets to retailers, was not vitiated by a manifest error of assessment.
      
The Court of First Instance accordingly held in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that the first of the conditions
         laid down by Article 85(3) of the Treaty was not satisfied and rejected the third plea relied on by HB in support of its application.
      
As regards HB’s fourth plea, alleging errors of law in the application of Article of the Treaty, the Court of First Instance
         confirmed in paragraph of the judgment under appeal the Commission’s analysis that that company is an unavoidable partner
         for many retailers on the relevant market and that it had a dominant position on that market. It accordingly noted in paragraph
         of the judgment that HB had a special responsibility not to allow its conduct to impair genuine undistorted competition
         on the common market. 
      
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance held that, while the provision of freezer cabinets
         on a condition of exclusivity constitutes a standard practice on the relevant market which cannot be prohibited in the normal
         situation of a competitive market, the analysis is otherwise where, because of the dominant position held by one of the traders,
         competition is restricted on that market. It accordingly held that the Commission was right to find that HB was abusing its
         dominant position on the relevant market by inducing retailers to accept agreements for the provision of freezer cabinets
         subject to an exclusivity clause.
      
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance rejected the argument based on the Opinion of Advocate
         General Jacobs in Case C-7/Bronner [1998] ECR I-7791, because the Commission did not claim in the contested decision that HB’s freezer cabinets were an ‘essential
         facility’ and the decision does not require HB to transfer an asset or to conclude contracts with persons whom it has not
         selected.
      
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance also rejected HB’s argument that, in considering
         Article of the Treaty, the Commission merely ‘recycled’ facts constituting an infringement of Article 85(1) of the Treaty.
      
As regards the fifth plea, alleging errors of law committed by the Commission relating to respect for rights to property and
         infringement of Article of the Treaty, the Court of First Instance held in paragraph of the judgment under appeal
         that the contested decision does not deprive HB of its rights to property in its stock of freezer cabinets and does not prevent
         it from exploiting those assets by renting them out on commercial terms, and also held that the decision does not contain
         any undue limitation on the exercise of its rights to property.
      
In addition, the Court of First Instance, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, rejected HB’s argument based on the
         disadvantages linked to the imposition of a separate fee for the use of the freezer cabinets belonging to that company. The
         Court of First Instance also rejected HB’s argument that it is disadvantaged in comparison with its competitors, who would
         be able to continue to make freezer cabinets available to retailers without charge, pointing out that, unlike the distribution
         agreements of its competitors, those of HB contribute significantly to the foreclosure of the relevant market and also operate
         in the context of a dominant position of one of the parties. 
      
The Court of First Instance rejected the sixth plea relied on by HB in support of its application, alleging infringement of
         Article of the Treaty. In particular, it stated in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that the Commission had
         given sufficient reasons in law for its decision to revise its initial favourable view contained in its notice of August
         1995, because the amendments proposed by HB to its distribution system had not brought about the expected results in terms
         of free access to sales outlets.
      
The Court of First Instance also rejected the seventh plea relied on by HB in support of its application, alleging failure
         to respect the fundamental principles of Community law.
      
In that regard, in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance first of all rejected
         HB’s argument relating to infringement of legitimate expectations, stating in particular that the Commission had not given
         HB specific assurances as to the consequences of the commitments notified by the letter of March and that the notice
         of August merely indicated a preliminary position of the Commission, which was subject to change, particularly in
         order to take account of the observations of third parties. 
      
In paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance also rejected HB’s claims that the principles
         of subsidiarity, sincere cooperation and legal certainty had been infringed. 
      
The Court of First Instance held in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that the contested decision does not contain
         any undue or disproportionate limitation on HB’s property rights in its freezer cabinets, nor does it constitute an arbitrary
         or discriminatory impairment of HB’s ability to compete with other suppliers. In paragraph of the judgment, the Court
         of First Instance also rejected HB’s argument that Article of the contested decision, which requires that that company immediately
         cease the infringements established and refrain from taking any measure having the same object or effect, is disproportionate.
      
Lastly, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance rejected HB’s argument based on infringement
         of essential procedural requirements and an inadequate statement of reasons in the contested decision, as well as the argument
         relating to the need to extend the negotiations in order to find a solution to the breakdown in the ‘settlement’. 
      
The Court of First Instance accordingly dismissed the action brought by HB in its entirety and ordered HB to pay the Commission’s
         costs. It also ordered Mars and Richmond  Ice Cream Ltd (‘Richmond’) to bear their own costs.
      
 Forms of order sought
By its appeal, HB claims that the Court should:
      
–        set aside, in whole or in part, the judgment under appeal, except for paragraph of the operative part of the judgment, which
         orders Mars and Richmond to bear their own costs;
      
–        annul, in whole or in part, the Commission’s decision or, in the alternative, refer the case back to the Court of First Instance
         for judgment, and 
      
–        order the Commission to pay the costs of both sets of proceedings.
The Commission contends that the appeal should be dismissed as inadmissible and unfounded and that HB should be ordered to
         pay the costs of these proceedings. 
      
Mars and Richmond also contend that the appeal should be dismissed and that HB should be ordered to pay the costs.
      
 The appeal 
Under Article of the Rules of Procedure, where the appeal is, in whole or in part, clearly inadmissible or clearly unfounded,
         the Court may at any time, acting on a report from the Judge-Rapporteur and after hearing the Advocate General, by reasoned
         order dismiss the appeal.
      
 The first ground of appeal, alleging infringement of Article 85(1) of the Treaty 
By its first ground of appeal, HB contests the finding of the Court of First Instance that the exclusivity clause is liable
         to have an appreciable effect on competition and to contribute to the foreclosure of the relevant market. The plea is divided
         into two parts. In the first part, HB submits that the analysis by the Court of First Instance of the effect of the exclusivity
         clause on competition is incorrect and that the judgment under appeal is inadequately reasoned in that regard. In the second
         part, it argues that the Court of First Instance erred in its analysis of the assessment of the contribution made by HB’s
         competitors to the foreclosure of the market.
      
 The first part of the first ground of appeal
–       Arguments of the parties 
HB contests the finding of the Court of First Instance that the exclusivity clause gives rise to a distortion of dealer choice.
         
      
HB contends that the fact that the option given to retailers to terminate distribution agreements is rarely exercised by them
         in practice is irrelevant to the inquiry into the restrictive effect on competition of the exclusivity clause. It refers inter
         alia to Delimitis in that regard.
      
HB contests the ‘objective and specific evidence’ on which the Court of First Instance relied in paragraphs to of the
         judgment under appeal  in order to demonstrate the existence of demand in Ireland for the ice creams of other manufacturers
         where they are available and the fact, referred to in paragraph of the judgment, that a considerable number of retailers
         are prepared to stock impulse ice creams from various manufacturers, provided that they may stock them in one and the same
         freezer. HB also claims that the reasoning in this regard is inadequate. It goes on to state that the evidence presented by
         Richmond at the hearing before the Court of First Instance regarding its experience on the United Kingdom market was submitted
         too late and, accordingly, is not only inadmissible but also inaccurate and irrelevant to the analysis of the relevant market.
         
      
HB also claims that there is a contradiction between paragraph of the judgment under appeal, which states that the retailers
         do stock ice creams of other brands alongside those of HB in the same freezer whenever they are free to do so, and paragraph
         of the judgment, which refers to a survey stating that almost 40% of retailers would be prepared to stock ice creams other
         than those of HB if the exclusivity clause were no longer included in the distribution agreements, which means, according
         to HB, that 60% of retailers indicated that they would not be willing to stock ice creams from manufacturers other than HB
         if the exclusivity clause were not to exist.
      
HB argues that the cancellation of the exclusivity clauses does not, as the Court of First Instance suggests in paragraphs
         and of the judgment under appeal, in any way imply the termination of the distribution and supply agreements entered
         into with the retailers concerned.
      
HB also argues that the judgment under appeal is inadequately reasoned by reason of a failure to examine the system of bonuses
         it provides to retailers possessing their own freezer cabinet (the ‘bonus scheme’). In its reply, it submits that the existence
         of such a bonus scheme is not presented as a separate ground of appeal, but as part of a broader plea put forward against
         the contested decision, namely that the Commission and the Court of First Instance wrongly failed to take proper account of
         the opportunities for competitors to gain access to the market. In its reply and at the hearing before the Court of First
         Instance, HB stressed the importance to be attached to that argument.
      
The Commission, Mars and Richmond take the view that HB’s arguments are purely factual and, accordingly, inadmissible, as
         well as being unfounded.
      
Mars and Richmond observe that Delimitis provides that it is the actual duration of the distribution agreements which must be appraised under Article 85(1) of the
         Treaty. Richmond also states that the Court of First Instance did not find merely that it was open in theory to retailers
         to stock the competing products in their sales outlet, but rightly examined whether there were real and concrete opportunities
         for competitors to gain access to the relevant market.
      
Richmond contends that the calculation of its market share in the United Kingdom is correct.
      
The Commission points out that the bonus scheme has been in place since in order to meet objections on its part, because
         it had challenged the fact that HB invoiced the cost of a freezer cabinet to all retailers, without making any distinction
         as to whether they did, or did not, use a freezer cabinet belonging to that company.
      
The Commission and Richmond maintain that, prior to this stage of the proceedings, HB has never put forward the bonus scheme
         as a justification, per se, for the annulment of the contested decision and that such an argument is accordingly inadmissible. The Commission adds that
         the true position is that the existence of the bonus scheme was used by HB only in support of its argument that it did not
         tie the supply of ice creams to the provision of freezers, an argument which was addressed by the Court of First Instance
         in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal. Mars observes that the references made by HB to the decision and the
         application merely concern the factual operation of the bonus scheme and do not contain any legal arguments.
      
The Commission and Richmond point out that the Court of First Instance is not required to provide a full response to every
         point put forward by each of the parties. The Commission refers in that regard to Case C-221/P Schröder and Others v Commission [1998] ECR I‑8255, paragraph 24, and Case C-274/P Connolly v Commission [2001] ECR I-1611, paragraph 121).
      
Mars also argues that the bonus scheme does not produce the result claimed by HB in terms of the opening up of the relevant
         market and that Delimitis does not require the Commission or the Court to consider the position in relation to outlets which are not foreclosed. Richmond
         also maintains that the bonus granted under that scheme was insufficient to operate as an incentive to retailers to buy their
         own freezer cabinet.
      
–       Findings of the Court
The effects of an agreement on competition have to be assessed in the legal and economic context in which it occurs and where
         it might combine with others to have a cumulative effect on competition (see, inter alia, Case 23/Brasserie de Haecht [1967] ECR 407, 415, and Delimitis, paragraph 14).
      
It follows that, as the Court of First Instance states in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the contractual restrictions
         on retailers must be examined not just in a purely formal manner from the legal point of view but also by taking into account
         the specific economic context in which the distribution agreements operate.
      
Accordingly, the Court of First Instance did not err in law when it held in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that,
         since the possibility of terminating the distribution agreements does not in any way preclude the effective enforcement of
         those agreements during the period in which that option is not used, it is necessary to take into account the actual duration
         of those agreements in assessing their effects on the relevant market.
      
HB’s argument in that regard is accordingly manifestly unfounded.
      
Moreover, it is not the task of the Court of Justice in an appeal to rule on the assessment of the facts and evidence by the
         Court of First Instance, save where there has been a clear distortion of those facts and evidence by that Court (see, to that
         effect, inter alia Case C-470/P Parliament v Ripa di Meana and Others [2004] ECR I‑4167, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
By challenging the various items of factual evidence on which the Court of First Instance relied in paragraphs to of
         the judgment under appeal in order to determine the effect of the exclusivity clause on the relevant market, HB calls into
         question the assessment of the facts by that Court, without going on to demonstrate that it made incorrect findings in relation
         to those facts or distorted the evidence in that regard. 
      
Furthermore, the question whether the cancellation of the exclusivity clause does, or does not, mean in practice that the
         distribution agreements are terminated is also a question of fact.
      
It follows that HB’s arguments in relation to those points are manifestly inadmissible.
      
Nor does HB put forward any serious grounds to support the conclusion that there is a contradiction between paragraph of
         the judgment under appeal, which states that the retailers do stock ice creams of other brands alongside those of HB whenever
         they are free to do so, and paragraph of the judgment, which bases that statement inter alia on the finding that a significant
         proportion of the retailers, namely almost 40% of them, claimed in the B & A survey that they would stock a wider range of
         products if the exclusivity clauses were abolished. 
      
It follows that that argument of HB is manifestly unfounded.
      
As regards, lastly, HB’s argument relating to the failure of the Court of First Instance to consider the bonus scheme, it
         should be noted that, as the Commission rightly observes, that Court was not obliged to respond in detail to every argument
         advanced by the parties, particularly if the argument was not sufficiently clear and precise and was not adequately supported
         by evidence (see, inter alia, Connolly v Commission, paragraph 121).
      
In that regard, the documents in the case do not show that the bonus scheme constituted an essential argument on HB’s part
         before the Court of First Instance in order to show that the exclusivity clause had no anti‑competitive effect.
      
Furthermore, although HB stresses the importance of the bonus scheme for retailers having their own freezer cabinet, it provides
         no detailed information to show that the existence of that scheme might have changed the assessment by the Court of First
         Instance of the effect of the exclusivity clause on the relevant market.
      
The Court of First Instance cannot therefore be criticised for failing to provide a more detailed response to an argument
         which must be regarded as irrelevant, having regard to the analysis made by the Court of First Instance of the effect which
         the exclusivity clause had on the commercial freedom of the retailers to select the products made available at their sales
         outlets.
      
That argument is accordingly manifestly inadmissible. 
      
It follows that the first part of the first ground of appeal must be rejected as being in part manifestly inadmissible and
         in part manifestly unfounded.
      
 The second part of the first ground of appeal
–       Arguments of the parties 
HB contends that the Court of First Instance wrongly assessed the effect of the distribution agreements entered into by HB’s
         competitors on the foreclosure of the relevant market. It argues that it was not open to the Court of First Instance to find
         that the network of agreements in place on that market affects 83% of the sales outlets, since 27% of them are demonstrably
         not foreclosed, inasmuch as the retailers have chosen to take freezer cabinets belonging to more than one manufacturer. HB
         also states that the Court of First Instance was not entitled to put its distribution agreements on the same footing as those
         of its competitors, since, in particular, the latter do not enjoy the same position or the same popularity on the market.
         It states that the Court of First Instance should have considered the duration, contractually and in practice, of those agreements.
         HB also contests the statement that it had conceded that 83% of retail shops in Ireland were foreclosed.
      
In its reply, HB submits that the significant exaggeration by the Court of First Instance of the cumulative effect of foreclosure
         of the market resulting from the network of distribution agreements amounts to a distortion of the evidence.
      
HB contests the finding of the Court of First Instance that there was no objective link between the exclusive use of freezer
         cabinets and the supply of impulse ice cream. It states that that finding contradicts the finding set out in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that the provision of those freezer cabinets in a large number of sales outlets, covering the
         entire geographic market, produces an objective benefit. HB also contends that the practice of charging rent to retailers
         which use its freezer cabinets in Northern Ireland involves payment of a nominal sum which, more often than not, is not even
         collected and, accordingly, that a practice of that kind cannot support the finding of the Court of First Instance that HB
         could charge rent in the same way to retailers in Ireland, rent which could reimburse the costs in providing and maintaining
         a freezer cabinet. 
      
HB also contests the finding of the Court of First Instance in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that, in the context
         of the relevant market, the supplier must be ready to offer a freezer cabinet without charge and to service it, arguing that
         the Court of First Instance fails to have sufficient regard, first, to the fact that in 17% of the sales outlets the retailers
         had their own freezer cabinets and, secondly, to the existence of the bonus scheme for the Irish retailers which stock ice
         creams manufactured by HB, but which do not install cabinets belonging to that company.
      
Lastly, HB contends that the Court of First Instance did not establish to the requisite standard that the weak market shares
         held by its competitors are attributable in part to the exclusivity clause and that it also erred in law in holding that the
         policy of exclusive use of the freezer cabinets belonging to HB represents a barrier to the entry of those competitors into
         the market.
      
The Commission maintains that HB’s arguments are based on assessments of fact and must be considered to be inadmissible. It
         adds that they are, in any event, unfounded. 
      
It argues that the finding by the Court of First Instance in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that the network of
         agreements in place on the relevant market affects 83% of the outlets reflects the fact that only 17% of retailers own their
         own freezer cabinet, which is relevant to the question whether a barrier to entry into that market exists.
      
The Commission denies that there is an objective link between the exclusive use of a freezer cabinet belonging to HB and the
         supply of ice cream and maintains that HB’s arguments are inconsistent inasmuch as HB contends that that exclusive use is
         crucial, while conceding that it is possible to supply ice cream without such an exclusivity clause. The Commission states
         that the advantages of the widespread availability of impulse ice cream are due to the provision of a freezer cabinet and
         not to the exclusivity clause. It also argues that it is implausible to maintain that a company such as HB cannot require
         its retailers to pay an economic rent for the use of its cabinets.
      
The Commission considers that the contested decision established the existence of a causal link between the exclusivity clause
         and the weak market share of HB’s competitors on the relevant market. It refers in particular in that regard to recitals to and to of the contested decision.
      
Mars and Richmond essentially put forward the same arguments as the Commission. 
      
Mars also contends that HB fails to show that, notwithstanding the existence of networks of distribution agreements relating
         to the exclusive use of freezer cabinets belonging to HB, which affect 83% of the outlets on the reference market, there are
         real and concrete opportunities for suppliers to penetrate that market or to expand their presence there.
      
Mars contests HB’s argument that the existence of an objective link between the exclusivity clause and the supply of ice cream
         may justify the conclusion that that clause is not a barrier to the entry of competitors into that market. It argues that
         any possible benefit in terms of the wider availability of impulse ice cream must be assessed in the context of the overall
         effect of a network of distribution agreements.
      
Mars considers that the finding by the Court of First Instance relating to the weak market shares held by HB’s competitors
         is based on the analysis undertaken in the judgment under appeal of the adverse effects of the exclusivity clause.
      
It maintains that HB does not put forward any legal argument in support of the contention that the Court of First Instance
         distorted the evidence by significantly exaggerating the degree of foreclosure of the relevant market.
      
Richmond states that, contrary to what HB contends, the Court of First Instance did not find that 83% of the sales outlets
         on the market were ‘foreclosed’ to competition, but that the networks of distribution agreements in place on the market ‘affect’
         those outlets. It accordingly contends that that argument must be rejected as being without purpose. It also maintains that
         the fact that suppliers other than HB are less popular than the latter on the relevant market does not necessarily mean that
         the level of foreclosure attributable to them will be lessened. 
      
–       Findings of the Court
The effects of an agreement on competition must be assessed in the context in which it occurs and where it might combine with
         others to have a cumulative effect on competition (Brasserie de Haecht, page 416, and Delimitis, paragraph 14).
      
In order to assess whether a number of contracts impede access to the market in question, it is necessary to define the nature
         and extent of all similar contracts tying a large number of outlets to a number of national producers. The effect of those
         networks of contracts on access to the market depends specifically on the number of outlets thus tied to producers in relation
         to those which are not so tied, the duration of the commitments entered into and the quantities of goods to which those commitments
         relate (see, to that effect, Delimitis, paragraph 19).
      
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance held that the Commission had been right to take
         into account, when analysing whether there might be a cumulative effect, not only the distribution agreements entered into
         by HB, but also the agreements relating to freezer cabinets subject to an exclusivity clause entered into by other suppliers
         in Ireland. According to the Court of First Instance, the fact that those suppliers make freezer cabinets available to retailers,
         under conditions similar to those offered by HB, and with the same constraints in terms of space, demonstrates that the difficulties
         encountered in the outlets equipped only with freezer cabinets belonging to HB in persuading retailers to replace those cabinets
         or to install additional freezer cabinets apply also to any freezer cabinet subject to a condition of exclusivity, even if
         the other suppliers do not have the same position or the same popularity as that company on the relevant market. 
      
In challenging that analysis, HB is in truth seeking to call into question the assessment of the facts undertaken by the Court
         of First Instance. Moreover, HB puts forward nothing to show that that Court distorted the facts or evidence relating to the
         characteristics of the agreements of suppliers other than HB. 
      
It follows that that part of the second part of the first ground of appeal put forward by HB is manifestly inadmissible. 
      
Furthermore, HB puts forward no clear evidence to show that the Court of First Instance erred in law in holding that the payment
         of a separate rental for the provision of freezer cabinets to retailers in Northern Ireland is relevant in assessing whether
         it would be possible to charge a rental for similar agreements entered into by HB with retailers in Ireland. It must also
         be pointed out that the Court of First Instance did not in fact base its findings solely on the practice followed by HB in
         Northern Ireland, but also held in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that HB had not established to the requisite
         legal standard that it would be impractical to impose a separate rental in respect of the supply of freezers in Ireland, a
         point which HB does not contest. 
      
Similarly, HB fails to put forward anything which might call into question the finding by the Court of First Instance in paragraph
         of the judgment under appeal that, in the context of the relevant market, a supplier must be ready to offer a freezer
         cabinet without charge and to service it. In any event, the fact, noted by HB, that retailers have their own freezer cabinet
         in 17% of outlets does not go to show that there has been any distortion of the facts and evidence submitted to the Court
         of First Instance in that regard. Furthermore, HB merely refers to the existence of the bonus scheme without putting forward
         anything which would show that the Court of First Instance erred in law by failing to take that scheme into consideration
         in its analysis in that regard.
      
Lastly, the Court of First Instance gave reasons for its finding that the weak market shares held by HB’s competitors are,
         at least in part, attributable to the latter’s practice of making freezer cabinets available to retailers with an exclusivity
         clause, when it held that the market share held by Mars, together with those of Valley and Leadmore, fell during the years
         preceding the adoption of the contested decision. Furthermore, HB puts forward nothing to show that the Court of First Instance
         erred in law in failing to give detailed consideration to the causal relationship between the exclusivity clause and the weak
         market share of HB’s competitors, and the other possible factors, unspecified, moreover, by HB, which might explain the small
         size of that market share.
      
In actual fact, in making those assertions, HB is seeking to call into question the assessment of the facts by the Court of
         First Instance.
      
It follows that the second part of the first ground of appeal relied on by HB in support of its appeal is manifestly inadmissible
         and, accordingly, that that ground must be rejected in its entirety.
      
 The second ground of appeal, alleging infringement of Article 85(3) of the Treaty 
 Arguments of the parties 
HB argues that the Court of First Instance erred in law in the application of the first condition laid down by Article 85(3)
         of the Treaty, by wrongly applying the burden of proof.
      
It considers that it has demonstrated that the exclusivity clause confers an advantage on retailers, in the form of wider
         geographical availability of impulse ice cream, and that that advantage would no longer be realised to the same extent if
         the clause were to be prohibited. 
      
HB argues that it is for the Commission in such a case to prove that the objective benefit of the distribution agreements
         is outweighed by their negative effects on competition and that the Commission may rely only on proof that is sufficiently
         precise and coherent.
      
HB contests in particular the Commission’s finding that, even if the exclusivity clause were to be prohibited, it is unlikely
         that, save in a small number of cases, that company would cease to provide freezer cabinets to its customers. HB submits that
         the judgment under appeal is also inadequately reasoned in that regard.
      
The Commission argues that this ground is tantamount to challenging an assessment of the facts by the Court of First Instance,
         namely the manner in which HB would conduct itself if the exclusivity clause were to be prohibited, and that it must accordingly
         be held to be inadmissible. 
      
The Commission submits that the plea is also unfounded. It is for the undertaking which seeks to benefit from an exemption
         under Article 85(3) of the Treaty to show that all of the conditions laid down by that provision have been satisfied and that
         it is not enough to find that certain advantages exist for an exemption to be granted, since case‑law requires it to be demonstrated
         that the advantages conferred by the agreement outweigh the disadvantages. It refers in that regard to Consten and Grundig v Commission. According to the Commission, HB was therefore obliged to show that the restrictions imposed by the distribution agreements
         were a prerequisite of the benefits obtained and that those benefits outweighed the disadvantages in terms of competition.
         The Commission considers that HB has failed to discharge the burden of proof in that regard. 
      
The Commission also refers to recitals to of the contested decision, which contain an analysis of the various cumulative
         conditions laid down by Article 85(3) of the Treaty, and notes that HB has not challenged the finding that the distribution
         agreements do not allow consumers a fair share of the benefits arising under them. 
      
Mars and Richmond essentially put forward arguments similar to those of the Commission.
      
 Findings of the Court
As the Court of First Instance rightly pointed out in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, where an exemption is being
         applied for under Article 85(3) of the Treaty, it is for the undertakings concerned in the first place to present to the Commission
         the evidence intended to establish that the agreement in question fulfils the conditions laid down by that provision (see,
         inter alia, Joined Cases 43/and 63/VBVB and VBBB v Commission [1984] ECR 19, paragraph 52).
      
The onus was therefore on HB to prove that the exclusivity clause satisfied the cumulative conditions laid down by Article
         85(3) of the Treaty. As regards the first of those conditions, HB was required in particular to establish that the exclusivity
         clause contributed to improving the production or distribution of the goods in question, so that, were restrictions to be
         imposed on the possibility of implementing that clause, such an improvement could no longer be realised.
      
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance recognised that the wide availability in outlets
         of freezer cabinets intended for the sale of impulse ice creams, covering the entire geographic market and consisting mainly
         of HB’s cabinets, could be considered an objective advantage in the distribution of those products.  However, the Court of
         First Instance also held that, if the power to impose an exclusivity clause were to be restricted, it is unlikely that HB
         would definitely cease to supply freezer cabinets to retailers, except in a small number of cases. The Court of First Instance
         observed in particular that HB had not shown that the Commission committed a manifest error in taking the view that business
         reality for a company such as HB, which wishes to maintain its position on the relevant market, is to be present in the maximum
         number of outlets possible. It also observed that, contrary to what HB contends, the Commission did not merely assume continuity
         of provision by HB of freezer cabinets on the market, but carried out a prospective analysis of the operation of the market
         after the adoption of the contested decision. 
      
It is therefore apparent from the judgment under appeal that the Commission set out in detail why the exclusivity clause did
         not contribute to improving the production or distribution of impulse ice creams and that HB has failed to show that the first
         condition laid down by Article 85(3) of the Treaty was satisfied.
      
It follows that the burden of proof was not wrongly applied by the Court of First Instance and that the ground of appeal alleging
         the incorrect application of Article 85(3) of the Treaty is manifestly unfounded.
      
 The third ground of appeal, alleging infringement of Article of the Treaty 
 Arguments of the parties
HB contends that the reasoning of the Court of First Instance is contradictory in that it recognises that the object of the
         exclusivity clause is not to restrict competition (paragraph of the judgment under appeal), that it constitutes a standard
         practice on the relevant market (paragraph of the judgment under appeal) and that it was adopted at the retailers’ request
         (paragraph of the judgment), but then goes on to hold that there has been an abuse of a dominant position within the meaning
         of Article of the Treaty. HB also maintains that the Court of First Instance failed to give adequate reasons for reaching
         a different conclusion from that of the High Court, which accepted that the exclusivity clause had a commercial justification.
         
      
HB also argues that the Court of First Instance erred in law in two respects in applying Article of the Treaty and that
         its analysis is, as a result, also inadequately reasoned.
      
First, HB considers that the Court of First Instance does not explain the reasons underlying its finding that the exclusivity
         clause distorts retailer choice and that that part of the reasoning of the Court of First Instance is ‘derivative’ of its
         findings in relation to Article 85(1) of the Treaty. HB contends that the exclusivity clause constitutes a normal business
         practice, which is not, per se, either restrictive of competition or abusive and was effectively challenged by the Court of First Instance only on the basis
         of its alleged effects of foreclosure of the relevant market. It follows that it is only Article of the Treaty, and not
         Article thereof, which should be the relevant basis for review.
      
HB adds that, inasmuch as the supply of a freezer cabinet creates an opportunity for the sale of impulse ice creams which
         would not exist in the absence of such a supply, it is wrong to conclude that that practice constitutes an abuse.
      
HB takes the view that the evidence submitted to the Court of First Instance did not warrant the inference that the distribution
         agreements prevented retailers from exercising their freedom of choice so as to stifle demand for competing brands.
      
It submits that the judgment under appeal is contradictory in that, in paragraph 108, the Court of First Instance held that
         the fact that 40% of sales outlets are affected by the distribution agreements is not a sufficient basis for finding that
         competition is distorted, whereas that Court held in paragraph of the judgment that HB had in fact distorted competition
         in breach of its special responsibility by tying 40% of the sales outlets. 
      
Secondly, HB maintains that the Court of First Instance erred in law in holding that the scope of the Bronner judgment is confined to cases of essential facilities. It essentially argues that, while the effect of that judgment is that
         it is only where a distribution system may be considered an essential facility that the owner may be compelled to allow third
         parties to have access to it, the judgment also means that, where such a system is not an essential facility, the duty on
         the owner to facilitate competition by allowing third parties to have access to the system should be less onerous. HB considers
         that the Commission therefore cannot impose on the company, whose stock of freezer cabinets is acknowledged not to constitute
         an essential facility, a duty to promote competition and to facilitate access by third parties that is at least commensurate
         to that imposed on the owners of essential facilities, by allowing its competitors to have access to a significant proportion
         of its stock of freezer cabinets.
      
HB also contends that the Court of First Instance erred in law in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, when it held
         that the implementation of the contested decision would not require that company to transfer assets or to enter into contracts
         with persons with whom it has not chosen to contract, because it is required to make assets, that is to say spaces for freezer
         cabinets, available to competitors which it has not selected.
      
HB also argues that the contested decision is vitiated by a failure to state adequate reasons in that regard.
      
The Commission replies that those arguments are partly unfounded and partly inadmissible.
      
It states first of all that the role of the Court of First Instance is to review the lawfulness of the contested decision
         in the light of the reasons contained in it and the arguments of the parties and that it is not bound by the judgment of a
         national court.
      
The Commission next argues that HB does not explain why the Court of First Instance erred in holding that the analysis of
         Article of the Treaty in the contested decision did not merely ‘recycle’ the analysis of Article 85.
      
The Commission lastly adds that, inasmuch as that argument seeks to establish that common business practices which induce
         foreclosure of a substantial part of the relevant market, when entered into by a dominant undertaking, can be analysed only
         under Article of the Treaty, to the exclusion of Article 86, it represents a new plea which is accordingly both inadmissible
         and manifestly unfounded.
      
The Commission contends that HB’s arguments that, first, the provision of freezer cabinets creates sales opportunities and,
         secondly, the reasoning of the Court of First Instance is contradictory, are inadmissible in that they involve a review of
         the economic appraisal of the facts.
      
It also states that the Court of First Instance did not hold that the practices of a dominant undertaking which result in
         the application of the exclusivity clause to 40% of sales outlets would not constitute, per se, an abuse, but that it is clearly abusive for such an undertaking to seek to establish exclusivity for its products in such
         a large proportion of available outlets, representing a similar proportion of the total sales of those products. In those
         circumstances, HB’s argument is wholly unfounded.
      
The Commission is of the view that HB’s argument relating to ‘essential facilities’ is manifestly unfounded in so far as the
         ice creams produced by that company are distributed through independent retailers to whom HB supplies freezer cabinets in
         exchange for payment. In that context, the Commission states that it is not a case of HB retaining assets for its own use
         and that the abuse arises from the latter’s attempt to control the use to which the freezers are put by those independent
         retailers. It adds that the Court of First Instance was right to point out that the contested decision does not require HB
         to transfer any assets or to enter into contracts with persons whom it has not selected.
      
According to the Commission, Article of the Treaty prohibits a practice which arises from the manner in which goods or
         services are marketed by an undertaking in a dominant position, where the practice deprives the purchaser, or restricts his
         possible choice, of sources of supply and has the effect of hindering the maintenance of the degree of competition still existing
         in the market or the growth of that competition or where there is a risk that competitors will be eliminated. It refers in
         that regard in particular to Case 85/Hoffmann-La Roche v Commission [1979] ECR and to Case C-333/P Tetra Pak v Commission [1996] ECR I‑5951, paragraph 44.
      
Mars notes that the Court of First Instance recognised in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, as the Commission had
         also found, that the Unilever Group, which is HB’s parent company, regarded the maintenance of the exclusivity clause for
         the use of the freezer cabinets as crucial to HB’s commercial success and that its objective was to restrict competition.
         It refers in that regard to the documents mentioned in recitals to of the contested decision, which are cited by the
         Court of First Instance in paragraph of the judgment under appeal.
      
Mars also maintains that the fact that a practice is standard on the market or that the exclusivity clause is entered into
         at the request of retailers does not mean that no abuse exists within the meaning of Article of the Treaty. It refers in
         that regard to Hoffmann-La Roche v Commission, paragraph 89, as well as to Case C-62/AKZO v Commission [1991] ECR I‑3359, paragraph 149, and Case C-310/P BPB Industries and British Gypsum v Commission [1995] ECR I‑865.
      
Mars argues that the Court of First Instance provided sufficient reasons in support of its finding that the exclusivity clause
         distorts retailer choice and refers in particular to paragraphs 92, and of the judgment under appeal in that regard.
         It also argues that there can be no contradiction between the analysis by the Court of First Instance under Article of
         the Treaty and paragraph of the judgment, since that paragraph forms part of the self-standing and independent analysis
         of Article of the Treaty.
      
Mars and Richmond contend that Bronner is irrelevant in the present case, as the latter does not involve third party access to ‘essential facilities’. Richmond also
         points out that the abuse established in the contested decision is different, because it relates to the practices carried
         out by HB in order to induce retailers to use its freezer cabinets and not to the fact that retailers who have not subscribed
         to the exclusivity clause cannot use those cabinets. Mars and Richmond also argue that the decision does not require HB to
         transfer assets or to enter into contracts with persons with whom that company would not have chosen to contract. Richmond
         adds that the Commission has the power to order positive action to bring an infringement to an end.
      
 Findings of the Court
It must be pointed out that the Community Courts cannot be bound by a finding of a national court that an exclusivity clause
         is compatible with Community law.
      
The concept of abuse of a dominant position is an objective concept relating to the behaviour of an undertaking in a dominant
         position which is such as to influence the structure of a market where, as a result of the very presence of the undertaking
         in question, the degree of competition is already weakened and which, through recourse to methods different from those which
         condition normal competition in products or services on the basis of the transactions of economic operators, has the effect
         of hindering the maintenance of the degree of competition still existing in the market or the growth of that competition (Hoffmann-La Roche v Commission, paragraph 91). In that regard, the Court has held that the fact that agreements were entered into at the request of the
         contracting partners of the undertaking in a dominant position does not mean that there is not an abuse for the purposes of
         Article of the Treaty (see, inter alia, Hoffmann-La Roche v Commission, paragraph 89).
      
It must also be made clear that the Court of First Instance did not hold in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that
         the object of the exclusivity clause is not to restrict competition on the relevant market, but, in fact, that that clause
         is not, ‘in formal terms’, an exclusive purchasing obligation having such an object. 
      
HB’s contention that the judgment under appeal is vitiated by a contradiction must accordingly be rejected as manifestly unfounded.
      
Furthermore, it is settled case-law that an appeal must indicate precisely the contested elements of the judgment which the
         appellant seeks to have set aside, and also the legal arguments specifically advanced in support of the appeal (see, inter
         alia, order of September in Case C-19/P San Marco v Commission [1996] ECR I-4435, paragraph 37).
      
In that regard, HB’s argument that the finding by the Court of First Instance that the distribution agreements distort retailer
         choice is, in truth, ‘derivative’ of the findings of that Court in relation to Article 85(1) of the Treaty, with the result
         that it is devoid of any independent meaning or purpose, does not satisfy the conditions referred to in the preceding paragraph.
         In particular, such an argument does not make it clear whether HB wishes to challenge an inadequacy of reasoning in the judgment
         under appeal, the ‘recycling’ of the analysis of Article of the Treaty or the very principle of the application of Article
         to the present case. Nor, as regards the last two of these possibilities, does HB put forward legal arguments specifically
         advanced in support of the appeal.
      
That argument of HB must accordingly be held to be manifestly inadmissible. 
      
Furthermore, HB’s argument that the exclusivity clause does not constitute an abuse for the purposes of Article of the
         Treaty because it creates an opportunity for the sale of ice creams, which would otherwise not exist, is tantamount to requesting
         the Court to reassess the facts and must accordingly be held to be manifestly inadmissible.
      
Furthermore, there is no contradiction between paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, since they involve separate
         analyses, relating to Articles and of the Treaty respectively. In addition, the analysis of the Court of First Instance
         set out in paragraph of the judgment under appeal must be read in its context, particularly in conjunction with paragraphs
         and of the judgment, which emphasise that an undertaking in a dominant position has a special responsibility and that
         competition is already restricted on the relevant market by reason of that dominant position. It follows that this argument
         of HB is also manifestly unfounded. 
      
Lastly, HB’s contention that the legal principles laid down in Bronner were wrongly applied is manifestly unfounded, inasmuch as, in any event, as the Court of First Instance held in paragraph
         of the judgment under appeal, the contested decision does not oblige HB to transfer an asset or to enter into agreements
         with persons with whom it has not chosen to contract. As the Commission observes, unlike the situation in Bronner, the freezer cabinets are not assets which HB retains for its own use, but their enjoyment is voluntarily transferred to
         independent undertakings which pay for the right to use them. Thus, HB’s contention that the contested decision imposes a
         duty on it which is at least as onerous as that which applies to the owner of an essential facility is manifestly unfounded.
         Nor is it the case that the Court of First Instance based its analysis solely on the finding that no essential facility was
         involved or that it failed to provide adequate reasons in the judgment under appeal in that regard. 
      
It follows that the third ground of appeal is in part manifestly inadmissible and in part manifestly unfounded and must be
         rejected.
      
 The fourth ground of appeal, alleging infringement of essential procedural requirements 
 Arguments of the parties 
HB argues first of all that the Court of First Instance infringed Article 48(1) of its Rules of Procedure and the right to
         a fair hearing by accepting that evidence relating to Richmond’s experience in the United Kingdom be presented by that company
         at the hearing, without HB having the opportunity to comment on it and, moreover, without Richmond providing any explanation
         as to the reasons for its late submission of that evidence.
      
HB next states that the fact that the Court of First Instance based its findings on that company’s practice of charging a
         rental for freezer cabinets supplied to retailers in Northern Ireland infringes its right to a fair hearing, inasmuch as that
         argument had until then been of no particular importance either in the contested decision or in the Commission’s written pleading
         before the Court of First Instance. 
      
HB lastly submits that the Court of First Instance wrongly applied the burden of proof in its analysis of the conditions for
         the application of Article 85(3) of the Treaty.
      
With respect to the evidence presented by Richmond, the Commission submits that Article 48(1) of the Rules of Procedure of
         the Court of First Instance does not apply to evidence introduced by interveners. It contends that Article 116(6) of those
         Rules, which permits interveners to submit purely oral observations, would be deprived of its substance if interveners were
         unable to submit evidence as part of such observations. 
      
The Commission argues that, in any event, Article 48(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance merely requires
         that reasons be given for any delay in presenting evidence and does not impose a general prohibition on new evidence being
         introduced. Therefore, even if that provision were to apply to interveners, it would not give rise to any irregularity in
         the present case, since the evidence was presented by an intervener which was addressing the Court of First Instance for the
         first time.
      
The Commission and Mars point out that HB had the opportunity at the hearing to reply to the evidence presented by Richmond
         and that, in any event, the finding by the Court of First Instance that a significant number of retailers would be prepared
         to stock ice creams of a brand other than HB in the same freezer cabinet if they were free to do so, is adequately supported
         by the other evidence presented to the Court of First Instance.
      
As regards the fact that HB charges a rental for the supply of freezer cabinets to retailers in Northern Ireland, the Commission
         argues, first, that HB did not, at any stage in the proceedings, contest the information relating to that practice set out
         in recital of the contested decision. The Commission points out that recital of the contested decision also refers
         to the possibility of HB’s requiring retailers in Ireland to pay rental and that the general issue of the possibility of charging
         for freezer use was fully debated between the parties. It also maintains that there is no obligation on the Court of First
         Instance to intimate in advance the conclusion it is likely to reach or the specific elements of the case file on which it
         will rely.
      
Mars takes the view that HB’s practice of charging rental to retailers in Northern Ireland has no effect on the substance
         of the judgment under appeal, since the contested decision was fully and properly reasoned in that regard. It also maintains
         that HB has no basis for arguing that the rules relating to the burden of proof were infringed by the Court of First Instance
         in relation to Article 85(3) of the Treaty.
      
Richmond submits that the evidence relating to its position on the United Kingdom market cannot be regarded as new evidence
         and was presented only in order to illustrate and to reinforce the argument that a significant number of retailers wish, when
         they are able, to stock a second brand of ice cream in the same freezer cabinet. It states that it is for the Court of First
         Instance to assess all the evidence submitted to it, save where that evidence has been fundamentally misconstrued, and cites
         in that regard Case C-7/P Deere v Commission [1998] ECR I‑3111, paragraph 118. It considers that Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance permits
         interveners to support their arguments, both in the written and the oral procedure, with evidence and that HB has not challenged
         the evidence presented by Richmond at the hearing.
      
 Findings of the Court
In accordance with the settled case-law of the Court of Justice, where one of the grounds adopted by the Court of First Instance
         is sufficient to sustain the operative part of its judgment, any defects that might vitiate other grounds given in the judgment
         concerned have, in any event, no bearing on that operative part and, accordingly, a plea relying on such defects is ineffective
         and must be dismissed (see, inter alia, Case C‑496/P Commission v CAS Succhi di Frutta [2004] ECR I-3801, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In the judgment under appeal, the argument based on Richmond’s experience in the United Kingdom constitutes only one argument
         of many intended to substantiate the finding by the Court of First Instance that a significant number of retailers stock ice
         creams of brands other than HB in the same freezer cabinet when they are free to do so.
      
Adequate support for that statement is provided by the other factual evidence on which the Court of First Instance relied
         in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal.
      
HB’s argument in that regard must accordingly be rejected as ineffective.
      
Moreover, as the Commission points out, the fact that HB charges retailers in Northern Ireland rent for the use of freezer
         cabinets had already been referred to in recital of the contested decision and the general question of whether that company
         had the possibility of requiring retailers using its cabinets to pay rent was the subject of a wide‑ranging debate between
         the parties. Furthermore, as is stated in paragraph of this order, the Court of First Instance did not rely solely on the
         practice followed by HB in Northern Ireland in order to establish that that company had the possibility of charging rent to
         retailers using one of its freezers on the relevant market, but also held in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that
         HB had not established to the requisite legal standard that it would be impractical to impose a separate rental in respect
         of the supply of freezers in Ireland, a point which HB does not contest. 
      
HB’s argument in that regard must accordingly be rejected as manifestly unfounded.
      
Lastly, since, in paragraph of this order, the Court rejected HB’s argument that the burden of proof had been reversed
         by the Court of First Instance in relation to Article 85(3) of the Treaty, there is no need to give that argument further
         consideration.
      
The fourth ground of appeal must therefore be rejected as manifestly unfounded.
      
Since none of the grounds relied on by HB in support of its appeal can succeed, the appeal must be dismissed.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, which applies to appeal proceedings by virtue of Article thereof, the unsuccessful
         party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission,
         Mars and Richmond have applied for HB to pay the costs and the latter has been unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the
         costs of these proceedings. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (Sixth Chamber) hereby orders:
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
2.      Unilever Bestfoods (Ireland) Ltd shall pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 