
Case C-242/Minister voor Vreemdelingenzaken en Integratie
v
T. Sahin
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Raad van State)
(EEC-Turkey Association Agreement – Freedom of movement for workers – Introduction of administrative charges for obtaining a residence permit in the host Member State – Infringement of the standstill clause in Article of Decision No 1/of the Association Council)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        International agreements – EEC-Turkey Association Agreement – Freedom of movement for persons – Workers – Standstill rule
            in Article of Decision No 1/of the Association Council – Conditions under which applicable
(Decision No 1/of the EEC-Turkey Association Council, Arts 6(1) and 13)
2.        International agreements – EEC-Turkey Association Agreement – Freedom of movement for persons – Workers – Standstill rule
            in Article of Decision No 1/of the Association Council – Scope
(Decision No 1/of the EEC-Turkey Association Council, Art. 13)
1.        Article of Decision No 1/of the EEC-Turkey Association Council, which provides that the contracting parties may not
         introduce new restrictions on the freedom of movement for workers, is not subject to the condition that the Turkish national
         concerned should satisfy the requirements of Article 6(1) of that decision. Further, the scope of Article is not restricted
         to Turkish migrants who are in paid employment.
      
Those two provisions of Decision No 1/cover different situations, since Article governs the conditions in which actual
         employment permits the gradual integration of the person concerned in the host Member State, while Article concerns the
         national measures relating to access to employment, while including within its scope family members whose admission into the
         territory of a Member State does not depend on actual employment. Article is not intended to protect Turkish nationals
         already integrated into a Member State’s labour force, but is intended to apply precisely to Turkish nationals who do not
         yet qualify for the rights in relation to employment and, accordingly, residence under Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80.
      
On the other hand, it is a requirement of Article that the Turkish national should be legally resident or employed in the
         host Member State, which means that the Turkish worker or member of his family must have complied with the rules of the host
         Member State as to entry, residence and, where appropriate, employment, with the result that he is lawfully present in the
         territory of that State. Accordingly that article is of no assistance to a Turkish national whose position is not lawful.
         
      
(see paras 50-51, 53)
2.        Article of Decision No 1/of the EEC-Turkey Association Council must be interpreted as precluding the introduction, from
         the entry into force of that decision in the Member State concerned, of national legislation which makes the granting of a
         residence permit or an extension of the period of validity thereof conditional on payment of administrative charges, where
         the amount of those charges payable by Turkish nationals is disproportionate as compared with the amount required from Community
         nationals.
      
The standstill clause enacted in Article prohibits generally the introduction of any new measure having the object or effect
         of making the exercise by a Turkish national in its territory of the freedom of movement for workers subject to more restrictive
         conditions than those which applied at the time when Decision No 1/entered into force with regard to the Member State concerned.
         More specifically, that article prohibits the introduction, as from the date of entry into force of the legal act of which
         that provision forms part in the host Member State, of any new restrictions on the exercise of freedom of movement for workers,
         including those relating to the substantive and/or procedural conditions governing the first admission to the territory of
         the Member State concerned of Turkish nationals intending to make use of that economic freedom.
      
In this connection, while the adoption of new rules which apply in the same way both to Turkish nationals and to Community
         nationals is not inconsistent with any of the standstill clauses laid down in the fields covered by the EEC-Turkey Association,
         for the Republic of Turkey may not receive more favourable treatment than that which Member States grant to one another pursuant
         to the EC Treaty, nevertheless such rules must not amount to creating a restriction within the meaning of Article of Decision
         No 1/80. Read in conjunction with Article of the Additional Protocol to the EEC-Turkey Association Agreement, Article implies that although a Turkish national to whom those provisions apply must certainly not be placed in a position more advantageous
         than that of Community nationals, he cannot on the other hand be subjected to new obligations which are disproportionate as
         compared with those established for Community nationals. Accordingly, national legislation constitutes a restriction prohibited
         by Article of Decision No 1/to the extent that, before an application for the grant of a residence permit or extension
         thereof can be considered, the legislation requires payment, by Turkish nationals to whom Article applies, of administrative
         charges of an amount which is significantly higher than that demanded in similar circumstances from Community nationals and
         where no relevant argument capable of justifying such a significant difference has been advanced. 
      
(see paras 63-65, 67, 71-75, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
September (*)
      
(EEC‑Turkey Association Agreement – Freedom of movement for workers – Introduction of administrative charges for obtaining a residence permit in the host Member State – Infringement of the standstill clause in Article of Decision No 1/of the Association Council)
In Case C‑242/06,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Raad van State (Netherlands), made by decision of May
         2006, received at the Court on May 2006, in the proceedings
      
Minister voor Vreemdelingenzaken en Integratie
v
T. Sahin,
      
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann, President of the Chamber, M. Ilešič, A. Tizzano, E. Levits and J.-J. Kasel (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro,
Registrar: C. Strömholm, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on December 2008,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Mr Sahin, by D. Schaap, advocaat,
–        the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster, C. Wissels and M. de Mol, acting as Agents,
–        the German Government, by C. Schulze-Bahr, M. Lumma and J. Möller, acting as Agents,
–        the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and by W. Ferrante, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Cypriot Government, by D. Lysandrou, acting as Agent,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by T. Ward, Barrister,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by S. Boelaert and M. van Beek, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article of Decision No 1/of the Association Council
         of September on the development of the Association (‘Decision No 1/80’). The Association Council was set up by the
         Agreement establishing an Association between the European Economic Community and Turkey, signed at Ankara on September
         by the Republic of Turkey and by the Member States of the EEC and the Community and concluded, approved and confirmed
         on behalf of the Community by Council Decision 64/732/EEC of December (OJ C 113, p. 1, the ‘Association Agreement’).
      
The reference was made in proceedings brought by Mr Sahin against the Minister voor Vreemdelingenzaken en Integratie (Minister
         for Immigration and Integration, the ‘Minister’) in relation to the requirement imposed on Turkish nationals to pay administrative
         charges before their applications for a residence permit or for an extension of the period of validity of such a permit would
         be considered.
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
 The EEC-Turkey Association 
–       The Association Agreement
According to Article 2(1) of the Association Agreement, the aim of that agreement is to promote the continuous and balanced
         strengthening of trade and economic relations between the Contracting Parties which includes, in relation to the workforce,
         the progressive securing of freedom of movement for workers (Article of the Association Agreement), and the abolition of
         restrictions on freedom of establishment (Article of that agreement) and on freedom to provide services (Article of
         that agreement), with a view to improving the standard of living of the Turkish people and facilitating the accession of Turkey
         to the Community at a later date (fourth recital in the preamble to and Article of that agreement).
      
To that end, the Association Agreement involves a preparatory stage, enabling the Republic of Turkey to strengthen its economy
         with aid from the Community (Article of that agreement), a transitional stage covering the progressive establishment of
         a customs union and the alignment of economic policies (Article of that agreement) and a final stage based on the customs
         union and entailing closer coordination of the economic policies of the Contracting Parties (Article of that agreement).
      
Article of the Association Agreement is worded as follows:
      
‘To ensure the implementation and progressive development of the Association, the Contracting Parties shall meet in a Council
         of Association which shall act within the powers conferred on it by this Agreement.’ 
      
Article of the Association Agreement, in Title II headed ‘Implementation of the transitional stage’ provides:
      
‘In order to attain the objectives set out in Article 4, the Council of Association shall, before the beginning of the transitional
         stage and in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article of the provisional Protocol, determine the conditions, rules
         and timetables for the implementation of the provisions relating to the fields covered by the Treaty establishing the Community
         which must be considered; this shall apply in particular to such of those fields as are mentioned under this Title and to
         any protective clause which may prove appropriate.’ 
      
Articles to of the Association Agreement also appear in Title II thereof, under Chapter headed ‘Other economic provisions’.
         
      
Article provides:
      
‘The Contracting Parties agree to be guided by Articles [EC], [EC] and [EC] for the purpose of progressively securing
         freedom of movement for workers between them.’ 
      
Article provides:
      
‘The Contracting Parties agree to be guided by Articles [EC] to [EC] and [EC] for the purpose of abolishing restrictions
         on freedom of establishment between them.’ 
      
Article states:
      
‘The Contracting Parties agree to be guided by Articles [EC], [EC] and [EC] to [EC] for the purpose of abolishing
         restrictions on freedom to provide services between them.’ 
      
Article 22(1) of the Association Agreement provides as follows:
      
‘In order to attain the objectives of this Agreement, the Council of Association shall have the power to take decisions in
         the cases provided for therein. Each of the parties shall take the measures necessary to implement the decisions taken. ...’
      
–       The Additional Protocol 
The Additional Protocol, signed on November at Brussels and concluded, approved and confirmed on behalf of the Community
         by Council Regulation (EEC) No 2760/of December (OJ L 361, p. 60) (‘the Additional Protocol’) which, according
         to Article thereof, forms an integral part of the Association Agreement, lays down, in Article 1, the conditions, arrangements
         and timetables for implementing the transitional stage referred to in Article of that agreement.
      
The Additional Protocol includes Title II, headed ‘Movement of persons and services’, Chapter I of which concerns ‘[w]orkers’
         and Chapter II of which concerns ‘[r]ight of establishment, services and transport’.
      
Article of the Additional Protocol, which is included in Chapter I, provides that freedom of movement for workers between
         Member States of the Community and Turkey is to be secured by progressive stages in accordance with the principles set out
         in Article of the Association Agreement between the end of the 12th and the 22nd year after the entry into force of that
         agreement and that the Council of Association is to decide on the rules necessary to that end.
      
Article 41(1) of the Additional Protocol, which is in Chapter II of Title II, is worded as follows:
      
‘The Contracting Parties shall refrain from introducing between themselves any new restrictions on the freedom of establishment
         and the freedom to provide services.’
      
Article of the Additional Protocol is worded as follows:
      
‘In the fields covered by this Protocol Turkey shall not receive more favourable treatment than that which Member States grant
         to one another pursuant to the Treaty establishing the Community.’
      
–       Decision No 1/On September the Association Council, which was set up by the Association Agreement and consists, on the one hand,
         of members of the Governments of the Member States, of the Council of the European Union and of the Commission of the European
         Communities and, on the other hand, of members of the Turkish Government, adopted Decision No 1/80.
      
Article of Decision No 1/is in Chapter II, ‘Social provisions’, Section 1, concerning ‘Questions relating to employment
         and the free movement of workers’. Paragraph of that article is worded as follows:
      
‘Subject to Article on free access to employment for members of his family, a Turkish worker duly registered as belonging
         to the labour force of a Member State:
      
–        shall be entitled in that Member State, after one year’s legal employment, to the renewal of his permit to work for the same
         employer, if a job is available;
      
–        shall be entitled in that Member State, after three years of legal employment and subject to the priority to be given to workers
         of Member States of the Community, to respond to another offer of employment, with an employer of his choice, made under normal
         conditions and registered with the employment services of that State, for the same occupation;
      
–        shall enjoy free access in that Member State to any paid employment of his choice, after four years of legal employment.’
         
      
Article of Decision No 1/80, which is also part of Section 1, provides:
      
‘The Member States of the Community and Turkey may not introduce new restrictions on the conditions of access to employment
         applicable to workers and members of their families legally resident and employed in their respective territories.’ 
      
Article of Decision No 1/provides that the decision entered into force on July 1980. However, under Article of
         that decision, the provisions of Section of Chapter II thereof are applicable from December 1980.
      
 Directive 68/360/EEC
Article 9(1) of Council Directive 68/360/EEC of October on the abolition of restrictions on movement and residence
         within the Community for workers of Member States and their families (OJ, English Special Edition (II) p. 485), stated:
      
‘The residence documents granted to nationals of a Member State of the EEC … shall be issued and renewed free of charge or
         on payment of an amount not exceeding the dues and taxes charged for the issue of identity cards to nationals.’ 
      
Directive 68/was repealed, with effect from April 2006, by Directive 2004/38/EC of the European Parliament and of the
         Council of April on the right of citizens of the Union and their family members to move and reside freely within the
         territory of the Member States, amending Regulation (EEC) No 1612/and repealing Directives 64/221/EEC, 68/360/EEC, 72/194/EEC,
         73/148/EEC, 75/34/EEC, 75/35/EEC, 90/364/EEC, 90/365/EEC and 93/96/EEC (OJ L 158, p. 77, and corrigenda OJ L 229,
         p. 35, OJ L 197, p. 34, and OJ L 204, p. 28).
      
 Directive 2004/Under Article of Directive 2004/38, Member States may, for periods of residence longer than three months, require citizens
         of the European Union to register with the relevant authorities of the place of residence, that procedure being accomplished
         by the issue of a registration certificate to that effect. Further, under Article of that directive, Member States may provide
         that family members of European Union citizens who are not Community nationals are required to hold a residence card where
         the planned period of residence is for more than three months. Failure to comply with the requirement to apply for a residence
         card may make the person concerned liable to proportionate and non-discriminatory sanctions. Under Article 11(1) of that directive,
         the residence card is to be valid for five years from the date of issue or for the envisaged period of residence of the Union
         citizen, if this period is less than five years.
      
Article of Directive 2004/38, headed ‘General provisions concerning residence documents’, is worded as follows:
      
‘1.      Possession of a registration certificate as referred to in Article 8, of a document certifying permanent residence, of a certificate
         attesting submission of an application for a family member residence card, of a residence card or of a permanent residence
         card, may under no circumstances be made a precondition for the exercise of a right or the completion of an administrative
         formality, as entitlement to rights may be attested by any other means of proof.
      
2.      All documents mentioned in paragraph shall be issued free of charge or for a charge not exceeding that imposed on nationals
         for the issuing of similar documents.’ 
      
 National legislation
The order for reference states that, on December 1980, when the provisions on employment and freedom of movement for workers
         laid down by Decision No 1/– including Article of that decision – entered into force in the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
         that Member State did not require the payment of administrative charges when an application for a residence permit was made
         and such charges were not levied either when an application to extend the period of validity of such a permit was made.
      
Only since the entry into force, on April 2001, of the Law of November providing for a comprehensive review of the
         Law on Foreign Nationals (Wet tot algehele herziening van de Vreemdelingenwet; Stb. 2000, No 495; the ‘Vw 2000’); the Decree
         on Foreign Nationals (Vreemdelingenbesluit 2000, Stb. 2000, No 497), and the Foreign Nationals Order (Voorschrift Vreemdelingen),
         have foreign nationals been required to pay administrative charges for the processing of an application for a residence permit.
      
Further, pursuant to an amendment of the Foreign Nationals Order, applicable as from May 2002, provision was also made for
         the levying of such administrative charges when applications to extend the period of validity of residence permits were made.
         At that time, the amount of the charges levied was increased.
      
In accordance with Article 24(2) of the Vw 2000, the effect of non‑payment within the period allowed of the charges pertaining
         to the application for a residence permit is that the application may not be considered by the competent authority. Moreover,
         charges paid are not to be refunded if the application is rejected.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
The decision for reference states that Mr Sahin is a Turkish national who obtained, on July 2000, a temporary residence
         authorisation which permitted him to enter the Netherlands on September 2000.
      
On October 2000, while he was legally resident in the Netherlands, he submitted an application for a residence permit in
         order to be able to live with his Dutch wife.
      
On December 2000, the Minister granted him such a residence permit, which was valid until October 2001. That permit contained
         no restrictions in relation to taking employment.
      
On an application from Mr Sahin, on September the Minister extended the validity of that residence permit until October 2002.
      
However, only on February did Mr Sahin apply for a further extension of the validity period of that permit.
      
On April the Minister, pursuant to the Netherlands legislation, refused to consider that application, on the ground
         that Mr Sahin had not paid the relevant administrative charges, which amounted to EUR 169.
      
After Mr Sahin had paid that sum, albeit outside the period allowed for that purpose, on May he filed a complaint
         against the Minister’s decision of April 2003, a complaint which the Minister rejected as unfounded on April 2004.
      
On May Mr Sahin brought an action challenging that rejection before the Rechtbank (District Court) (Netherlands) ’s-Gravenhage
         on the basis of Article of Decision No 1/80. That court upheld the action by judgment of August 2004, annulled the Minister’s
         decision of April and instructed the Minister to decide the matter anew.
      
On September 2004, the Minister again rejected Mr Sahin’s complaint as unfounded.
      
By judgment of May 2005, the Rechtbank ’s-Gravenhage upheld the action brought by Mr Sahin on October against the
         Minister’s second decision of rejection, and held that the requirement imposed on Mr Sahin to pay administrative charges when
         making an application to extend the period of validity of his Netherlands residence permit was contrary to Article of Decision
         No 1/80.
      
In support of the Minister’s appeal against that judgment before the Raad van State (Council of State) (Netherlands), the
         Minister claimed that the court of first instance erred in holding that Mr Sahin’s situation fell within the scope of Article
         13.
      
According to the Raad van State, Mr Sahin did not pay in good time the administrative charges which were payable, with the
         result that, under national law, the Minister was obliged not to consider Mr Sahin’s application.
      
It is common ground that, from December until October 2002, Mr Sahin was legally resident in the Netherlands, within
         the meaning of the national legislation, since, throughout that period, he was in possession of a valid residence permit.
         He was also entitled, during that period, to take employment in Netherlands territory. Accordingly, from March onwards,
         Mr Sahin held several jobs none of which however lasted more than one year without interruption in the service of the same
         employer, with the result that he cannot rely on the rights laid down in Article of Decision No 1/80.
      
The question therefore arises whether any other provision of the legislation enacted in the context of the EEC-Turkey Association
         precludes the application of the Netherlands legislation relating to the obligation to pay administrative charges in order
         to obtain a residence permit and the Minister’s refusal to consider an application submitted for that purpose if such charges
         are not paid.
      
The referring court observes in that context that only on February 2003, in other words after the validity of his residence
         permit had expired, did Mr Sahin submit an application to extend the permit, with the result that, under national law, he
         was no longer legally resident during the period from October until February and was no longer entitled to
         take paid employment in the Netherlands while that application was pending. Consequently, in the opinion of that court, the
         jobs held by Mr Sahin during that period of time were held illegally from the perspective of Netherlands domestic law.
      
On the other hand, after Mr Sahin submitted his application to extend the validity period of his residence permit, that is,
         after February 2003, Mr Sahin’s residence in the Netherlands was, in accordance with Netherlands law, again to be regarded
         as legal. Furthermore, since that belated application was made within the reasonable period of six months after the period
         of legal residence had ended, it has to be examined in the light of the requirements of national law relating to extending
         the period of residence and not those relating to the initial admission into the Netherlands.
      
In the present case, it is, more particularly, necessary to determine whether a Turkish national in a situation such as that
         described in paragraphs to of this judgment may properly rely on Article of Decision No 1/80. In addition, while
         there is no doubt that the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings must be regarded as ‘new’ within the meaning
         of that article, given that it results in worsening the situation of Turkish nationals as compared with their situation under
         the rules applicable to them when Article entered into force in the Kingdom of the Netherlands, it is also necessary to
         decide whether the constraints which that legislation imposes on Turkish nationals are to be construed as ‘restrictions’ within
         the meaning of Article 13, having regard, inter alia, to the fact that the amount of the charges levied in relation to such
         applications significantly exceeds that imposed on Community nationals and to members of their families.
      
In those circumstances the Raad van State decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court
         of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      (a)   In the light of paragraphs and of the judgment in Joined Cases C‑317/and C‑369/Abatay and Others [2003] ECR I‑12301, is Article of Decision No 1/… to be construed as meaning that an alien, a Turkish national, who
         has complied with the rules for first admission and residence in the country and from December to October was
         legally employed by various employers, but failed to request in due time the extension of the period of validity of his residence
         permit, as a result of which after the expiry of the permit and at the time of the application for its extension, under national
         law, he was neither legally resident nor entitled to work in the country, can rely on that provision?
      
(b)      Is the reply to question 1(a) affected by the fact that an application for extension not lodged by an alien in due time which
         is received within six months of the expiry of the period of validity of the residence permit, although under national law
         this application is treated as an application for the grant of a first residence permit, is examined in the light of the requirements
         laid down for authorisation of continued residence and the alien is allowed to await the decision on the application in the
         country?
      
(2)      (a)   Is the word “restriction” in Article of Decision No 1/to be understood to include the requirement upon an alien, a Turkish
         national, to whom Decision No 1/applies, to pay administrative charges in connection with the processing of an application
         for the extension of the period of validity of a residence permit, failing which payment his application will not be considered,
         in accordance with Article 24(2) of the Vw 2000?
      
(b)      Is the reply to question 2(a) different if the amount of the charges for processing the application does not exceed the costs?
(3)      Must Article of Decision No 1/80, which also serves to implement the Additional Protocol to the [Association Agreement],
         read in conjunction with Article of that Protocol, be interpreted as meaning that the amount of the administrative charges
         (EUR 169.for the alien at the relevant time) for Turkish nationals who fall within the scope of Decision No 1/80, payable
         in connection with the processing of an application for the grant or extension of a residence permit, may not exceed the amount
         of the charge (EUR 30) that can be levied on nationals of the European Community for the processing of an application for
         examination in the light of Community law and the issue of the corresponding residence documents (see Article 9(1) of Directive
         [68/360] and Article 25(2) of Directive [2004/38])?’ 
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 Preliminary remarks
By the reference for a preliminary ruling, the referring court seeks, in essence to know, first, whether a Turkish national
         such as Mr Sahin is a person whose presence in the host Member State is legal and therefore within the scope of Article of Decision No 1/80. Second, that court asks the Court whether the standstill clause laid down in that article precludes legislation
         in that State which provides that a Turkish national is required to pay administrative charges for the consideration of his
         application to obtain a residence permit or an extension of the period of validity thereof, in particular when those charges
         are markedly higher than those required of Community nationals in a comparable situation.
      
In order to give an answer which will help the referring court to resolve the dispute before it, each of those two aspects
         must in turn be examined.
      
 The personal scope of Article of Decision No 1/The referring court asks whether a Turkish national such as Mr Sahin satisfies the requirement in Article of Decision No 1/that he be ‘legally’ resident and employed. The court did find that Mr Sahin had, on the one hand, complied not only with
         the relevant national rules in relation to his initial admission into the Netherlands but with also the rules relating to
         residence until October and, on the other hand, that that Turkish national had been lawfully employed there from the
         perspective of domestic law until the same date. Nevertheless, the referring court asks whether, subsequently, Mr Sahin can
         still legitimately rely on Article when, under national law, the consequence of the fact that his residence permit had
         expired and that he submitted his application to extend that permit outside the prescribed period because the relevant administrative
         charges were paid late was that neither his residence nor his employment were still in compliance with the relevant national
         rules, and when, furthermore, he was not yet able to satisfy the conditions required to qualify for the specific rights in
         relation to employment and residence in the host Member State on the basis of Article 6(1) of that decision.
      
In that regard, it must, first, be recalled that, in paragraphs to of Abatay and Others, the Court held that Article of Decision No 1/is not subject to the condition that the Turkish national concerned satisfy
         the requirements of Article 6(1) of that decision and that the scope of that Article is not restricted to Turkish migrants
         who are in paid employment.
      
Those two provisions of Decision No 1/are aimed at different situations, since Article governs the conditions in which
         actual employment permits the gradual integration of the person concerned in the host Member State, while Article concerns
         the national measures relating to access to employment, while including within its scope family members whose admission into
         the territory of a Member State does not depend on actual employment. The Court concluded, in Abatay and Others, that Article is not intended to protect Turkish nationals already integrated into a Member State’s labour force, but
         is intended to apply precisely to Turkish nationals who do not yet qualify for the rights in relation to employment and, accordingly,
         residence under Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80.
      
That being the case, the fact that Mr Sahin does not satisfy the requirements for the specific rights under Article does
         not mean that he is deprived of the possibility of validly relying on Article of Decision No 1/80.
      
Second, as regards the meaning of ‘legally’ in Article of Decision No 1/80, according to the case-law, this means that
         the Turkish worker or member of his family must have complied with the rules of the host Member State as to entry, residence
         and, where appropriate, employment, with the result that he is lawfully present in the territory of that State (see, inter
         alia, Abatay and Others, paragraph and case-law there cited). Accordingly Article is of no assistance to a Turkish national whose position
         is not lawful (Abatay and Others, paragraph 85).
      
In that regard it is clear from the documents before the Court that Mr Sahin was lawfully allowed to enter and reside in Netherlands
         territory; moreover, the competent Netherlands authorities granted him the unconditional right to take up any employment he
         might choose in that host Member State, and he did in fact avail himself of that right.
      
It is accordingly common ground that Mr Sahin complied with all the relevant national rules in relation to immigration controls
         and employment, from his lawful entry into the Netherlands on September until October 2002, when the validity of
         his residence permit expired. In particular, he was legally present in that Member State when the new domestic legislation
         entered into force, requiring the levying of administrative charges for the issue and extension of residence permits, which,
         according to the documents before the Court, is the sole matter at issue in the main proceedings.
      
On the information provided by the referring court, only after October did Mr Sahin’s situation, as regards residence
         and employment, temporarily fail to comply with the requirements of the national rules, until, less than six months after
         the expiry of the period of validity of his residence permit, Mr Sahin applied in due form for the extension of that permit,
         and complied with the obligation to pay the administrative charges required for that purpose.
      
As stated by the referring court, from the date of that application, Mr Sahin’s residence in the Netherlands had, under domestic
         law, again to be regarded as legal. Furthermore, under that law, such a belated application for renewal had to be examined
         in the light of the requirements of national law relating to extension of a residence permit and not those relating to the
         granting of such a permit.
      
It must be added that it is not disputed that Mr Sahin would have obtained an extension of his residence permit if he had
         paid the administrative charges attaching to his application at the right time. There is nothing in the documents before the
         Court to suggest that the competent Netherlands authorities intended to put an end to Mr Sahin’s residence or were about to
         deport him.
      
In any event, the Court has already held that a residence permit issued by the national authorities has only declaratory and
         probative value and that, although Member States do indeed have the right to require that foreigners on their territory hold
         a valid residence permit and apply for its extension in good time and although, in principle, they retain the power to impose
         penalties for breach of such obligations, nevertheless Member States are not entitled to adopt in that regard measures which
         are disproportionate as compared with comparable domestic cases (see Case C‑329/Ergat [2000] ECR I‑1487, paragraphs 52, 55, 56, and 62).
      
It will be for the referring court to take due account of all of the particular circumstances of the case in the main proceedings
         in order to assess whether Mr Sahin’s presence in the host Member State must be regarded as being no longer legal, in relation
         to residence and employment, as required for the application of Article of Decision No 1/80. 
      
On the assumption that that condition of legality is satisfied in the present case, it is necessary to rule on the second
         part of the reference, set out in paragraph of this judgment, relating to the exact significance of the standstill clause
         of Article of Decision No 1/80.
      
 The scope of the standstill clause in Article of Decision No 1/In that regard, it must first be observed that it is clear from settled case‑law of the Court that Article of Decision
         No 1/may be validly relied on before the courts and tribunals of Member States by the Turkish nationals to whom it applies
         to prevent the application of rules of national law that conflict with it (see Case C‑192/Sevince [1990] ECR I‑3461, paragraph 26, and Abatay and Others, paragraphs and and the first indent of paragraph 117).
      
It is also settled case-law that the standstill clause enacted in Article prohibits generally the introduction of any new
         measure having the object or effect of making the exercise by a Turkish national in its territory of the freedom of movement
         for workers subject to more restrictive conditions than those which applied at the time when Decision No 1/entered into
         force with regard to the Member State concerned (see Abatay and Others, paragraph 66, and the second indent of paragraph 117, and by analogy, as regards the standstill clause in relation to freedom
         of establishment and freedom to provide services in Article 41(1) of the Additional Protocol, Case C‑228/Soysal and Savatli [2009] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 47).
      
The Court has therefore more specifically held that Article 41(1) of the Additional Protocol prohibits the introduction, as
         from the date of entry into force of the legal act of which that provision forms part in the host Member State, of any new
         restrictions on the exercise of freedom of establishment or freedom to provide services, including those relating to the substantive
         and/or procedural conditions governing the first admission to the territory of that Member State of Turkish nationals intending
         to make use of those economic freedoms (see Case C‑16/Tum and Dari [2007] ECR I‑7415, paragraph 69, and Soysal and Savatli, paragraphs and 49).
      
Since the Court has already ruled that the standstill clause in Article of Decision No 1/is of the same kind as that
         contained in Article 41(1) of the Additional Protocol and that the objective pursued by those two clauses is identical (see
         Case C‑37/Savas [2000] ECR I‑2927, paragraph 50, and Abatay and Others, paragraphs to 74), the interpretation set out in the preceding paragraph must be equally valid as regards the standstill
         obligation which is the basis of Article in relation to freedom of movement for workers.
      
In the present case, the referring court has already made the finding that the domestic legislation in question must be considered
         to be ‘new’ within the meaning of Article of Decision No 1/80, given that the legislation was adopted after the entry into
         force of that decision.
      
The Court has however also ruled in this connection that the adoption of new rules which apply in the same way both to Turkish
         nationals and to Community nationals is not inconsistent with any of the standstill clauses laid down in the fields covered
         by the EEC-Turkey Association (see, by analogy, as regards Article 41(1) of the Additional Protocol, Soysal and Savatli, paragraph 61). The Court added, in the same paragraph of that judgment, that, if such rules applied to nationals of Member
         States but not to Turkish nationals, Turkish nationals would be put in a more favourable position than Community nationals,
         which would be clearly contrary to the requirement of Article of the Additional Protocol, according to which the Republic
         of Turkey may not receive more favourable treatment than that which Member States grant to one another pursuant to the EC
         Treaty. 
      
However, in the case in the main proceedings, it is clear, on the one hand, from the documents before the Court, that in the
         Netherlands the issue of documents for the identification of national citizens is subject to payment of an administrative
         charge of a certain amount. On the other hand, under Article 25(2) of Directive 2004/38, the documents mentioned in paragraph
         of that article, which include those covering citizens of the Union who move to or reside in a Member State other than that
         of which they are nationals and also the residence cards required for members of their families, whatever their nationality,
         who accompany them or join them, are to be issued on payment of a charge which must not exceed that imposed on nationals of
         the Member State concerned for the issuing of similar documents.
      
It follows that Turkish workers and members of their families cannot validly rely on one of the standstill clauses laid down
         in the context of the EEC‑Turkey Association, such as Article of Decision No 1/80, in order to insist that the host Member
         State exempt them from payment of any administrative charge as a prerequisite to consideration of an application for the grant
         of a residence permit or the extension of the period of validity of such a permit, even though, at the date when that decision
         entered into force in that Member State, the State concerned had not imposed on them any obligation of that kind. Any other
         interpretation would be inconsistent with Article of the Additional Protocol, which prohibits Member States from according
         to Turkish nationals treatment which is more favourable than that accorded to Community nationals who are in a comparable
         situation.
      
The standstill clause in Article of Decision No 1/therefore does not, as such, preclude the introduction of legislation
         of that type which makes the granting of a residence permit or an extension of the period of validity thereof conditional
         on the payment of administrative charges by foreign nationals residing in the territory of the Member State concerned.
      
Nevertheless, such legislation must not amount to creating a restriction within the meaning of Article of Decision No 1/80.
         Read in conjunction with Article of the Additional Protocol, Article implies that although a Turkish national to whom
         those provisions apply must certainly not be placed in a position more advantageous than that of Community nationals, he cannot
         on the other hand be subjected to new obligations which are disproportionate as compared with those established for Community
         nationals.
      
It is clear from the order for reference that, at the material time in the case in the main proceedings, Turkish nationals
         were required, under the Netherlands legislation, to pay a sum amounting to EUR for the processing of an application for
         a residence permit or extension thereof, whereas the amount which Community nationals could be charged in the Netherlands
         for the processing of a similar application was only EUR 30. Moreover, it is common ground that the period of validity of
         the documents in question is in some cases shorter when they are issued to Turkish nationals, with the result that Turkish
         nationals are obliged to apply for the renewal of such documents more often than Community nationals and that, consequently,
         the financial impact on the former is significant, the more so since, if the application is rejected, the sum paid is not
         refunded.
      
In that regard, in neither its written observations lodged with the Court nor in response to questions put to it at the hearing
         has the Netherlands Government advanced any relevant argument capable of justifying such a significant difference between
         the amounts of the administrative charges imposed on Turkish nationals and those provided for in relation to Community nationals.
         It must be added in that context that the Court cannot accept the argument of the Netherlands Government that the enquiries
         and checks required before a residence document can be issued to a Turkish national are more complex and more costly than
         those needed in respect of a Community national, given that, under the Netherlands legislation concerned, payment of the administrative
         charge must be made before the application for a residence permit or extension thereof is even considered, and that, furthermore,
         there is nothing to prevent a Member State from requiring the applicant himself to submit to the competent authorities a dossier
         containing all the supporting documents required for such an application.
      
It must therefore be concluded that national legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings constitutes a restriction
         prohibited by Article of Decision No 1/to the extent that, before an application for the grant of a residence permit
         or extension thereof can be considered, the legislation requires payment, by Turkish nationals to whom Article applies,
         of administrative charges of an amount which is disproportionate as compared with that demanded in similar circumstances from
         Community nationals.
      
In light of all of the foregoing the answer to be given to the questions referred is that Article of Decision No 1/must
         be interpreted as precluding the introduction, from the entry into force of that decision in the Member State concerned, of
         national legislation, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which makes the granting of a residence permit or an
         extension of the period of validity of such a permit conditional on payment of administrative charges, where the amount of
         those charges payable by Turkish nationals is disproportionate as compared with the amount required from Community nationals.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
Article of Decision No 1/of September on the development of the Association, adopted by the Association Council
            set up by the Agreement establishing an Association between the European Economic Community and Turkey, must be interpreted
            as precluding the introduction, from the entry into force of that decision in the Member State concerned, of national legislation,
            such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which makes the granting of a residence permit or an extension of the period
            of validity thereof conditional on payment of administrative charges, where the amount of those charges payable by Turkish
            nationals is disproportionate as compared with the amount required from Community nationals.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 