
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-92/Georgios StylianakisvElliniko Dimosio(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Monomeles Diikitiko Protodikio Irakliou)
         
«(Article 8a of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) – European citizenship – Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) – Freedom to provide services – Community air transport – Airport tax – Discrimination – Regulation (EEC) No 2408/92)»
Opinion of Advocate General Alber delivered on October I - Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), February I - Summary of the Judgment
Transport – Air transport – Freedom to provide services – Restrictions – National rules providing for different rates of airport tax for national and intra-Community flights – Conditions governing permissibility(Council Regulation No 2408/92, Art. 3(1))Article 3(1) of Regulation No 2408/on access for Community air carriers to intra-Community air routes, the purpose of which
         is to define the conditions for applying in the air transport sector the principle of the freedom to provide services, precludes
         a measure adopted by a Member State which imposes on, for the most part, flights to other Member States higher airport tax
         than that applicable to domestic flights within that Member State unless it is shown that those taxes compensate airport services
         necessary for the processing of passengers and that the cost of those services provided to passengers flying to other Member
         States is proportionately higher than the cost of those services necessary for the processing of passengers on domestic flights.see para. 29, operative part
      
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)February (1)
((Article 8a of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) – European citizenship – Article of the Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) – Freedom to provide services – Community air transport – Airport tax – Discrimination – Regulation (EEC) No 2408/92))
In Case C-92/01, 
            REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Monomeles Diikitiko Protodikio Irakliou (Greece) for a preliminary ruling
            in the proceedings pending before that court between
            
 Georgios Stylianakis
and
 Elliniko Dimosio ,
on the interpretation of Articles 8a and of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Articles and EC) and Article 3(1)
            of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2408/of July on access for Community air carriers to intra-Community air routes
            (OJ L 240, p. 8)
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
composed of: J.-P. Puissochet (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, R. Schintgen, V. Skouris, F. Macken and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: S. Alber, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
the Greek Government, by M. Apessos and N. Dafniou, acting as Agents, 
               
─
the Italian Government, by U. Leanza, acting as Agent, assisted by M. Fiorilli, avvocato dello Stato, 
               
─
the Commission of the European Communities, by M. Patakia and M. Huttunen, acting as Agents, 
               
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on October 2002,
gives the following
Judgment
            
By order of October 2000, received by the Court on February 2001, the Monomeles Diikitiko Protodikio Irakliou (Administrative
         Court of First Instance, Heraklion, Single Judge) referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC a question
         on the interpretation of Articles 8a and of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Articles and EC) and Article 3(1)
         of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2408/of July on access for Community air carriers to intra-Community air routes
         (OJ L 240, p. 8). 
         
            
That question was raised in proceedings brought by Mr Stylianakis against the Elliniko Dimosio (Greek State) seeking a finding
         that the Greek State is obliged to refund to him the amount of GRD 450, which is equivalent to half of the airport modernisation
         and development tax which he was required to pay when flying from Heraklion to Marseilles (France). 
         
Relevant legislation
Community law
         
            
Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) states: 
         
1.
 Citizenship of the Union is hereby established. Every person holding the nationality of a Member State shall be a citizen
         of the Union. 
         
2.
 Citizens of the Union shall enjoy the rights conferred by this Treaty and shall be subject to the duties imposed thereby.
         
            
Article 8a(1) of the Treaty provides: Every citizen of the Union shall have the right to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States, subject
         to the limitations and conditions laid down in this Treaty and by the measures adopted to give it effect.
         
            
The first subparagraph of Article of the Treaty provides: Within the framework of the provisions set out below, restrictions on freedom to provide services within the Community shall
         be progressively abolished during the transitional period in respect of nationals of Member States who are established in
         a State of the Community other than that of the person for whom the services are intended.
         
            
Article 61(1) of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article 51(1) EC) states: Freedom to provide services in the field of transport shall be governed by the provisions of the Title relating to transport.
         
            
The first subparagraph of Article 84(2) of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, the first subparagraph of Article 80(2) EC)
         provides: The Council may, acting by a qualified majority, decide whether, to what extent and by what procedure appropriate provisions
         may be laid down for sea and air transport.
         
            
Regulation No 2408/92, which was adopted on the basis of Article 84(2) of the Treaty, is part of the third  
         package of measures adopted by the Council to establish an air transport policy for the internal market over a period expiring on
         December 1992. The regulation provides,  
          inter alia , for free access for Community air carriers to intra-Community routes. Article 3(1) of the Regulation states: Subject to this Regulation, Community air carriers shall be permitted by the Member State(s) concerned to exercise traffic
         rights on routes within the Community.
         National law
         
            
Article 40(9) of Law No 2065/(FEK A' 113), as amended by Law No 2668/(FEK A' 282,  
         Law No 2065/1992), provides: Every passenger over years of age departing from a Greek airport (whether a State, municipal, community or private airport)
         for a domestic or international destination shall be charged an airport modernisation and development tax, as follows:
         
1.
 for passengers whose final destination is more than kilometres, but not more than kilometres, from their airport of
         departure, a tax in drachmas of an amount equal to ECU 10; 
         
2.
 for passengers whose final destination is more than kilometres from their airport of departure, a tax in drachmas of an
         amount equal to ECU 20.
         
The main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
            
The applicant in the main proceedings, Mr Stylianakis, travelled by aeroplane from Heraklion to Marseilles on August 1998.
         For that journey, he paid, in addition to the price of his ticket, the sum of GRD by way of airport modernisation and
         development tax. He subsequently brought an action before the Monomeles Diikitiko Protodikio Irakliou asking that court to
         find that the Greek State is obliged to refund to him half of that sum, namely GRD 450. 
         
            
According to the national court, the airport modernisation and development tax, levied by airlines on a passenger's departure,
         does not constitute consideration for a performed service but, rather, a fiscal charge. That tax is used,  
          inter alia , to finance construction work and the provision of facilities in airports, in particular for the construction of Spáta airport
         (Greece). 
         
            
Mr Stylianakis claimed that Article 40(9) of Law No 2065/1992, which provides for the doubling of the tax in accordance with
         a distance criterion, establishes a distinction between domestic flights in Greece and international flights, including those
         to other Member States. According to him, that distinction is contrary to Article 8a and Article of the Treaty and to Article
         of Regulation No 2408/92. Mr Stylianakis bases his arguments, in particular, on Case C-381/Commission  v  
          France  [1994] ECR I-5145. 
         
            
In its defence, the Greek State, referring to its reply to a reasoned opinion of the Commission of the European Communities
         questioning the compatibility of Article of Law No 2065/with Article of the Treaty and Article 3(1) of Regulation
         No 2408/92, submits that the flight between Corfu and Rome (Italy), that is to say between Greece and another Member State,
         is less than km and that it is taxable at the lower rate. The Greek State added that passengers on international flights,
         including flights to other Member States, benefit from more extensive services than those on internal flights and that the
         tax difference, which in any event involves small sums, is therefore justified. 
         
            
The national court nevertheless considers that the doubled tax applicable to flights to Member States other than Greece may
         constitute a restriction of the freedom of movement of citizens of the Union and an infringement of the provisions of Regulation
         No 2408/92. 
         
            
Accordingly, the Monomeles Diikitiko Protodikio Irakliou decided to stay proceedings and refer the following question to the
         Court for a preliminary ruling: Are Articles 8a and of the EC Treaty and Article 3(1) of Council Regulation No 2408/to be interpreted as prohibiting
         a Member State from imposing a differentiated fiscal charge on domestic and intra-Community flights with the direct result
         that an amount of tax is charged on intra-Community flights double that applicable to flights within the Member State?
         
            
It should be noted that the Commission's reasoned opinion, referred to in paragraph of this judgment, was followed by the
         bringing of an action before the Court under Article 226(2) EC for a declaration confirming the alleged failure by the Greek
         State to fulfil its obligations. That case was registered at the Court Registry under the number C-272/00. 
         
            
However, during those proceedings for failure to fulfil obligations, the Hellenic Republic amended the contested legislation
         by Article of Law No 2892/(FEK A' 46, p. 1161), which abolished, with respect to domestic flights and flights between
         Greece and other Member States or contracting parties to the Agreement on the European Economic Area of May (OJ L 1, p. 3), the difference in the amount of airport modernisation and development tax determined in accordance with distance
         and fixed that amount at the equivalent of EUR 12. Accordingly, the Commission withdrew its action and Case C-272/was removed
         from the register of the Court. 
         Article 8a of the Treaty
            
Article 8a(1) of the Treaty, which lays down in general terms the right of every citizen of the Union to move and reside freely
         within the territory of the Member States, is specifically applied in the provisions guaranteeing the freedom to provide services.
         
         
            
The freedom to provide services confers rights on both providers of services and recipients and any restriction of that freedom
         may thus undermine the rights of a recipient of services. A recipient may therefore rely on those provisions against the measure
         concerned (see Joined Cases 286/and 26/Luisi and Carbone  [1984] ECR 377, paragraph 16, Case C-158/Kohll  [1998] ECR I-1931, paragraph 35, and Case C-294/Eurowings Luftverkehr  [1999] ECR I-7447, paragraph 34). 
         
            
In light of the facts of the main proceedings, it is therefore unnecessary to rule on the interpretation of Article 8a of
         the Treaty (see, with respect to freedom of establishment, Case C-193/Skanavi and Chryssanthakopoulos  [1996] ECR I-929, paragraph 22, and, with respect to freedom of movement for workers, Case C-100/Oteiza Olazabal  [2002] ECR I-10981, paragraph 26). 
         Article of the Treaty and Article 3(1) of Regulation No 2408/92Observations submitted to the Court
         
            
The Italian Government contends that the tax at issue in the main proceedings affects the provision of air transport services
         between Member States but, observing that that tax is applied without discrimination on the grounds of nationality and in
         accordance with an objective criterion, concludes that it is not contrary to Article of the Treaty since that provision
         prohibits only discrimination based on nationality or residence. It further submits that application of the distance criterion
         is not a disguised restriction. It adds that the tax does not infringe Regulation No 2408/since payment of that tax is
         not a condition of authorisation to exercise traffic rights. 
         
            
The Commission contends that the tax system at issue in the main proceedings imposes the most onerous tax principally on international
         flights, including those between Member States, because, with one exception, the flights of less than km are domestic
         flights within the territory of Greece. That system makes the provision of air transport services between Member States more
         difficult than the provision of the same services within Greece and is consequently a restriction contrary to Article of
         the Treaty, since that article applies to air transport pursuant to Regulation No 2408/92. The need to finance Spáta airport,
         relied on by the Greek State before the national court, cannot justify such a restriction. The Commission, on the basis of
         its understanding of a document of the Greek Civil Aviation authority (YPA) on passenger-processing capacity in airports,
         disputes the claim that passengers on international flights benefit from more extensive services than those on domestic flights,
         a situation which might have justified the imposition of a higher tax on those passengers. It maintains that, in any event,
         the purpose of the tax at issue in the main proceedings is not to compensate the costs of the services actually provided in
         airports. The Court's answer
         
            
Even though, having regard to Article of the Treaty, Article of the Treaty is not applicable as such to transport services,
         since those services are governed by the provisions of the title relating to transport, the principle of the freedom to provide
         services is none the less applicable to that sector. 
         
            
As is clear from the case-law of the Court, the very purpose of Regulation No 2408/92, which was adopted on the basis of Article
         84(2) of the Treaty, is to define the conditions for applying in the air transport sector the principle of the freedom to
         provide services (see, to that effect, Case C-361/Italy  v  
          Commission  [2001] ECR I-385, paragraph 32). 
         
            
That freedom precludes the application of any national legislation which has the effect of making the provision of services
         between Member States more difficult than the provision of services purely within one Member State, irrespective of whether
         there is discrimination on the grounds of nationality or residence (see, to that effect,  
          Commission  v  
          France , cited above, paragraph to 21). 
         
            
As regards the tax at issue in the main proceedings, those air journeys which cover a distance of more than km from a
         Greek airport, on which the most onerous tax is imposed, are all journeys between Member States or to third countries, whereas
         those covering a distance of less than km, which are subject to the lower tax, are, with one exception, all domestic flights
         within Greece. It must therefore be held that, despite the ostensible neutrality of the criterion used to differentiate the
         amount of tax imposed, the most onerous tax specifically concerns non-domestic flights (see, by analogy, Case C-205/Commission  v  
          Austria  [2000] ECR I-7367). 
         
            
Moreover, in the light of the documents before the Court, it does not seem that the tax in question contains an element of
         compensation for airport services necessary for the processing of passengers and that the cost of those services provided
         to passengers on flights of more than km is double that of those provided to passengers on flights of less than km.
         
         
            
Accordingly, since airport taxes directly and automatically influence the price of the journey, differences in the taxes to
         be paid by passengers will automatically be reflected in the transport cost, and thus, in the case in the main proceedings,
         access to domestic flights will be favoured over access to intra-Community flights (see Case C-70/Commission  v  
          Portugal  [2001] ECR I-4845, paragraph 20). 
         
            
The answer to the question referred by the national court for a preliminary ruling must therefore be that Article 3(1) of
         Regulation No 2408/precludes a measure adopted by a Member State, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which
         imposes on, for the most part, flights to other Member States higher airport tax than that applicable to domestic flights
         within that Member State unless it is shown that those taxes compensate airport services necessary for the processing of passengers
         and that the cost of those services provided to passengers flying to other Member States is proportionately higher than the
         cost of those services necessary for the processing of passengers on domestic flights. 
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the Greek and Italian Governments and by the Commission, which have submitted observations to the Court,
         are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings pending
         before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
in answer to the question referred to it by the Monomeles Diikitiko Protodikio Irakliou by order of October 2000, hereby
         rules: 
          Article 3(1) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2408/of July on access for Community air carriers to intra-Community
               air routes precludes a measure adopted by a Member State, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which imposes on,
               for the most part, flights to other Member States higher airport tax than that applicable to domestic flights within that
               Member State unless it is shown that those taxes compensate airport services necessary for the processing of passengers and
               that the cost of those services provided to passengers flying to other Member States is proportionately higher than the cost
               of those services necessary for the processing of passengers on domestic flights. 
Puissochet
Schintgen 
Skouris 
Macken
Cunha Rodrigues 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on February 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
J.-P. Puissochet  
Registrar
President of the Sixth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: Greek.
Top  
 