
Case C-340/The Queen, on the application of: 
M and Others
v
Her Majesty’s Treasury
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the House of Lords)
(Common foreign and security policy – Restrictive measures taken against persons and entities associated with Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaeda network and the Taliban
         – Freezing of funds and economic resources – Regulation (EC) No 881/– Article 2(2) – Prohibition of making funds available to the persons listed in Annex I to that regulation – Scope – Social security and social assistance benefits paid to the spouse of a person included in Annex I)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        European Union law – Interpretation – Texts in several languages – Regulation No 881/– Differences between the various
            language versions
(Council Regulation No 881/2002, as amended by Council Regulation No 561/2003)
2.        European Union – Common foreign and security policy – Restrictive measures taken against persons and entities associated with
            Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaeda network and the Taliban – Regulation No 881/(Council Regulation No 881/2002, as amended by Regulation No 561/2003, Art. 2(2))
1.        Where there is divergence between the various language versions of a Community text, the provision in question must be interpreted
         by reference to the purpose and general scheme of the rules of which it forms part.
      
For the purpose of interpreting Regulation No 881/imposing certain specific restrictive measures directed against certain
         persons and entities associated with Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaeda network and the Taliban, as amended by Regulation No 561/2003,
         account must also be taken of the wording and purpose of Resolution (2002) of the United Nations Security Council which
         that regulation, according to recital in the preamble thereto, is designed to implement. In addition, in construing a provision
         of secondary European Union law, such as that regulation, preference must as far as possible be given to the interpretation
         that renders the provision consistent with the general principles of European Union law and, more specifically, with the principle
         of legal certainty. That principle requires legislation, such as Regulation No 881/2002, which imposes restrictive measures
         having considerable impact on the rights and freedoms of designated persons to be clear and precise so that the persons concerned,
         including third parties, may know unambiguously their rights and duties and take measures accordingly.
      
(see paras 44-45, 64-65)
2.        Article 2(2) of Regulation No 881/imposing certain specific restrictive measures directed against certain persons and
         entities associated with Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaeda network and the Taliban, as amended by Regulation No 561/2003, must
         be construed as not applying to the provision by the State of social security or social assistance benefits to the spouse
         of a person designated by the committee created pursuant to Paragraph of Resolution (1999) of the Security Council
         of the United Nations and included in the list in Annex I to that regulation, on the grounds only that the spouse lives with
         that person and will or may use some of those payments to pay for goods and services which the designated person also will
         consume or from which he also will benefit.  
      
It is hard to imagine how those funds could be turned into means that could be used to support terrorist activities, especially
         because the benefits at issue are fixed at a level intended to meet only the strictly vital needs of the persons concerned.
      
(see paras 61, 74, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Common foreign and security policy – Restrictive measures taken against persons and entities associated with Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaeda network and the Taliban
         – Freezing of funds and economic resources – Regulation (EC) No 881/– Article 2(2) – Prohibition of making funds available to the persons listed in Annex I to that regulation – Scope – Social security and social assistance benefits paid to the spouse of a person included in Annex I)
      
In Case C‑340/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the House of Lords (United Kingdom), made by decision of April
         2008, received at the Court on July 2008, in the proceedings
      
The Queen, on the application of:
      
M and Others
v
Her Majesty’s Treasury,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of J.-C. Bonichot, President of the Chamber, C. Toader, C.W.A. Timmermans (Rapporteur), K. Schiemann and P. Kūris,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Mengozzi,
Registrar: M.-A. Gaudissart, Head of Unit,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on November 2009,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        M and Others, represented by B. Emerson QC, S. Cox, Barrister, and by H. Miller and K. Ashton, Solicitors,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by I. Rao, acting as Agent, assisted by J. Swift, Barrister,
–        the Estonian Government, by L. Uibo, acting as Agent,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by S. Boelaert and P. Aalto, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling relates to the interpretation of Article 2(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 881/of May imposing certain specific restrictive measures directed against certain persons and entities associated with
         Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaeda network and the Taliban, and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 467/prohibiting the export
         of certain goods and services to Afghanistan, strengthening the flight ban and extending the freeze of funds and other financial
         resources in respect of the Taliban of Afghanistan (OJ L 139, p. 9), as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 561/of March (OJ L 82, p. 1, ‘Regulation No 881/2002’).
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between M and Others and Her Majesty’s Treasury (‘the Treasury’), concerning the
         decisions by which the latter considered that the grant of social security and social assistance benefits to the appellants
         in the main proceedings, the spouses of persons designated by the Committee created pursuant to Paragraph of Resolution
         (1999) of the Security Council of the United Nations and listed in Annex I to Regulation No 881/(‘the designated
         person(s)’ and ‘the Sanctions Committee’, respectively), is prohibited by the restrictive measure laid down in Article 2(2)
         of that regulation.
      
 Legal context
 The resolutions of the Security Council
On January the Security Council adopted Resolution (2002) laying down the measures that States must take with
         respect to Usama bin Laden, members of the Al-Qaeda network and the Taliban and other associated individuals, groups, undertakings
         and entities associated with them, as referred to in the list created pursuant to Security Council Resolutions (1999)
         and (2000).
      
Paragraph of Resolution (2002) provides:
      
‘[The Security Council] [d]ecides that all States shall take the following measures with respect to Usama bin Laden, members
         of the Al-Qaeda organisation and the Taliban and other individuals, groups, undertakings and entities associated with them,
         as referred to in the list created pursuant to resolutions (1999) and (2000), to be updated regularly by the [Sanctions]
         Committee:
      
(a)      Freeze without delay the funds and other financial assets or economic resources of these individuals, groups, undertakings
         and entities, including funds derived from property owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by them or by persons acting
         on their behalf or at their direction, and ensure that neither these nor any other funds, financial assets or economic resources
         are made available, directly or indirectly, for such persons’ benefit, by their nationals or by any persons within their territory;
      
…’
On December the Security Council adopted Resolution (2002) to facilitate the implementation of counter-terrorism
         obligations.
      
Paragraph of Resolution (2002) provides that:
      
‘[The Security Council decides that] the provisions of … paragraph 2(a) of Resolution (2002) do not apply to funds and
         other financial assets or economic resources that have been determined by the relevant State(s) to be:
      
(a)      necessary for basic expenses, including payments for foodstuffs, rent or mortgage, medicines and medical treatment, taxes,
         insurance premiums, and public utility charges, … after notification by the relevant State(s) to the [Sanctions] Committee
         of the intention to authorise, where appropriate, access to such funds, assets or resources and in the absence of a negative
         decision by the Committee within hours of such notification; …’
      
 European Union law
In order to give effect to Resolution (2002), on May the Council of the European Union adopted Common Position
         2002/402/CFSP concerning restrictive measures against Usama bin Laden, members of the Al-Qaeda organisation and the Taliban
         and other individuals, groups, undertakings and entities associated with them and repealing Common Positions 96/746/CFSP,
         1999/727/CFSP, 2001/154/CFSP and 2001/771/CFSP (OJ L 139, p. 4).
      
As is clear in particular from Recital in the preamble thereto, Regulation No 881/was adopted in order to implement,
         inter alia, Resolution (2002).
      
Article of Regulation No 881/provides:
      
‘For the purpose of this Regulation, the following definitions shall apply:
(1)      “funds” means financial assets and economic benefits of every kind …;
(2)      “economic resources” means assets of every kind, whether tangible or intangible, movable or immovable, which are not funds
         but can be used to obtain funds, goods or services;
      
…’
Article of Regulation No 881/states:
      
‘1.      All funds and economic resources belonging to, or owned or held by, a natural or legal person, group or entity designated
         by the Sanctions Committee and listed in Annex I shall be frozen.
      
2.      No funds shall be made available, directly or indirectly, to, or for the benefit of, a natural or legal person, group or entity
         designated by the Sanctions Committee and listed in Annex I.
      
3.      No economic resources shall be made available, directly or indirectly, to, or for the benefit of, a natural or legal person,
         group or entity designated by the Sanctions Committee and listed in Annex I, so as to enable that person, group or entity
         to obtain funds, goods or services.’
      
Taking the view that European Community action was necessary to give effect to Resolution (2002), on February the Council adopted Common Position 2003/140/CFSP concerning exceptions to the restrictive measures imposed by Common Position
         2002/(OJ L 53, p. 62).
      
Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 561/states that, in view of Resolution (2002), it is necessary to adjust
         the measures imposed by the Community.
      
Article 2a of Regulation No 881/2002, added to that regulation by Regulation No 561/2003, provides:
      
‘1.      Article shall not apply to funds or economic resources where:
(a)      any of the competent authorities of the Member States, as listed in Annex II, has determined, upon a request made by an interested
         natural or legal person, that these funds or economic resources are
      
(i)      necessary to cover basic expenses, including payments for foodstuffs, rent or mortgage, medicines and medical treatment, taxes,
         insurance premiums, and public utility charges;
      
… and
(b)      such determination has been notified to the Sanctions Committee; and
(c)      (i)   in the case of a determination under point (a)(i) …, the Sanctions Committee has not objected to the determination within
         hours of notification;
      
…
2.      Any person wishing to benefit from the provisions referred to in paragraph shall address its request to the relevant competent
         authority of the Member State as listed in Annex II.
      
The competent authority listed in Annex II shall promptly notify both the person that made the request, and any other person,
         body or entity known to be directly concerned, in writing, whether the request has been granted.
      
The competent authority shall also inform other Member States whether the request for such an exception has been granted.
…’
Article of Regulation No 881/provides:
      
‘1.      Each Member State shall determine the sanctions to be imposed where the provisions of this Regulation are infringed. Such
         sanctions shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive.
      
…
3.      Each Member State shall be responsible for bringing proceedings against any natural or legal person, group or entity under
         its jurisdiction, in cases of violation of any of the prohibitions laid down in this Regulation by any such person, group
         or entity.’
      
The Treasury is listed as a competent authority of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in Annex II to
         Regulation No 881/2002.
      
 National legislation
The Al-Qa’eda and Taliban (United Nations Measures) Order (‘the Order of 2002’ is intended, according to its preamble,
         to give effect to Resolutions (2002) and (2002) of the Security Council.
      
Article of the Order of 2002, entitled ‘Making funds available to Usama bin Laden and associates’, is worded as follows:
      
‘Any person who, except under the authority of a licence granted by the Treasury under this article, makes any funds available
         to or for the benefit of a listed person or any person acting on behalf of a listed person is guilty or an offence under this
         Order.’
      
Article 20(1) of the Order of 2002, entitled ‘Penalties and Proceedings’, provides:
      
‘Any person guilty of an offence under article … … shall be liable:
(a)      on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years or to a fine or to both; or
(b)      on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum
         or to both.’
      
As from November the Order of has been amended by the Al-Qaida and Taliban (United Nations Measures) Order (‘the Order of 2006’).
      
Article of the Order of 2006, entitled ‘Freezing funds and economic resources of designated persons’, provides:
      
‘1. A person (including the designated person) must not deal with funds or economic resources belonging to, owned or held
         by a person referred to in paragraph (2) unless he does so under the authority of a licence granted under article 11.
      
2.      The prohibition in paragraph (1) applies in respect of:
(a)      any designated person,
(b)      any person owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by a designated person; and
(c)      any person acting on behalf or at the direction of a designated person.
3.      A person who contravenes the prohibition in paragraph (1) is guilty of an offence.’
Article of the Order of 2006, entitled ‘Making funds or economic resources available to designated persons etc.’, provides:
      
‘1.      A person must not make funds or economic resources available, directly or indirectly, to or for the benefit of a person referred
         to in article 7(2) unless he does so under the authority of a licence granted under article 11.
      
2.      A person who contravenes the prohibition in paragraph (1) is guilty of an offence.
…’
Article of the Order of 2006, entitled ‘Licences’, provides that:
      
‘1. The Treasury may grant a licence to exempt acts specified in the licence from the prohibition in article 7(1) or 8(1).
2.      A licence may be
(a)      general or granted to a category of persons or to a particular person;
(b)      subject to conditions;
(c)      of indefinite duration or subject to an expiry date.
3.      The Treasury may vary or revoke a licence at any time.
…
6.      Any person who has done any act under the authority of a licence and who fails to comply with any conditions attaching to
         that licence is guilty of an offence.’
      
 The disputes in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling 
The order for reference makes it clear that the disputes in the main proceedings concern several social security or social
         assistance benefits, such as income support, disability living allowance, child benefit, housing benefit and council tax benefit
         granted to M and Others, the appellants in the main proceedings, who are married to designated persons and live with the latter
         and their children in the United Kingdom.
      
By decisions taken in July and valid for an indefinite period the Treasury considered that those payments were caught
         by the prohibition laid down in Article 2(2) of Regulation No 881/2002.
      
Because the sums in question may be used to cover the basic needs of the households to which designated persons belong, such
         as the buying of food for a communal meal, they are, in the Treasury’s opinion, made indirectly available for the benefit
         of those persons within the meaning of that provision.
      
The Treasury decided that those payments may, in consequence, be made only if they are covered by an exception under Article
         2a of Regulation No 881/in the form of a licence issued in accordance with article of the Order of 2002.
      
The Treasury issued licences, subject to a body of conditions, to various public authorities, permitting them to continue
         paying the social benefits to each of the spouses concerned in the main proceedings.
      
M and Others challenged those decisions, arguing that those payments were not caught by the prohibition laid down in Article
         2(2) of Regulation No 881/2002.
      
Having been unsuccessful at first instance and on appeal, M and Others have brought the cases in the main proceedings before
         the House of Lords.
      
The court making the reference notes that the following obligations were imposed in connection with a licence issued by virtue
         of article of the Order of 2002:
      
–        the benefits in question must be paid into a bank account from which the spouse concerned can draw only GBP in cash for
         each member of the household; other payments from that account must be made by debit card;
      
–        the spouse concerned must send a monthly account to the Treasury detailing all her expenditure in the previous month, enclosing
         receipts for the goods purchased and a copy of her monthly bank statement.  Those receipts may be checked by the Treasury
         in order to ascertain that the purchases do not exceed basic expenses, and
      
–        the licence includes a warning to the spouse that it is a criminal offence to make cash, financial assets or economic resources
         available to her husband, a designated person.
      
The House of Lords considers that such an intrusive regime is not required by Article 2(2) of Regulation No 881/and puts
         forward the following arguments:
      
–        that regime is not required in order to give effect to the purpose of Resolution (2002), which is to stop funds being
         used for terrorist ends.  It is hard to see how the expenditure of sums on current domestic expenses, such as the purchase
         of food, from which a designated person derives a benefit in kind, could create any risk that funds might be diverted to terrorist
         ends, the amounts of the social benefits in question being carefully calculated so as not to exceed the vital needs of the
         recipients;
      
–        a broad interpretation of the words ‘for the benefit of’ in Article 2(2) of Regulation No 881/is inconsistent with Article
         2(3) of that regulation, which prohibits making economic resources available to a designated person only when that enables
         such a person ‘to obtain funds, goods or services’;
      
–        the Treasury construes the words used in Article 2(2) of Regulation No 881/as meaning ‘applied’ or ‘expended for the
         benefit of’.  It seems more likely, however, having regard to the objective pursued by that regulation, that the drafters
         of that regulation intended those words to mean funds made available to or used for the benefit of a designated person that
         the latter could use for the purposes of terrorism, and
      
–        the Treasury’s construction produces a disproportionate and oppressive result.  It means that any person paying money to the
         spouse of a designated person, such as her employer or her bank, must seek a licence simply because she lives with a designated
         person and some part of her expenditure may be used for his benefit.  Furthermore, the terms of the licence are such that
         she is unable to spend her own money, however large her income, without accounting to the Treasury for every item of her expenditure.
         That constitutes an extraordinary invasion of the privacy of a person who is not included in the list in question.
      
In those circumstances, the House of Lords decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following question to the Court for
         a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Does Article 2(2) of … Regulation … No 881/apply to the provision by the State of social security or social assistance
         benefits to the spouse of a designated [person] … on the ground only that the spouse lives with the designated person and
         will or may use some of the money to pay for goods and services which the latter will consume or from which he will benefit?’
      
 Consideration of the question referred for a preliminary ruling
In the cases in the main proceedings, the Treasury argued that Article 2(2) of Regulation No 881/was applicable to the
         payment of social security or social assistance benefits at issue to the spouses of designated persons, relying on the wording
         of that provision in its version in the English language, the latter being also the language of the instant case.
      
It is therefore to be considered whether the question referred may be answered by giving a literal interpretation of Article
         2(2) of Regulation No 881/2002, which calls for a comparison of the various language versions of that provision.
      
According to the English version of the provision, ‘[n]o funds shall be made available, directly or indirectly, to, or for
         the benefit of,’ a designated person.
      
The Treasury, like the courts seised at first and second instance and like the United Kingdom Government, infers that the
         prohibition laid down in Article 2(2) of Regulation No 881/includes making funds available indirectly for the benefit
         of a designated person.
      
In its view, it follows that that provision applies also when funds are made available to someone other than the designated
         person but when the latter indirectly derives benefit therefrom.  That is so in the cases in the main proceedings, for the
         social security or social assistance benefits at issue are calculated and granted in order that the household, including the
         designated person, may derive benefit from them.
      
In this regard, while it seems that the Treasury’s definition of the ambit of Article 2(2) of Regulation No 881/could
         also be founded on certain other language versions, such as the versions in Hungarian, Dutch, Finnish and Swedish, the fact
         remains that the wording of that provision in other language versions, in particular the versions in Spanish, French, Portuguese
         and Romanian, is different.
      
It is clear from those latter language versions that, in addition to making funds directly or indirectly available, it is
         also prohibited that funds should be ‘used for the benefit of’ a designated person.
      
In those language versions, the benefit supposedly derived by a designated person is linked, not to the making available of
         funds, but to their use.  Furthermore, in those language versions, the words ‘directly or indirectly’ relate to the making
         available of funds and not to their use.
      
Separate examination, in the light of those latter language versions, does not support the argument that, by making social
         security or social assistance benefits available to the spouses of designated persons, the authorities concerned have ‘used’
         those funds ‘for the benefit’ of a designated person.  In point of fact, it is not those authorities, but the spouses of the
         designated persons to whom the funds at issue are made available, who then use them to buy goods or services which they provide
         as assistance in kind for the designated persons in order to meet the basic expenses of the household to which those persons
         belong.
      
Moreover, yet other language versions, such as those in German and Italian, do not fall within either of the two groups of
         language versions described above, but use their own terminology.
      
Thus, those versions, in addition to laying down the prohibition of making funds directly or indirectly available to a designated
         person, also prohibit that funds should ‘benefit’ (‘zugute kommen’) such a person, or that they should be ‘allocated for the
         benefit of’ (‘stanziar[e] a … vantaggio’) such a person.
      
In this regard, it is to be borne in mind that it is settled case-law that the different language versions of a text of European
         Union law must be given a uniform interpretation and hence, in the case of divergence between the language versions, the provision
         in question must be interpreted by reference to the purpose and general scheme of the rules of which it forms a part (Case
         C‑341/PlatoPlastik Robert Frank [2004] ECR I‑4883, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
In addition, for the purpose of interpreting Regulation No 881/2002, account must also be taken of the wording and purpose
         of Resolution (2002) which that regulation, according to the fourth recital in the preamble thereto, is designed to implement
         (see, in particular, Joined Cases C‑402/P and C‑415/P Kadi and Al Barakaat International Foundation v Council and Commission [2008] ECR I‑6351, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
In the words of Paragraph 2(a) of Resolution (2002), the States are to ensure ‘that neither these nor any other funds
         [belonging to individuals, groups, undertakings and entities associated with them, as referred to in the list created pursuant
         to resolutions (1999) and (2000)], financial assets or economic resources are made available, directly or indirectly,
         for such persons’ benefit, by their nationals or by any persons within their territory’.
      
Although the expression ‘pour les fins qu’ils poursuivent’ [for the ends they pursue] in the French text of Paragraph 2(a)
         would appear to indicate that the making available of financial assets or economic resources is prohibited only if they can
         be used by the designated persons for the purposes of activities related to terrorism, the fact remains that other official
         language versions of that provision do not make it possible to arrive at an unequivocal interpretation to that effect on the
         basis of that text alone.
      
Indeed, that expression does not appear in the Spanish, that version merely stating that it must be prohibited that funds
         should be made available ‘to those persons’ (‘de esas personas’).  The English version is different again, for it provides
         that it is prohibited to make funds available ‘for such persons’ benefit’.
      
In view of the divergences thus established between the language versions of both Article 2(2) of Regulation No 881/and
         Resolution (2002), Article 2(2) of Regulation No 881/must, in the light of what has been stated in paragraphs and above, be construed in terms of the purpose and general scheme of the legislation of which it forms part and account
         must in this regard be taken of the substance of Resolution (2002).
      
In this connection, with regard to the obligations referred to in Paragraph 2(a) of Resolution (2002), Paragraph of
         Resolution (2008), adopted by the Security Council on June 2008, provides that they ‘apply to financial and economic
         resources of every kind … used for the support of Al‑Qaeda, Usama bin Laden, and the Taliban and other individuals, groups,
         undertakings, or entities associated with them’.
      
Furthermore, in an information document of September headed ‘Assets Freeze: Explanation of Terms’, available on the
         Sanctions Committee’s internet site, that committee stated that ‘[t]he purpose of the assets freeze is to deny … individuals,
         groups, undertakings and entities [included in the list drawn up by the Sanctions Committee] the means to support terrorism’.
      
So far as Regulation No 881/is concerned, the Court has held that its objective is to prevent designated persons from
         having at their disposal any financial or economic resources, in order to impede the financing of terrorist activities (Case
         C‑117/Möllendorf and Möllendorf-Niehuus [2007] ECR I‑8361, paragraph 63).
      
Likewise, the Court has stated that the essential purpose and object of that regulation is to combat international terrorism,
         in particular to cut it off from its financial resources by freezing the economic funds and resources of persons or entities
         suspected of involvement in activities linked to terrorism (Kadi and Al Barakaat International Foundation v Council and Commission, paragraph 169).
      
It follows that the objective of the rules freezing the funds of designated persons, of which the prohibition of making funds
         available laid down in Article 2(2) of Regulation No 881/forms part, is to stop those persons having access to economic
         or financial resources, whatever their nature, that they could use to support their terrorist activities.
      
That objective is, moreover, reflected in the qualification contained in the definition in Article 1(2) of Regulation No 881/of ‘economic resources’ as ‘assets of every kind, … which are not funds but can be used to obtain funds, goods or services’,
         and in Article 2(3) of that regulation prohibiting making economic resources available to designated persons ‘so as to enable
         that person, group or entity to obtain funds, goods or services’.
      
Having regard to the objective pursued by Regulation No 881/2002, that qualification has to be understood as meaning that
         the measure freezing economic resources applies only to those assets that can be turned into funds, goods or services capable
         of being used to support terrorist activities.
      
It is true that neither the definition of funds in Article 1(1) of Regulation No 881/nor the measure prohibiting the
         making available of funds provided for in Article 2(2) of that regulation contains such a qualification.  None the less, that
         absence can be explained by the fact that those provisions refer specifically to funds which, if made available, directly
         or indirectly, to a designated person, entail in themselves a danger that they may be diverted in order to support terrorist
         activities.
      
In the cases in the main proceedings, however, the interpretation given by the Treasury of Article 2(2) of Regulation No 881/was not based on any danger whatsoever that the funds in question might be diverted in order to support terrorist activities.
      
It has not been argued that the spouses concerned hand over those funds to a designated person instead of allocating them
         to their basic household expenses.  Such a misappropriation of funds would, moreover, be covered by the prohibition laid down
         in Article 2(2) of that regulation and would constitute an offence punishable under national criminal law.
      
It is not disputed that, in the cases in the main proceedings, the funds in question are in fact used by the spouses concerned
         to meet the essential needs of the households to which the designated persons belong.
      
As the court making the reference has observed, without being contradicted on this point before the Court, it is hard to imagine
         how those funds could be turned into means that could be used to support terrorist activities, especially because the benefits
         at issue are fixed at a level intended to meet only the strictly vital needs of the persons concerned.
      
In circumstances such as those in issue in the main proceedings, the benefit in kind that a designated person might indirectly
         derive from the social payments made to his spouse cannot, therefore, compromise the objective pursued by Regulation No 881/which, as stated in paragraph above, is to stop designated persons gaining access to economic or financial resources of
         any kind that they could use to support terrorist activities.
      
In consequence, having regard to the variations found to exist in the language versions of Article 2(2) of Regulation No 881/2002,
         that provision must, in the light of its object, be construed as meaning that it does not apply to the payment of social security
         or social assistance benefits in circumstances such as those in issue in the main proceedings.
      
In addition, it is to be borne in mind that, in construing a provision of secondary European Union law, preference should
         as far as possible be given to the interpretation which renders the provision consistent with the general principles of European
         Union law and, more specifically, with the principle of legal certainty (C‑1/Borgmann [2004] ECR I‑3219, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
That principle requires legislation, such as Regulation No 881/2002, which imposes restrictive measures having considerable
         impact on the rights and freedoms of designated persons (Kadi and Al Barakaat International Foundation v Council and Commission, paragraph 375) and which, as provided in Article of that regulation, in domestic law involves penalties, in this instance
         criminal penalties, for infringement of those measures, to be clear and precise so that the persons concerned, including third
         parties such as the social security bodies involved in the main proceedings, may know unambiguously their rights and duties
         and take measures accordingly.
      
In that context, a construction contrary to that provided in paragraph above would pose the danger of engendering legal
         uncertainty, in particular so far as concerns triangular situations in which funds are made available, directly or indirectly,
         not to a designated person but to someone else to whom the designated person is more or less closely connected and in which
         the latter indirectly derives some benefit from those funds.
      
Such legal uncertainty seems all the more unacceptable because, in such situations, the question in any event arises whether
         the specific benefit obtained for a designated person by the person to whom the funds are made available may be caught by
         the restrictive measures laid down in Article 2(2) and (3) of Regulation No 881/2002.
      
It may be added in that regard that, in circumstances such as those in issue in the main proceedings, the benefit derived
         by a designated person, in the form of assistance in kind, from funds made available to his spouse, cannot be treated as economic
         resources for the purposes of Articles 1(2) and 2(3) of Regulation No 881/either, for such a benefit cannot be used by
         the designated person to obtain ‘funds, goods or services’ within the meaning of those provisions.
      
Indeed, as stated in paragraph above, in situations such as those in issue in the main proceedings, it cannot reasonably
         be maintained that that benefit can be turned into economic or financial resources that the designated person could use to
         support terrorist activities.
      
Nor can it be maintained that, if the interpretation that the payment of the social benefits at issue in the main proceedings
         does not fall within the ambit of Article 2(2) and (3) of Regulation No 881/were to be accepted, then the exception provided
         for by Article 2a of that regulation, relating in this case to basic expenses, would become superfluous.
      
As the Advocate General stated in point of his Opinion, that exception is to be allowed in every case in which funds are
         directly or indirectly made available to a designated person and not to a third party, for, in such a situation, the designated
         person can decide how to use those funds, which involves a danger of their being diverted for terrorist purposes.
      
Last, it cannot be objected that, if the interpretation that the payment of the social benefits at issue in the main proceedings
         does not fall within the ambit of Article 2(2) and (3) of Regulation No 881/were to be accepted, then the designated
         person would be relieved of the obligation to provide for his own basic needs, so enabling him to allocate to the purposes
         of terrorism the funds he managed to obtain by other means.
      
As the Advocate General observed in point of his Opinion, even if a third party’s direct assumption of responsibility
         for a designated person’s basic expenses is not caught by Article of Regulation No 881/2002, the fact nevertheless remains
         that the freezing of funds and the prohibitions laid down in that provision remain fully applicable to such a person without
         prejudice, where appropriate, to an exception in accordance with Article 2a of that regulation.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the question referred is that Article 2(2) of Regulation No 881/must be
         construed as not applying to the provision by the State of social security or social assistance benefits to the spouse of
         a designated person on the grounds only that the spouse lives with the designated person and will or may use some of those
         payments to pay for goods and services which the designated person also will consume or from which he will benefit.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
Article 2(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 881/of May imposing certain specific restrictive measures directed
            against certain persons and entities associated with Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaeda network and the Taliban, and repealing
            Council Regulation (EC) No 467/prohibiting the export of certain goods and services to Afghanistan, strengthening the
            flight ban and extending the freeze of funds and other financial resources in respect of the Taliban of Afghanistan, as amended
            by Council Regulation (EC) No 561/of March 2003, must be construed as not applying to the provision by the State of
            social security or social assistance benefits to the spouse of a person designated by the committee created pursuant to Paragraph
            of Resolution (1999) of the Security Council of the United Nations and included in the list in Annex I to that regulation,
            as amended, on the grounds only that the spouse lives with that person and will or may use some of those payments to pay for
            goods and services which the designated person also will consume or from which he also will benefit.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 