
ORDER OF THE COURT (Eighth Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Appeal – Community trade mark – Regulation (EC) No 40/– Article 8(1)(b) – Word mark ENERCON – Opposition of the proprietor of the word mark TRANSFORMERS ENERGON – Refusal to register – Likelihood of confusion)
In Case C-204/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on April 2010,
Enercon GmbH, established in Aurich (Germany), represented by J. Mellor, Barrister, and R. Böhm, Rechtsanwalt, 
      
appellant,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM), represented by D. Botis, acting as Agent,
      
defendant at first instance,
Hasbro Inc., established in Pawtucket (United States), 
      
intervener at first instance,
THE COURT (Eighth Chamber),
composed of K. Schiemann, President of the Chamber, C. Toader and E. Jarašiūnas (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
after hearing the Advocate General,
makes the following
Order
By its appeal, Enercon GmbH (‘Enercon’) seeks to have set aside the judgment of the General Court of the European Union of
         February in Case T‑472/Enercon v OHIM – Hasbro (ENERCON) (‘the judgment under appeal’), in which the General Court dismissed the action brought against the decision of the Fourth
         Board of Appeal of the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM) of October (Case R 959/2006-4) dismissing the appeal lodged by Enercon against the decision of the Opposition Division of OHIM which
         had upheld the opposition filed by Hasbro Inc. against registration of the word mark ENERCON (‘the contested decision’).
      
 Legal context
Council Regulation (EC) No 40/of December on the Community trade mark (OJ L 11, p. 1) was repealed by Council
         Regulation (EC) No 207/of February on the Community trade mark (OJ L 78, p. 1), which entered into force
         on April 2009. However, in the light of the date of the material facts, the present case remains governed by Regulation
         No 40/94.
      
Article 8(1) of Regulation No 40/provides:
      
‘1.      Upon opposition by the proprietor of an earlier trade mark, the trade mark applied for shall not be registered:
…
(b)      if because of its identity with or similarity to the earlier trade mark and the identity or similarity of the goods or services
         covered by the trade marks there exists a likelihood of confusion on the part of the public in the territory in which the
         earlier trade mark is protected; the likelihood of confusion includes the likelihood of association with the earlier trade
         mark.’
      
 The background to the dispute
On August 2003, Enercon filed an application with OHIM for registration of the word mark ENERCON as a Community trade mark
         covering a variety of goods in Classes 16, 18, 24, 25, and under the Nice Agreement of June concerning the International
         Classification of Goods and Services for the Purposes of the Registration of Marks, as revised and amended.
      
On November 2004, Hasbro Inc. (‘Hasbro’) filed a notice of opposition to that application for registration on the basis
         of Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/and Article 8(4) and (5) of that regulation. The opposition was based on, first,
         the earlier Community word mark TRANSFORMERS ENERGON, registered under number in respect of goods in Classes 16, 18,
         24, 25, 28, and under the Nice Agreement, and, second, the earlier non-registered trade marks TRANSFORMERS ENERGON and
         ENERGON, used in the United Kingdom for toys and games.
      
The opposition covered all of the goods designated by the earlier mark and was brought against all of the goods in respect
         of which registration had been sought.
      
By decision of May 2006, the Opposition Division of OHIM upheld Hasbro’s opposition. It found that there was a likelihood
         of confusion, within the meaning of Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94, by reason of the identity of the goods and the
         similarity of the signs.
      
On July 2006, Enercon lodged an appeal against that decision. That appeal was dismissed by the contested decision. In that
         decision, the Fourth Board of Appeal of OHIM upheld the Opposition Division’s assessment that the similarities between the
         signs at issue were sufficient to give rise to a likelihood of confusion.
      
 Procedure before the General Court and the judgment under appeal
By application lodged at the Registry of the General Court on December 2007, Enercon brought an action seeking annulment
         of the contested decision. In support of its action, it relied on a single plea in law alleging infringement of Article 8(1)(b)
         of Regulation No 40/94, submitting, in essence, that the element ‘transformers’ was the dominant element of the earlier mark
         and that, by examining the similarity of the ENERCON mark – registration of which was sought – only with regard to the ‘energon’
         element of the earlier mark, the Fourth Board of Appeal of OHIM had failed to take account of the overall impression created
         by the earlier sign.
      
In rejecting that plea, and thereby dismissing the action in its entirety, the General Court held, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, that the Fourth Board of Appeal of OHIM had acted correctly in finding that the ‘transformers’
         and ‘energon’ elements of the earlier mark were equally distinctive and dominant.
      
As regards visual similarity, the General Court held, in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, that the Fourth
         Board of Appeal of OHIM did not disregard the overall impression produced by the earlier mark when it found, correctly, that
         the trade mark applied for and the ‘energon’ element of the earlier mark were very similar and that the marks at issue, each
         considered as a whole, thus presented a certain visual similarity.
      
In relation to the phonetic comparison of the signs at issue, the General Court held, in paragraphs and of the judgment
         under appeal, that the Fourth Board of Appeal of OHIM had also been entitled to find that the marks ENERCON and TRANSFORMERS
         ENERGON resembled each other and had, as a whole, a certain degree of similarity.
      
As regards conceptual similarity, the General Court, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, rejected Enercon’s
         arguments, including the argument alleging that the fact that the first syllable of the words ‘enercon’ and ‘energon’ is identical
         is not sufficient to identify conceptual similarity. In that regard, the General Court stated that the Fourth Board of Appeal
         of OHIM had found that there was a low degree of conceptual similarity on a different basis, namely that those two words were
         likely to be perceived as evoking the notion of energy.
      
The General Court concluded, in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, that the Fourth Board of Appeal of OHIM
         had been right to hold that the signs at issue, each considered as a whole, bore a certain degree of similarity and that,
         consequently, as regards the global assessment of the likelihood of confusion, Enercon had not demonstrated that that Board
         of Appeal had erred in finding that, taking into account, first, the similarity of the signs at issue and, second, the fact
         that the designated goods were identical, the target public might be led to believe that the goods at issue came from the
         same undertaking or undertakings which were economically linked.
      
 Forms of order sought before the Court of Justice
The appellant requests the Court of Justice to set aside the judgment under appeal and, as appropriate, the contested decision
         and the decision of the Opposition Division of OHIM, to remit the case to OHIM and to order Hasbro and OHIM to pay the costs.
      
OHIM contends that the Court should dismiss the appeal and order the appellant to pay the costs.
      
 The appeal
Under Article of its Rules of Procedure, where an appeal is, in whole or in part, clearly inadmissible or clearly unfounded,
         the Court may at any time, acting on a report from the Judge-Rapporteur and after hearing the Advocate General, by reasoned
         order dismiss that appeal, without opening the oral procedure.
      
In support of its appeal, Enercon relies on a single plea in law alleging infringement of Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94.
      
Enercon takes the view that the General Court misinterpreted, or wrongly applied, the principles established in the judgment
         in Case C‑120/Medion [2005] ECR I‑8551, in relation to the element of a mark having an independent distinctive role. According to Enercon, the
         errors made in that regard by the Opposition Division of OHIM are also present in the contested decision and in the judgment
         under appeal based on that decision. No account was taken of the fact that the principle laid down in Medion applies only in exceptional circumstances in which the usual rule – that the average consumer perceives the mark as a whole
         – does not apply.
      
However, in the present case, according to Enercon, there are no such exceptional circumstances, as the word ‘energon’ does
         not have the slightest independent distinctive role within the earlier mark. Furthermore, there is no analogy with the circumstances
         considered in Medion since, in the present case, in contrast to the circumstances in Medion, the mark applied for consisted of a single word element, whereas the earlier mark consisted of two elements.
      
By reason of the incorrect application of the principles established in Medion, in the view of Enercon, no overall assessment was carried out as to the likelihood of confusion which took into account
         all the facts of the present case. A correct analysis of those facts would, according to it, have led to a finding that there
         is a low level of similarity between the marks at issue on the visual, phonetic and conceptual levels and that, overall, significant
         differences exclude any likelihood of confusion. At the very most, there is a risk of association stricto sensu.
      
In that regard, it must be held, at the outset, that the judgment under appeal contains no explicit reference to the judgment
         in Medion or implicit reference to the concept of an independent distinctive role referred to in paragraph of that judgment.
      
Far from taking the view that the circumstances of the present case constituted a particular case such as that referred to
         in paragraph of Medion, the General Court pointed out, first, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that, according to settled case-law,
         the assessment of the visual, phonetic and conceptual similarity of the marks in question must be based on the overall impression
         given by those marks, bearing in mind, in particular, their distinctive and dominant components (see, inter alia, Case C‑334/P
         OHIM v Shaker [2007] ECR I‑4529, paragraph and case-law cited). In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the General Court added
         that assessment of the similarity between two marks means more than taking just one component of a composite trade mark and
         comparing it with another mark; on the contrary, the comparison must be made by examining each of the marks in question as
         a whole, which does not mean that the overall impression conveyed to the relevant public by a composite trade mark may not,
         in certain circumstances, be dominated by one or more of its components.
      
Replying, next, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, to Enercon’s arguments that the Fourth Board of Appeal
         of OHIM committed an error by reducing the earlier mark to its ‘energon’ element and by thus ignoring the overall impression
         created by that mark, dominated by the ‘transformers’ element, the General Court assessed the relative importance of those
         elements in the overall impression created by the earlier mark and concluded that the Board of Appeal had acted correctly
         in finding that the two elements were equally distinctive and dominant.
      
As regards the visual, phonetic and conceptual similarities of the marks at issue, the General Court, as is apparent from
         paragraphs to of the present order, examined the assessments carried out by the Fourth Board of Appeal of OHIM, and
         Enercon’s arguments, and concluded that the Board of Appeal had been right to hold that the signs at issue, each considered
         as a whole, bore a certain degree of similarity. Consequently, it found that Enercon had not demonstrated that the Fourth
         Board of Appeal of OHIM had erred in its overall assessment of the likelihood of confusion, regard being had also to the similarity
         of the goods covered by the marks at issue.
      
It is manifestly clear from the foregoing that the General Court in no way interpreted or applied the principles established
         in Medion in relation to an element of a mark having an independent distinctive role, and that, in reply to the appellant’s arguments,
         it correctly carried out an overall assessment of the marks at issue taking into account all of the factors relevant to the
         case.
      
It follows that the single plea in law is clearly unfounded.
      
Moreover, in so far as, by that plea, the appellant criticises the General Court for having wrongly assessed the similarities
         between the marks at issue and ignored their differences, thus excluding, according to the appellant, a likelihood of confusion,
         suffice it to state that that is an assessment of a factual nature which is not, save where the facts and evidence are distorted
         – something which is not alleged in this case – subject to review by the Court of Justice on appeal (see, to that effect,
         inter alia, Case C‑234/P Il Ponte Finanziaria v OHIM [2007] ECR I‑7333, paragraph and the case-law cited). To that extent, therefore, the plea is manifestly inadmissible.
      
It follows from all of the foregoing that the appeal must be dismissed in its entirety as being, in part, manifestly unfounded
         and, in part, manifestly inadmissible.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, which applies to appeal proceedings by virtue of Article thereof, the unsuccessful
         party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. As OHIM has applied
         for an order for costs against the appellant, and as the latter has been unsuccessful, the appellant must be ordered to pay
         the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Eighth Chamber) hereby orders:
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
2.      Enercon GmbH shall pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English. 
      
Top  
 