
Case C-503/Commission of the European Communities
v
Federal Republic of Germany
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Judgment of the Court establishing the failure to fulfil obligations – Non-implementation – Article EC – Measures necessary to comply with the judgment of the Court – Rescission of a contract)
Opinion of Advocate General Trstenjak delivered on March Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), July Summary of the Judgment
1.     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Judgment of the Court finding a failure to fulfil obligations – Breach of the
            obligation to comply with the judgment – Financial penalties
(Art. 228(2) EC)
2.     Approximation of laws – Review procedures in respect of the award of public supply and public works contracts – Directive
            89/(Arts EC and EC; Council Directive 89/665, Art. 3)
3.     Approximation of laws – Review procedures in respect of the award of public supply and public works contracts – Directive
            89/(Arts EC and EC; Council Directive 89/665, Art. 2(6), second subpara.)
4.     Approximation of laws – Review procedures concerning the award of public service contracts – Directive 92/(Art. EC; Council Directive 92/50)
5.     Member States – Obligations – Failure to fulfil obligations – National system pleaded as justification – Not permissible 
(Art. EC)
1.     In proceedings under Article 228(2) EC, an action does not become inadmissible on the ground that the Commission is no longer
         requesting the imposition of a periodic penalty payment. Since the Court has jurisdiction to impose a financial penalty not
         suggested by the Commission, the action is not inadmissible simply because the Commission takes the view, at a certain stage
         of the procedure before the Court, that a periodic penalty is no longer necessary. 
      
(see paras 21-22)
2.     The special procedure under Article of Directive 89/on the coordination of the laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions relating to the application of review procedures to the award of public supply and public works contracts, whereby
         the Commission may intervene with a Member State if it considers that a clear and manifest infringement of Community provisions
         in the field of public procurement has been committed, constitutes a preventive measure which can neither derogate from nor
         replace the powers of the Commission under Articles EC and EC.
      
(see para. 23)
3.     Although the second subparagraph of Article 2(6) of Directive 89/on the coordination of the laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions relating to the application of review procedures to the award of public supply and public works contracts permits
         the Member States to preserve the effects of contracts concluded in breach of directives relating to the award of public contracts
         and thus protects the legitimate expectations of the parties thereto, its effect cannot be, unless the scope of the EC Treaty
         provisions establishing the internal market is to be reduced, that the contracting authority’s conduct vis-à-vis third parties
         is to be regarded as in conformity with Community law following the conclusion of such contracts.
      
If the second subparagraph of Article 2(6) of Directive 89/does not affect the application of Article EC, nor can
         it affect the application of Article EC, without reducing the scope of the Treaty provisions establishing the internal
         market. Furthermore, that provision relates, as is apparent from its wording, to the compensation which a person harmed by
         an infringement committed by a contracting authority may obtain from it. That provision, because of its specific nature, cannot
         be regarded also as regulating the relations between a Member State and the Community in the context of Articles EC and
         EC.
      
(see paras 33-35)
4.     Even if it the principles of legal certainty and of the protection of legitimate expectations, the principle pacta sunt servanda and the right to property could be used against the contracting authority by the other party to the contract in the event
         of rescission of a contract concluded in breach of Directive 92/relating to the coordination of procedures for the award
         of public service contracts, a Member State cannot in any event rely on those principles or that right in order to justify
         the non-implementation of a judgment establishing a failure to fulfil obligations under Article EC and thereby evade its
         own liability under Community law.
      
(see para. 36)
5.     A Member State cannot plead provisions, practices or situations prevailing in its domestic legal order to justify the failure
         to observe obligations arising under Community law. 
      
(see para. 38)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Judgment of the Court establishing the failure to fulfil obligations – Non-implementation – Article EC – Measures necessary to comply with the judgment of the Court – Rescission of a contract)
In Case C‑503/04,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on December 2004,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by B. Schima, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Federal Republic of Germany, represented by W.-D. Plessing and C. Schulze-Bahr, acting as Agents, and H.-J. Prieß, Rechtsanwalt,
      
defendant,
supported by
French Republic, represented by G. de Bergues and J.-C. Gracia, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
Kingdom of the Netherlands, represented by H.G. Sevenster and D.J.M. de Grave, acting as Agents,
      
Republic of Finland, represented by T. Pynnä, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
interveners,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, P. Kūris, K. Schiemann, J. Makarczyk and J.‑C. Bonichot,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: H. von Holstein, Deputy Registrar,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on December 2006,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2007,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities requests the Court to declare that, by failing to adopt all
         the necessary measures to comply with the judgment in Joined Cases C-20/and C-28/Commission v Germany [2003] ECR I-regarding the conclusion of a contract for the collection of waste water by the municipality of Bockhorn
         (Germany) and of a contract for waste disposal by the City of Brunswick (Germany), the Federal Republic of Germany has failed
         to fulfil its obligations under Article 228(1) EC, and to order that Member State to pay to the Commission’s own resources
         account of the European Community a penalty payment of EUR for each day of delay in implementing the measures necessary
         to comply with that judgment in respect of the contract relating to the municipality of Bockhorn  and of EUR for each
         day of delay in implementing the measures necessary to comply with the abovementioned judgment in respect of the contract
         relating to the City of Brunswick, in each case from the date of delivery of that judgment until the measures are implemented.
         
      
By order of the President of the Court of June 2005, the French Republic, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic
         of Finland were granted leave to intervene in support of the forms of order sought by the Federal Republic of Germany.
      
 Legal context
Article 2(6) of Council Directive 89/665/EEC of December on the coordination of the laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions relating to the application of review procedures to the award of public supply and public works contracts (OJ L 395, p. 33) provides: 
      
‘The effects of the exercise of the powers referred to in paragraph on a contract concluded subsequent to its award shall
         be determined by national law. 
      
Furthermore, except where a decision must be set aside prior to the award of damages, a Member State may provide that, after
         the conclusion of a contract following its award, the powers of the body responsible for the review procedures shall be limited
         to awarding damages to any person harmed by an infringement.’ 
      
Article 3(1) of Directive 89/states:
‘The Commission may invoke the procedure for which this Article provides when, prior to a contract being concluded, it considers
         that a clear and manifest infringement of Community provisions in the field of public procurement has been  committed during
         a contract award procedure falling within the scope of Directives 71/305/EEC and 77/62/EEC.’
      
 The judgment in Commission v Germany
In paragraphs and of the operative part of the judgment in Commission v Germany, the Court: 
      
‘1.      Declare[d] that since the Municipality of Bockhorn (Germany) failed to invite tenders for the award of the contract for the
         collection of its waste water and failed to publish notice of the results of the procedure for the award of the contract in
         the Supplement to the Official Journal of the European Communities, the Federal Republic of Germany, at the time of the award of that public service contract, failed to fulfil its obligations
         under Article in conjunction with Article 15(2) and Article 16(1) of Council Directive 92/50/EEC of June relating
         to the coordination of procedures for the award of public service contracts (OJ L 209, p. 1); 
      
2.      Declare[d] that since the City of Braunschweig (Germany) awarded a contract for waste disposal by negotiated procedure without
         prior publication of a contract notice, although the criteria laid down in Article 11(3) of Directive 92/for an award by
         privately negotiated procedure without a Community-wide invitation to tender had not been met, the Federal Republic of Germany,
         at the time of the award of that public service contract, failed to fulfil its obligations under Article and Article 11(3)(b)
         of that directive.’
      
 Pre-litigation procedure
By letter of June 2003, the Commission requested the German Government to notify it of the measures taken to comply with
         the judgment in Commission v Germany. 
      
Since it was not satisfied by the German Government’s response of August 2003, on October the Commission requested
         the German authorities to submit their observations within two months.
      
In its letter of December 2003, the German Government referred to a letter sent in early December to the government
         of the Land of Lower Saxony asking it to ensure compliance with the public procurement legislation in force and to notify it of the measures
         intended to prevent similar infringements in future.  In addition, the German Government referred to Paragraph of the German
         Vergabeverordnung (Public Procurement Regulation) which entered into force on February and which provides that a contract
         concluded by a contracting authority is invalid if unsuccessful tenderers have not been informed of the conclusion of that
         contract at least days before its award.  That government also submitted that Community law did not require the rescission
         of the two contracts at issue in the case which gave rise to the judgment in Commission v Germany.
      
On April 2004, the Commission sent a reasoned opinion to the Federal Republic of Germany, to which the latter responded
         on June 2004.
      
Since the Commission considered that the Federal Republic of Germany had failed to comply with the judgment in Commission v Germany, it decided to bring the present action.
      
 The action
 The subject-matter of the action
Since the Federal Republic of Germany stated in its defence that on February the contract for the collection of waste
         water concluded by the municipality of Bockhorn was to be annulled, the Commission stated in its reply that it was not pursuing
         either its action or its claim for imposition of a periodic penalty payment in so far as they related to that contract. 
      
As the Commission has partly discontinued its action, it is necessary to examine it only in so far as it relates to the contract
         concluded by the City of Brunswick for waste disposal.
      
 Admissibility
The Federal Republic of Germany alleges, firstly, that the Commission has no interest in bringing proceedings because of its
         failure to submit an application for interpretation within the meaning of Article of the Rules of Procedure.  According
         to that Member State, the dispute relating to the consequences which follow from the judgment in Commission v Germany could and should have been resolved by way of an application for interpretation of that judgement and not by way of an action
         based on Article EC. 
      
However, that argument cannot be accepted.
In proceedings for failure to fulfil obligations under Article EC, the Court is required to find only that a provision
         of Community law has been infringed.  Pursuant to Article 228(1) EC, the Member State concerned is required to take the measures
         necessary to comply with the judgment of the Court (see, to that effect, Case C-126/Commission v Germany [2004] ECR I-11197, paragraph 26).  Since a question concerning the measures required for the implementation of a judgment
         establishing a failure to fulfil obligations under Article EC does not form part of the subject-matter of such a judgment,
         such a question cannot form the subject-matter of an application for interpretation of a judgment (see also, to that effect,
         order in Joined Cases 146/INT and 431/INT Maindiaux and Others v ESC and Others [1988] ECR 2003, paragraph 6).
      
Furthermore, it is precisely at the stage of an action under Article 228(2) EC that it is for the Member State, whose responsibility
         it is to draw the conclusions to which the judgment establishing the failure to fulfil obligations appears to it to give rise,
         to justify the validity of those conclusions, should they be criticised by the Commission. 
      
Secondly, in its rejoinder, the Federal Republic of Germany, supported by the Kingdom of the Netherlands, requests the Court
         to close the procedure by application of Article 92(2) of the Rules of Procedure, as the action has become devoid of purpose
         since, with effect from July 2005, the contract concluded by the City of Brunswick concerning waste disposal has also been
         rescinded.
      
The Commission responds, in its observations relating to the statements in intervention of the French Republic, the Kingdom
         of the Netherlands and of the Republic of Finland, that it retains an interest in obtaining from the Court a ruling on whether,
         on expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion issued under Article EC, the Federal Republic of Germany had
         already complied with the judgment of April in Joined Cases C‑20/and C‑28/Commission v Germany.  The Commission states, however, that an order for payment of a periodic penalty payment is no longer necessary.
      
In that regard, it should be recalled that, according to settled case-law, the reference date for assessing whether there
         has been a failure to fulfil obligations under Article EC is the date of expiry of the period prescribed in the reasoned
         opinion issued under that provision (see Case C‑119/Commission v Italy [2006] ECR I‑6885, paragraph 27, and case-law cited).
      
In the present case, the period referred to in the reasoned opinion which, as is apparent from the receipt stamp, was received
         by the German authorities on April 2004, was one of two months.  The reference date for assessing whether there has been
         a failure to fulfil obligations under Article EC is therefore June 2004.  At that date, the contract concluded by the
         City of Brunswick for waste disposal had not yet been terminated. 
      
Nor, moreover, is the action inadmissible contrary to the Federal Republic of Germany’s submissions at the hearing, on the
         ground that the Commission is no longer requesting the imposition of a periodic penalty payment.
      
Since the Court has jurisdiction to impose a financial penalty not suggested by the Commission (see, to that effect, Case
         C-304/Commission v France [2005] ECR I-6263, paragraph 90), the action is not inadmissible simply because the Commission takes the view, at a certain
         stage of the procedure before the Court, that a penalty is no longer necessary.
      
With regard, thirdly, to the plea of inadmissibility based on Article of Directive 89/665, to which the Advocate General
         refers in point of her Opinion, it is appropriate to note that the particular procedure laid down in that provision constitutes
         a preventive measure which can neither derogate from nor replace the powers of the Commission under Articles EC and EC (see, to that effect, Case C-394/Commission v Greece [2005] ECR I‑4713, paragraph 27, and case-law cited).
      
It follows from all the foregoing that the action is admissible.
 Substance
The Commission takes the view that the Federal Republic of Germany has not adopted measures sufficient to comply with the
         judgment in Joined Cases C‑20/and C‑28/Commission v Germany, since that Member State did not, before the date of expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion, rescind the
         contract concluded by the City of Brunswick for waste disposal.
      
The Federal Republic of Germany reiterates the position expressed in the letter from the German Government of December
         that rescission of the contracts affected by that judgment was not required and submits that the steps set out in that
         communication constituted measures sufficient to comply with that judgment.
      
In that regard, it should be recalled that, as is apparent from paragraph of the judgment in Joined Cases C‑20/and C‑28/Commission v Germany, the City of Brunswick and Braunschweigsche Kohlebergwerke (‘BKB’) concluded a contract under which BKB was made responsible
         for residual waste disposal by thermal processing for a period of years from June/July 1999.
      
As the Advocate General observes in point of her Opinion, the measures mentioned by the German Government in its letter
         of December were intended exclusively to prevent the conclusion of new contracts which would constitute failures to
         fulfil obligations similar to those found in that judgment.  However, they did not prevent the contract concluded by the City
         of Brunswick from continuing to have full effect on June 2004. 
      
Accordingly, since that contract had not been terminated on June 2004, the failure to fulfil obligations continued on that
         date.  The adverse effect on the freedom to provide services arising from the disregard of the provisions of Directive 92/subsists throughout the entire performance of the contracts concluded in breach thereof (Joined Cases C‑20/and C‑28/Commission v Germany, paragraph 36).  Furthermore, at that date, the failure to fulfil obligations was to continue for decades, given the long
         period for which the contract in question had been concluded. 
      
Having regard to all those facts, the view cannot be taken, in a situation such as that of the present case, that, with regard
         to the contract concluded by the City of Brunswick, the Federal Republic of Germany had adopted, as at June 2004, measures
         implementing the judgment in Joined Cases C‑20/and C‑28/Commission v Germany. 
      
However, the Federal Republic of Germany, supported by the French Republic, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic
         of Finland, submits that the second subparagraph of Article 2(6) of Directive 89/665, which allows Member States to provide
         in their legislation that, after the conclusion of a contract following the award of a public contract, the bringing of an
         action can give rise only to an award of damages and, thus, to exclude any possibility of rescission of that contract, precludes
         a finding of failure to fulfil obligations within the meaning of Article EC with regard to such a contract entailing the
         obligation to rescind it.  According to those Member States, the principles of legal certainty and of the protection of legitimate
         expectations, the principle pacta sunt servanda, the fundamental right to property, Article EC and the case-law of the Court regarding the limitation in time of the
         effects of a judgment also preclude such a result.
      
However, such arguments cannot be upheld. 
With regard, firstly, to the second subparagraph of Article 2(6) of Directive 89/665, the Court has already held that, although
         that provision permits the Member States to preserve the effects of contracts concluded in breach of directives relating to
         the award of public contracts and thus protects the legitimate expectations of the parties thereto, its effect cannot be,
         unless the scope of the EC Treaty provisions establishing the internal market is to be reduced, that the contracting authority’s
         conduct vis-à-vis third parties is to be regarded as in conformity with Community law following the conclusion of such contracts
         (Joined Cases C‑20/and C‑28/Commission v Germany, paragraph 39).
      
If the second subparagraph of Article 2(6) of Directive 89/does not affect the application of Article EC, nor can
         it affect the application of Article EC, without, in a situation such as that in the present case, reducing the scope
         of the Treaty provisions establishing the internal market. 
      
Furthermore, the second subparagraph of Article 2(6) of Directive 89/665, which has the objective of guaranteeing the existence,
         in all Member States, of effective remedies for infringements of Community law in the field of public procurement or of the
         national rules implementing that law, so as to ensure the effective application of the directives on the coordination of public
         procurement procedures (Case C‑470/Universale-Bau and Others [2002] ECR I‑11617, paragraph 71), relates, as is apparent from its wording, to the compensation which a person harmed by
         an infringement committed by a contracting authority may obtain from it.  That provision, because of its specific nature,
         cannot be regarded also as regulating the relations between a Member State and the Community in the context of Articles EC and EC.
      
With regard, secondly, even if it were to be accepted that the principles of legal certainty and of the protection of legitimate
         expectations, the principle pacta sunt servanda and the right to property could be used against the contracting authority by the other party to the contract in the event
         of rescission, Member States cannot rely thereon to justify the non-implementation of a judgment establishing a failure to
         fulfil obligations under Article EC and thereby evade their own liability under Community law (see, by analogy, Case C‑470/AGM.-COS.MET [2007] ECR I-0000, paragraph 72). 
      
With regard, thirdly, to Article EC, according to which ‘this Treaty shall in no way prejudice the rules in Member States
         governing the system of property ownership’, it should be recalled that that article does not have the effect of exempting
         the Member States’ systems of property ownership from the fundamental rules of the Treaty (see Case C‑463/Commission v Spain [2003] ECR I‑4581, paragraph 67, and case-law cited).  The particular features of the system of property ownership in a Member
         State cannot therefore justify the continuation of a failure to fulfil obligations which consists of an obstacle to the freedom
         to provide services in disregard of the provisions of Directive 92/50.
      
Moreover, it should be recalled that a Member State cannot plead provisions, practices or situations prevailing in its domestic
         legal order to justify the failure to observe obligations arising under Community law (see Commission v Italy, paragraph 25, and case-law cited).
      
Fourthly, with regard to the Court’s case-law on the limitation in time of the effects of a judgment, it is sufficient to
         state that, in any event, that case-law does not justify the non-implementation of a judgment establishing a failure to fulfil
         obligations under Article EC. 
      
Although, with regard to the contract concluded by the City of Brunswick, it must therefore be held that the Federal Republic
         of Germany had not, as at June 2004, adopted the measures to implement the judgment in Joined Cases C‑20/and C‑28/Commission v Germany, the same is not, however, true at the date of examination of the facts by the Court.  It follows that the imposition of
         the periodic penalty payment, which the Commission is in fact no longer requesting, is not justified. 
      
In the same way, the facts of the present case are such that it does not appear necessary to order payment of a lump sum.
         
      
Accordingly, it must be held that, by having failed, at the date on which the period laid down in the reasoned opinion issued
         by the Commission pursuant to Article EC, to adopt all the necessary measures to comply with the judgment in Joined Cases
         C‑20/and C‑28/Commission v Germany regarding the conclusion of a contract for waste disposal by the City of Brunswick, the Federal Republic of Germany has failed
         to fulfil its obligations under that article. 
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings.  As the Commission has asked that costs be awarded against the Federal Republic
         of Germany and the latter has been unsuccessful, the Federal Republic of Germany must be ordered to pay the costs.  The intervening
         Member States, the French Republic, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic of Finland, must be ordered to bear their
         own costs in accordance with Article 69(4) of the Rules of Procedure.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by having failed, at the date on which the period laid down in the reasoned opinion issued by the Commission
            of the European Communities pursuant to Article EC, to adopt all the necessary measures to comply with the judgment of
            April in Joined Cases C‑20/and C‑28/Commission v Germany regarding the conclusion of a contract for waste disposal by the City of Brunswick (Germany), the Federal Republic of Germany
            has failed to fulfil its obligations under that article;
2.      Orders the Federal Republic of Germany to pay the costs;
3.      Orders the French Republic, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic of Finland to bear their own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 