
Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber) of November – ArchiMEDES v Commission
(Case C‑317/P)
Appeal – Set‑off of claims governed by separate legal orders – Application for repayment of sums advanced – Principle of litis denuntiatio – Rights of the defence and right to a fair hearing
1.                     Procedure – Statement of reasons for judgments – Scope (Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 36) (see paras 76-78)
2.                     Appeals – Grounds – Plea submitted for the first time in the context of the appeal – Inadmissibility (see paras 88-91)
3.                     Appeals – Grounds – Grounds of a judgment vitiated by an infringement of Union law (see para 105)
4.                     Appeals – Grounds – Plea in law to the effect that there is no mechanism for the joinder of a third party (see paras 121-125)
5.                     Appeals – Grounds – Mere repetition of the pleas and arguments put forward before the Court of First Instance – Inadmissibility
            (see paras 130-134)
Re: 
Appeal brought against the judgment of the Court of First Instance (Fifth Chamber) of June in Joined Cases T‑396/and T‑397/ArchiMEDES
 v 
Commission
, by which that court dismissed the action brought by the applicant at first instance seeking, first, annulment of the Commission’s
                  decisions to recover certain sums paid under a contract with the applicant and to set off their reciprocal claims and, second,
                  an order for the Commission to pay the remainder of the balance due under that contract – Non-applicability of the principle
                  of 
               
litis denuntiatio
 – Rejection of the claim for the co-contractors to be held jointly and severally liable – Infringement of the rights of the
                  defence and of the right to a fair hearing.
               
Operative part
The Court: 
1.
	Dismisses the appeal; 
2.
	Orders Architecture, microclimat, énergies douces – Europe et Sud SARL (ArchiMEDES) to pay the costs.
Top  
 