
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-459/Willy Gerekens
and
Association agricole pour la promotion de la commercialisation laitière Procola 
v
State of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Cour de cassation (Luxembourg))
(Reference for a preliminary ruling – Milk – Additional levy in the milk and milk products sector – National legislation – Levy fixed retroactively – General principles of legal certainty and non-retroactivity)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Milk and milk products – Additional levy on milk – National rules replacing
            rules held by the Court of Justice to be discriminatory – Retroactive application to production under the abolished scheme
            – Breach of the principles of legal certainty and non-retroactivity – None
(Council Regulations Nos 856/and 857/84)
2.        Agriculture – Common agricultural policy – Objectives – Rational development of milk production and guarantee of a fair income
            for producers – Introduction of an additional levy on milk – Lawfulness
(Council Regulations Nos 856/and 857/84)
1.        The general principles of Community law of legal certainty and non-retroactivity do not mean that, for the application of
         Community rules establishing production quotas of the type introduced by Regulations No 856/84, amending Regulation No 804/on the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products and No 857/adopting general rules for the application
         of the levy referred to in Article 5c of Regulation No 804/68, a Member State is precluded from adopting, in place of initial
         rules held by the Court of Justice to be discriminatory, new rules applying retroactively to production in excess of the production
         quotas introduced after the entry into force of those regulations, but in accordance with the national rules which have been
         replaced.
      
On the one hand, the aim pursued by such national rules requires that, for the purpose of implementing the arrangements for
         the additional levy on milk properly and effectively, the arrangements be applied retroactively. On the other hand, traders
         cannot expect that producers will not be subject to an additional levy on excess quantities of milk produced in excess of
         the quotas allocated to those producers. 
      
(see paras 27, 32-33, 38, operative part)
2.        The additional levy on milk provided for in Regulations No 856/amending Regulation No 804/on the common organisation
         of the market in milk and milk products and No 857/adopting general rules for the application of the levy referred to in
         Article 5c of Regulation No 804/is not to be regarded as a penalty analogous to those provided for under Articles and
         of Regulation No 536/laying down detailed rules on the application of the additional levy on milk and milk products.
      
In effect, it amounts to a restriction arising from market policy rules or structural policy, since it is to be considered
         to be intervention to stabilise agricultural markets and is to be used to finance expenditure in the milk sector. It follows
         that, apart from its obvious aim of requiring milk producers to observe the reference quantities allocated to them, the additional
         levy has an economic objective too, in that it is intended to bring to the Community the funds necessary for disposal of milk
         produced by producers in excess of their quotas. 
      
(see paras 36-37)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)July 2004(1)
(Reference for a preliminary ruling  –  Milk  –  Additional levy in the milk and milk products sector  –  National legislation  –  Levy fixed retroactively  –  General principles of legal certainty and non-retroactivity)
 In Case C-459/02,
             REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Cour de Cassation (Luxembourg) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings
            pending before that court between
            
Willy Gerekens,Association agricole pour la promotion de la commercialisation laitière Procola 
and
State of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg
 on the interpretation of the general principles of Community law of legal certainty and non-retroactivity in respect of national
            rules in the sphere of milk production quotas which were adopted in place of initial rules held by the Court of Justice to
            be discriminatory and which make it possible to penalise retroactively production in excess of those quotas after the entry
            into force of Council Regulation (EEC) No 856/of March amending Regulation (EEC) No 804/on the common organisation
            of the market in milk and milk products (OJ L 90, p. 10) and Council Regulation (EEC) No 857/of March adopting
            general rules for the application of the levy referred to in Article 5c of Regulation (EEC) No 804/in the milk and milk
            products sector (OJ L 90, p. 13), but in accordance with the national rules which have been replaced,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),,
 composed of: A. Rosas, acting for the President of the Third Chamber, R. Schintgen and N. Colneric (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,Registrar: R. Grass,
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
–
 Mr Gerekens and the association agricole pour la promotion de la commercialisation laitière Procola, by F. Entringer, avocat,
               
–
 the State of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, by F. Hoffstetter, acting as Agent, assisted by G. Pierret, avocat,
               
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by G. Berscheid and C. Cattabriga, acting as Agents,
               
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By judgment of November 2002, received at the Court on December 2002, the Cour de Cassation (Court of Cassation) referred
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC a question on the interpretation of the general principles of Community
         law of legal certainty and non-retroactivity of certain rules of national law on milk production quotas adopted in place of
         initial rules which were held by the Court of Justice to be discriminatory and under which sanctions could be imposed retroactively
         where those quotas had been exceeded after the entry into force of Council Regulation (EEC) No 856/of March amending
         Regulation (EEC) No 804/on the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products (OJ L 90, p. 10) and Council
         Regulation (EEC) No 857/of March adopting general rules for the application of the levy referred to in Article
         5c of Regulation (EEC) No 804/in the milk and milk products sector (OJ L 90, p. 13), but under the regime of the national
         rules which had been replaced.
         
            
 That question was raised in proceedings brought by Mr Gerekens, a milk producer, and the association agricole pour la promotion
         de la commercialisation laitière Procola (‘Procola’) against the State of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg in respect of the
         harm which the State was alleged to have caused to the claimants as a result of errors in the application of the Community
         rules on the additional levy on milk.
         
Legal framework
Community rules
            
 Regulations Nos 856/and 857/introduced, from April 1984, an additional levy on quantities of cows’ milk delivered
         in excess of a reference quantity to be determined, for each producer or each purchaser, within the limit of an overall quantity
         guaranteed to each Member State. The reference quantity exempt from the additional levy was equal to the quantity of milk
         or milk equivalent either delivered by a producer or purchased by a dairy, according to the formula chosen by the Member State
         concerned, during the reference year.
         
            
 According to the second subparagraph of Article 5c(1) of Regulation (EEC) No 804/of the Council of June on the
         common organisation of the market in milk and milk products (OJ, English Special Edition (I), p. 176), as amended by
         Regulation No 856/(hereinafter ‘Regulation No 806/84’):
         ‘…
          The levy system shall be implemented in each region of the territory of the Member States in accordance with one of the following
         formulas:
         
Formula A
–
A levy shall be payable by every milk producer on the quantities of milk and/or milk equivalent which he has delivered to
               a purchaser and which for the months concerned exceed a reference quantity to be determined.
            
Formula B
–
A levy shall be payable by every purchaser of milk or other milk products on the quantities of milk or milk equivalent which
               have been delivered to him by a producer and which, during the months concerned, exceed a reference quantity to be determined.
            
–
The purchaser liable to the levy shall pass on the burden in the price paid to those producers who have increased their deliveries,
               in proportion to their contribution to the purchaser’s reference quantity being exceeded.’
            
            
 Article of Regulation No 857/provides:
         ‘1.     The reference quantity referred to in Article 5c(1) of … Regulation [No 804/68] shall be equal to the quantity of milk or
         milk equivalent delivered by the producer during the calendar year (formula A), or to the quantity of milk or milk equivalent
         purchased by a purchaser during the calendar year (formula B), plus 1%.
          2.       However, Member States may provide that on their territory the reference quantity referred to in paragraph shall be equal
         to the quantity of milk or milk equivalent delivered or purchased during the calendar year or the calendar year,
         weighted by a percentage established so as not to exceed the guaranteed quantity defined in Article 5c of Regulation (EEC)
         No 804/68. This percentage may be varied on the basis of the level of deliveries of certain categories of persons liable for
         the levy, of the trend in deliveries in certain regions between and or of the trend in deliveries of certain categories
         of persons liable during this same period, under conditions to be determined according to procedures provided for in Article
         of Regulation (EEC) No 804/68.
          3.       The percentages referred to in paragraphs and can be adapted by the Member States to ensure the application of Articles
         and 4.’
         
            
 Article 4(1)(a) and (2) of Regulation No 857/provides:
         ‘1.     In order to complete the restructuring of milk production at national or regional level or at the level of the collecting
         areas, the Member States may, in connection with the application of formulas A and B:
         
(a)
grant to producers undertaking to discontinue milk production definitively compensation paid in one or more annual payments;
…
 2.       The reference quantities freed shall, as necessary, be added to the reserve referred to in Article 5.’
         
            
 Article 6(1) of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 1371/of May laying down detailed rules for the application of the
         additional levy referred to in Article 5c of Regulation (EEC) No 804/(OJ L 132, p. 11) provides:
         ‘1.     Where formula B is applied, purchasers’ reference quantities shall be adjusted to take account of:
         …
         
(d)
replacements as referred to in Article 7(2) of Regulation (EEC) No 857/84, including changes by producers from one purchaser
               to another.’
            
National rules
            
 The Community rules were implemented in Luxembourg, inter alia, for the first period of their application, April to
         March 1985, by the Grand-Ducal Regulation of October concerning the application, in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg,
         of the arrangements for the additional levy on milk (Mémorial 1984, p. 1486; ‘the Grand-Ducal Regulation’) and, for the following periods, by the Grand-Ducal Regulation of November
         1985, bearing the same title (Mémorial 1985, p. 1256; ‘the Grand-Ducal Regulation’). 
         
            
 Of the two implementing formulas available under Article 5c of Regulation No 804/68, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg had chosen
         formula B. 
         
            
 In accordance with Article 2(1) of Regulation No 857/84, Luxembourg had taken as the reference year. The basic quantities
         thus determined were then weighted by certain coefficients which took account of the trend in quantities of milk delivered
         to the various purchasers between and by comparison with the average trend in deliveries in Luxembourg. 
         
            
 Under the Luxembourg rules, the individual reference quotas of producers who had voluntarily ceased production could be allocated
         to the dairies, regarded as purchasers, to which the deliveries had been made rather than to the national reserve, although
         that possibility was not provided for, in the context of formula B, by Article 7(2) of Regulation No 857/84, read with Article
         6(1)(d) of Regulation No 1371/and Article 4(1)(a) and (2) of Regulation No 857/84.
         
            
 With regard to that legislation (‘the old legislation’), the Court of Justice, in its judgment of November in Joined
         Cases 201/and 202/Klensch and Others [1986] ECR 3477, ruled as follows:
         
‘(1)
The prohibition of discrimination laid down in Article 40(3) of the Treaty precludes a Member State from choosing as
               the reference year pursuant to Article of Council Regulation No 857/of March if, owing to the particular conditions
               on the market of that State, the implementation of the option in its territory leads to discrimination between producers within
               the Community.
            
(2)
Article of Council Regulation No 857/of March precludes, except for those cases expressly provided for in the
               rules, a Member State which has chosen as the reference year pursuant to that provision from determining purchasers’
               reference quantities by weighting the quantity of milk purchased by them during by a percentage which varies on the basis
               of the level of deliveries of certain categories of persons liable for the levy.
            
(3)
Council Regulation No 857/of March precludes a Member State which has opted for formula B from adding the individual
               reference quantity of a producer who has ceased production to the reference quantity of the purchaser to whom that producer
               was supplying milk at the time when he ceased production, instead of adding it to the national reserve.’
            
            
 Following the judgment in Klensch and Others, the Conseil d’État (Council of State) (Luxembourg), by judgment of February 1987, annulled the ministerial decisions
         fixing the individual quotas on the basis of the national rules in the cases pending before it.
         
            
 As regards the legislative provisions, the Grand-Ducal Regulation of and other earlier provisions were repealed by Article
         of the Grand-Ducal Regulation of July concerning the application, in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, of the arrangements
         for the additional levy on milk (Mémorial 1987, p. 850; ‘the Grand-Ducal Regulation’, which introduced new arrangements for the levy (‘the new legislation’).
         
         
            
 The Grand-Ducal Regulation was given retroactive effect by the Law of August making applicable to the milk years
         before the 1987/milk year the provisions of the Grand-Ducal Regulation of July concerning the application, in the
         Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, of the arrangements for the additional levy on milk (Mémorial 1987, p. 1698). The single article of that law provides that that regulation is to apply to the 12-month periods of application
         of the additional levy on milk commencing on April 1984, April and April 1986, respectively, and provides for a
         new allocation of reference quantities on the basis of that regulation. 
         
            
 Article of the Grand-Ducal Regulation maintains the choice previously made by the Luxembourg authorities, namely formula
         B. However, according to Article 3(1) of that regulation the reference year chosen is no longer but 1983, for which the
         reference quantities are reduced by a total percentage representing the sum of two components, one of which is determined
         according to the volume of deliveries of milk to a purchaser by the supplier concerned during and the other according
         to the increase, during that year, of milk deliveries to a purchaser compared with those made in from the same holding.
         The regulation no longer provides that the individual reference quantities of producers who have ceased their activity are
         to be allocated to the purchasers of those quantities.
         
            
 Following the implementation of those new rules, the Luxembourg Ministry of Agriculture fixed the quotas for the various purchasers
         for each milk year from April 1984. The Luxembourg authorities did not apply to any of the producers concerned an imposition
         greater than that which would have been applied by the and Grand-Ducal Regulations. The most favourable situation
         was applied.
         
Main proceedings and question referred to the Court
            
 Mr Gerekens is one of the Luxembourg milk producers affiliated to Procola who were required to pay an additional levy on
         milk for the milk periods 1985/and 1986/87. It follows from a letter sent to Procola by the Luxembourg Ministry of Agriculture
         on March that the levy payable by Mr Gerekens under the old rules would have been LUF 298, whereas the levy payable
         under the new rules came to LUF 860. On the basis of the situation most favourable to the producer, the latter amount
         was chosen, but it was increased by LUF by way of default interest. Mr Gerekens and Procola sought reimbursement of
         that sum from the State of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, relying on the unlawful retroactivity of the applicable national
         rules. That claim is based on the harm which they claim to have suffered owing to errors committed by the State in the national
         rules and in the application of the Community provisions on the additional levy on milk.
         
            
 Mr Gerekens and Procola were unsuccessful at first instance and on appeal and appealed to the Cour de Cassation. 
         
            
 Taking the view that the dispute before it raised a question of the interpretation of Community law which had not been the
         subject-matter of a preliminary ruling in a similar case, the Cour de Cassation decided to stay the proceedings and to refer
         the following question to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
         ‘Do the general principles of Community law of legal certainty and non-retroactivity mean that, for the application of Community
         rules establishing production quotas of the type introduced by Council Regulation (EEC) No 856/of March amending
         Regulation (EEC) No 804/on the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products … and Council Regulation (EEC)
         No 857/of March adopting general rules for the application of the levy referred to in Article 5c of Regulation
         (EEC) No 804/in the milk and milk products sector …, a Member State is precluded from adopting, in place of initial rules
         held by the Court of Justice of the European Communities to be discriminatory, new rules which make it possible to penalise
         retroactively production in excess of production quotas introduced after the entry into force of the Community regulations
         but under the aegis of the national rules which have been replaced?’
         
The question referred to the Court
            
 The requirements flowing from the protection of the general principles recognised in the Community legal order are also binding
         on the Member States when they implement Community regulations. 
         
            
 Those general principles include legal certainty (see Case C-453/Kühne & Heitz [2004] ECR I-0000, paragraph 24).
         
            
 Although, as a general rule, the principle of legal certainty precludes a Community measure from taking effect from a point
         in time before its publication, it may exceptionally be otherwise when the purpose to be attained so demands and when the
         legitimate expectations of the persons concerned are duly respected (see Joined Cases C-143/and C-92/Zuckerfabrik Süderdithmarschen and Zuckerfabrik Soest [1991] ECR I-415, paragraph 49, and Case C-110/Netherlands v Council [2001] ECR I-8763, paragraph 151).
         
            
 Likewise, the principle of legal certainty is not infringed by national rules which are applicable retroactively, when the
         purpose to be attained so demands and when the legitimate expectations of the persons concerned are duly respected.
         
            
 The aim pursued by the national rules in issue in the main proceedings is to implement the arrangements for the additional
         levy on milk, in accordance with the obligation placed on Member States by Article 5c(1) of Regulation No 804/68. The purpose
         of those arrangements is to re-establish, by limiting milk production, the balance between supply and demand in the milk market,
         which is characterised by structural surpluses (see, in particular, Case 84/Erpelding [1988] ECR 2647, paragraph 26). Their objective can be attained only if all the quantities produced and coming into the market
         in one way or another, and thus influencing supply and demand, are taken into account from the first 12-month period beginning
         April 1984. 
         
            
 Therefore a Member State would compromise that objective and jeopardise the effectiveness of the arrangements for the additional
         levy on milk if it did not replace national rules intended to implement those arrangements which proved to be incompatible
         with Community law by new rules having retroactive effect. There can be no exception to the obligation to implement regulations
         which introduced the arrangements for the levy on milk, which are mandatory in every aspect from the time when they entered
         into force.
         
            
 Consequently, the aim pursued by national rules such as those in issue in the main proceedings requires that, for the purpose
         of implementing the arrangements for the additional levy on milk properly and effectively, the arrangements be applied retroactively.
         
         
            
 As regards the possible breach of the legitimate expectations of those concerned, it must be borne in mind that any trader
         in regard to whom an institution has given rise to justified hopes may rely on the principle of the protection of legitimate
         expectations (Case C-22/Irish Farmers Association and Others [1997] ECR I‑1809, paragraph 25). 
         
            
 The principle of the protection of legitimate expectations may be invoked as against particular rules only to the extent that
         the public authorities themselves have previously created a situation which could give rise to a legitimate expectation (see,
         to that effect, Case C-179/Weidacher [2002] ECR I-501, paragraph 31). Furthermore, where a prudent and discriminating trader could have foreseen the adoption
         of a Community measure likely to affect his interests, he cannot plead that principle if the measure is adopted (see, to that
         effect, Irish Farmers Association and Others, cited above, paragraph 25).
         
            
 In the present case, the applicants do not invoke an expectation that the and Grand-Ducal Regulations would apply
         permanently. They rely only on their expectation that the new rules would not be retroactive.
         
            
 There is nothing in the history of that legislation, as described by the claimants in the main proceedings themselves in the
         observations which they have submitted to the Court, from which it might be concluded that traders were able to place their
         legitimate expectation in the fact that the period between April and the date on which the Grand-Ducal Regulation
         entered into force would not be covered by national rules designed to implement the Community arrangements for the additional
         levy on milk. 
         
            
 It is clear from those observations that the competent national authorities never allowed the slightest doubt to subsist as
         regards the fact that the and Grand-Ducal Regulations would be replaced by new rules having retroactive effect.
         Only the means whereby such effect would be given to those rules was discussed at national level, in order to ensure that
         such retroactivity would be consistent with Luxembourg law.
         
            
 Thus, traders such as the claimants in the main proceedings must have expected that the Grand-Ducal Regulation would
         be implemented with retroactive effect. Furthermore, they would have been able to foresee the adoption of such a measure owing
         to the continuing production surpluses on the milk market and the obligation placed on Member States to implement the arrangements
         for the additional levy on milk as soon as they entered into force, on April 1984. Therefore, with effect from the date
         of entry into force of Regulations Nos 856/and 857/they could not expect that producers would not be subject to an additional
         levy on quantities of cows’ milk produced in excess of the quotas allocated to those producers. 
         
            
 Nor is the retroactive effect of the Grand-Ducal Regulation called into question by the arguments of the claimants in
         the main proceedings that in economic terms the additional levy has all the effects of a penal measure in so far as it penalises
         producers who have exceeded their quotas in precise proportion to that surplus production. 
         
            
 The principle that penal provisions may not have retroactive effect is indeed one which is common to all the legal orders
         of the Member States and is enshrined in Article of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
         Freedoms as a fundamental right which takes its place among the general principles of law whose observance is ensured by the
         Court of Justice (Case 63/Kirk [1984] ECR 2689, paragraph 22, and Case C-331/Fedesa and Others [1990] ECR I-4023, paragraph 42).
         
            
 However, the Court has held that the additional levy is not to be regarded as a penalty analogous to those provided for under
         Articles and of Regulation No 536/of March laying down detailed rules on the application of the additional levy
         on milk and milk products (OJ L 57, p. 12) (see Joined Cases C-231/00, C‑303/and C-451/Cooperativa Lattepiù and Others [2004] ECR I-0000, paragraph 74, and Joined Cases C-480/to C-482/00, C-484/00, C‑489/to C‑491/and C-497/to C-499/Azienda Agricola Ettore Ribaldi and Others [2004] ECR I-0000, paragraph 58).
         
            
 The additional levy on milk amounts to a restriction arising from market policy rules or structural policy. It is to be considered
         to be intervention to stabilise agricultural markets and is to be used to finance expenditure in the milk sector. It follows
         that, apart from its obvious aim of requiring milk producers to observe the reference quantities allocated to them, the additional
         levy has an economic objective too, in that it is intended to bring to the Community the funds necessary for disposal of milk
         produced by producers in excess of their quotas (see Cooperativa Lattepiù and Others, paragraphs and 75, and Azienda Agricola Ettore Ribaldi and Others, paragraphs and 59). 
         
            
 It follows from all of the foregoing considerations that the answer to the question referred to the Court must be that the
         general principles of Community law of legal certainty and non-retroactivity do not mean that, for the application of Community
         rules establishing production quotas of the type introduced by Regulations Nos 856/and 857/84, a Member State is precluded
         from adopting, in place of initial rules held by the Court of Justice to be discriminatory, new rules applying retroactively
         to production in excess of the production quotas introduced after the entry into force of those regulations, but in accordance
         with the national rules which have been replaced.
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the Luxembourg Government and by the Commission, which have submitted observations to the Court, are
         not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before
         the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court.
         
On those grounds,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
 in answer to the questions referred to it by the Cour de Cassation by judgment of November 2002, hereby rules:
         The general principles of Community law of legal certainty and non-retroactivity do not mean that, for the application of
               Community rules establishing production quotas of the type introduced by Council Regulation (EEC) No 856/of March amending Regulation (EEC) No 804/on the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products and Council Regulation
               (EEC) No 857/of March adopting general rules for the application of the levy referred to in Article 5c of Regulation
               (EEC) No 804/in the milk and milk products sector, a Member State is precluded from adopting, in place of initial rules
               held by the Court of Justice to be discriminatory, new rules applying retroactively to production in excess of the production
               quotas introduced following the entry into force of those regulations, but in accordance with the national rules which have
               been replaced.
Rosas
Schintgen
Colneric
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on July 2004.
         
R. Grass
A. Rosas
Registrar
President of the Third Chamber
 –
            
Language of the case: French.
Top  
 