
Avis juridique important
|
61988JJudgment of the Court (Second Chamber) of February 1990.  -  Rosaria Vella and others v Alliance nationale des mutualités chrétiennes.  -  Reference for a preliminary ruling: Cour du travail de Mons - Belgium.  -  Social security for migrant workers - Period of incapacity in respect of which an allowance was received treated as a period of insurance.  -  Case C-324/88.  
European Court reports Page I-Pub.RJ Page Pub somm 
Summary
Parties
Operative part
Keywords
++++Social security for migrant workers - Periods of insurance - Periods treated as such - To be determined in accordance with the national legislation under which the period in question was completed  ( EEC Treaty, Arts to 51; Council Regulations Nos 3, Art . 1(r ) and 1408/71, Art . 1(r ) )  
Summary
Article 1(r ) of Regulation No and Article 1(r ) of Regulation No 1408/must be interpreted as meaning that periods treated as periods of insurance are to be determined solely in accordance with the criteria laid down in the national legislation under which those periods were completed, provided that the national legislation observes the provisions of Articles to of the Treaty ( see the judgment of June in Case 2/Murru v Caisse régionale d' assurance maladie de Paris (( )) ECR ). 
Parties
In Case C-324/REFERENCE to the Court under Article of the EEC Treaty by the cour du travail, Mons, for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending before that court between  Rosario Vella, widow of Mr Scaduto, and Others,  v  Alliance nationale des mutualités chrétiennes, Brussels,  on the interpretation of Articles and of Regulation No of the Council of September concerning social security for migrant workers ( Journal officiel 1958, 30, p . ), Article of Regulation No of the Council of December implementing procedures and supplementary provisions in respect of Regulation No ( Journal officiel 1958, 30, p . ), and Articles 1, and of Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408/of the Council of June on the application of social security schemes to employed persons, to self-employed persons and members of their families moving within the Community ( Official Journal, English Special Edition ( II ), p . ),  THE COURT ( Second Chamber )  composed of : F . A . Schockweiler, President of Chamber, G . F . Mancini and T . F . O' Higgins, Judges,  in answer to the question referred to it by the cour du travail, Mons, by judgment of November 1988, hereby rules :  
Operative part
Article 1(r ) of Regulation No and Article 1(r ) of Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408/must be interpreted as meaning that periods treated as periods of insurance must be determined solely on the basis of the criteria contained in the national legislation under which those periods were completed . 
Top  
 