
Order of the President of the Court of October — Hassan v Council(Case C-168/P(R))
Appeal – Application for interim measures – Restrictive measures against Syria – Freezing of funds and economic resources – Application for suspension of operation and interim measures – Lack of any urgency
1.                     Application for interim measures – Suspension of operation of a measure – Interim measures – Conditions for granting – Prima
            facie case – Urgency – Serious and irreparable damage – Cumulative nature – Balancing of all the interests at issue – Order
            of priority of examination and method of verification – Assessment to be made by the court hearing an application for interim
            measures (Art. TFEU and TFEU; Rules of Procedure of the Court, Art. 83, second para; Rules of Procedure of the General
            Court, Article 104, second para) (see paras 22-25)
2.                     Application for interim measures – Suspension of operation of a measure – Interim measures – Conditions for granting – Serious
            and irreparable damage – Burden of proof – Harm caused by the measures freezing funds and economic resources – Evidence capable
            of proving such harm (Arts TFEU and TFEU) (see paras 27, 28, 33, 38-40, 60)
3.                     Application for interim measures – Suspension of operation of a measure – Interim measures – Conditions for granting – Serious
            and irreparable damage – Unrepairable nature of the harm – Assessment solely on the basis of the uncertainty of obtaining
            compensation for pecuniary damage if an action for damages is brought — Not permissible (Art. TFEU and TFEU; Rules
            of Procedure of the Court, Art. 83, second para) (see paras 77-81) 
Re:
Appeal brought against the order of the President of the General Court of February in Case T-572/R 
Hassan 
v 
Council
, rejecting the application for interim measures, in particular an application for suspension of the implementation of Council
                  Implementing Decision 2011/515/CFSP of August implementing Decision 2011/273/CFSP concerning restrictive measures
                  against Syria (OJ L 218, p. 20), and of Council Implementing Regulation (EU) No 843/of August implementing
                  Regulation (EU) No 442/concerning restrictive measures in view of the situation in Syria (OJ L 218, p. 1), in so
                  far as they concern the appellant.  
               
Operative part
1.
	The appeal is dismissed. 
2.
	Mr Hassan is ordered to pay the costs.
Top  
 