
Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber) of July – Freistaat Sachsen and Land Sachsen-Anhalt v Commission
(Case C-459/P)
Appeal – State aid – Aid for a training project concerning certain jobs in the new DHL centre at Leipzig-Halle airport – Action for annulment against the decision declaring part of the aid incompatible with the common market – Examination of the need for the aid – Failure to take into account the incentive effects of the aid and its positive external effects on the choice of the site
1.                     State aid – Prohibition – Derogations – Categories of aid, defined by legislation, that may be regarded as compatible with
            the internal market – Regulation No 68/on training aid – Criteria for assessment – Individual examination of training
            aid ineligible for the exemption from notification – Taking into account the criterion of the necessity of the aid – Whether
            permissible (Art. 107(3)(c) TFEU; Commission Regulation No 68/2001, Art. 5) (see paras 30-31, 33)
2.                     State aid – Prohibition – Derogations – Aid eligible for the derogation laid down in Article 107(3)(c) TFEU – Operating aid
            – Excluded – Training aides – Criterion of the necessity of the aid – Positive effects for certain economic areas or sectors
            – Irrelevant (Art. 107(3)(c) TFEU) (see paras 34-36, 61)
3.                     State aid – Prohibition – Derogations – Aid that may be regarded as compatible with the internal market – Assessment in the
            light of Article 107(3)(c) TFEU – Taking into account previous practice – Excluded – No breach of the principle of equal treatment
            (Art. 107(3)(c) TFEU) (see paras 38, 50)
4.                     State aid – Examination by the Commission – Training aid – Incentive effect of the aid on the choice of the site where an
            undertaking is to be installed – Irrelevant (Art. 107(3)(c) TFEU) (see para. 42)
5.                     State aid – Examination by the Commission – Elements to be taken into consideration – Taking account of factors linked to
            the recipient’s practice or business strategy – Whether permissible (Arts 107(3) TFEU and 108(2) and (3) TFEU) (see paras
            48-49)
6.                     State aid – Prohibition – Derogations – Aid eligible for the derogation laid down in Article 107(3)(c) TFEU – Conditions –
            Training aid – Criterion of the necessity of the aid – Taking account of the existence of national legislation requiring staff
            to be trained – Whether permissible (Art. 107(3)(c) TFEU) (see para. 56)
Re: 
Appeal brought against the judgment of the General Court (Eighth Chamber) of July in Case T‑396/Freistaat Sachsen and Land Sachsen-Anhalt
 v 
Commission
, by which that court dismissed the action seeking partial annulment of Decision 2008/878/EC of July regarding the
                  State aid which Germany intends to grant to DHL (OJ L 312, p. 31) – Aid for training – Decision declaring part of the
                  aid incompatible with the common market – Incorrect examination of the necessity of the aid – Disregard of the positive external
                  effects of the aid and of its incentive effects on the choice of the site.
               
Operative part
The Court: 
1.
	Dismisses the appeal; 
2.
	Orders Freistaat Sachsen and Land Sachsen-Anhalt to pay the costs.
Top  
 