
Case C-301/Ireland
v
European Parliament
and
Council of the European Union
(Action for annulment – Directive 2006/24/EC – Retention of data generated or processed in connection with the provision of electronic communications services – Choice of legal basis)
Summary of the Judgment
Acts of the institutions – Choice of legal basis
(Art. EC; European Parliament and Council Directive 2006/24)
Directive 2006/24/EC on the retention of data generated or processed in connection with the provision of publicly available
         electronic communications services or of public communications networks had to be adopted on the basis of Article EC.
      
The Community legislature may have recourse to Article EC in particular where disparities exist between national rules
         which are such as to obstruct the fundamental freedoms or to create distortions of competition and thus have a direct effect
         on the functioning of the internal market.
      
It is apparent that the differences between the various national rules adopted on the retention of data relating to electronic
         communications were liable to have a direct impact on the functioning of the internal market and that it was foreseeable that
         that impact would become more serious with the passage of time. Such a situation justified the Community legislature in pursuing
         the objective of safeguarding the proper functioning of the internal market through the adoption of harmonised rules. 
      
Furthermore, Directive 2006/regulates operations which are independent of the implementation of any police and judicial
         cooperation in criminal matters. It harmonises neither the issue of access to data by the competent national law-enforcement
         authorities nor that relating to the use and exchange of those data between those authorities. Those matters, which fall,
         in principle, within the area covered by Title VI of the EU Treaty, have been excluded from the provisions of that directive.
         It follows that the substantive content of Directive 2006/is directed essentially at the activities of service providers
         in the relevant sector of the internal market, to the exclusion of State activities coming under Title VI of the EU Treaty.
         In light of that substantive content, it must be held that that directive relates predominantly to the functioning of the
         internal market. 
      
(see paras 63, 71-72, 83-85, 93)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
February (*)
      
(Action for annulment – Directive 2006/24/EC – Retention of data generated or processed in connection with the provision of electronic communications services – Choice of legal basis)
In Case C‑301/06,
ACTION for annulment under Article EC, brought on July 2006,
Ireland, represented by D. O’Hagan, acting as Agent, E. Fitzsimons, D. Barniville and A. Collins, SC, with an address for service
         in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
supported by:
Slovak Republic, represented by J. Čorba, acting as Agent,
      
intervener,
v
European Parliament, represented initially by H. Duintjer Tebbens, M. Dean and A. Auersperger Matić, and subsequently by the latter two and K. Bradley,
         acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
Council of the European Union, represented by J.-C. Piris, J. Schutte and S. Kyriakopoulou, acting as Agents,
      
defendants,
supported by:
Kingdom of Spain, represented by M.A. Sampol Pucurull and J. Rodríguez Cárcamo, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
Kingdom of the Netherlands, represented by C. ten Dam and C. Wissels, acting as Agents, 
      
Commission of the European Communities, represented by C. Docksey, R. Troosters and C. O’Reilly, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
European Data Protection Supervisor, represented by H. Hijmans, acting as Agent, 
      
interveners,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas and K. Lenaerts, Presidents of Chambers, A. Tizzano,
         J. N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur), R. Silva de Lapuerta, K. Schiemann, J. Klučka, A. Arabadjiev, C. Toader and J.‑J. Kasel,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: Y. Bot,
Registrar: C. Strömholm, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on July 2008,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on October 2008,
gives the following
Judgment
By its action, Ireland requests the Court to annul Directive 2006/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of March on the retention of data generated or processed in connection with the provision of publicly available electronic
         communications services or of public communications networks and amending Directive 2002/58/EC (OJ L 105, p. 54), on
         the ground that it was not adopted on an appropriate legal basis.
      
 Legal framework
 Directive 95/46/EC
Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of October on the protection of individuals with
         regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data (OJ L 281, p. 31) lays down rules relating
         to the processing of personal data in order to protect the rights of individuals in that respect, while ensuring the free
         movement of those data in the European Community.
      
Article 3(2) of Directive 95/provides:
      
‘This Directive shall not apply to the processing of personal data:
–        in the course of an activity which falls outside the scope of Community law, such as those provided for by Titles V and VI
         of the Treaty on European Union and in any case to processing operations concerning public security, defence, State security
         (including the economic well-being of the State when the processing operation relates to State security matters) and the activities
         of the State in areas of criminal law,
      
–        by a natural person in the course of a purely personal or household activity.’
 Directive 2002/58/EC
Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of July concerning the processing of personal data
         and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector (Directive on privacy and electronic communications)
         (OJ L 201, p. 37) was adopted with a view to supplementing Directive 95/by provisions specific to the telecommunications
         sector.
      
Under Article 6(1) of Directive 2002/58:
      
‘Traffic data relating to subscribers and users processed and stored by the provider of a public communications network or
         publicly available electronic communications service must be erased or made anonymous when it is no longer needed for the
         purpose of the transmission of a communication without prejudice to paragraphs 2, and of this Article and Article 15(1).’
      
Article 15(1) of Directive 2002/states:
      
‘Member States may adopt legislative measures to restrict the scope of the rights and obligations provided for in Article
         5, Article 6, Article 8(1), (2), (3) and (4), and Article of this Directive when such restriction constitutes a necessary,
         appropriate and proportionate measure within a democratic society to safeguard national security (i.e. State security), defence,
         public security, and the prevention, investigation, detection and prosecution of criminal offences or of unauthorised use
         of the electronic communication system, as referred to in Article 13(1) of Directive 95/46/EC. To this end, Member States
         may, inter alia, adopt legislative measures providing for the retention of data for a limited period justified on the grounds
         laid down in this paragraph. All the measures referred to in this paragraph shall be in accordance with the general principles
         of Community law, including those referred to in Article 6(1) and (2) of the Treaty on European Union.’
      
 Directive 2006/Recitals to in the preamble to Directive 2006/provide as follows:
      
‘(5)      Several Member States have adopted legislation providing for the retention of data by service providers for the prevention,
         investigation, detection and prosecution of criminal offences. Those national provisions vary considerably.
      
(6)      The legal and technical differences between national provisions concerning the retention of data for the purpose of prevention,
         investigation, detection and prosecution of criminal offences present obstacles to the internal market for electronic communications,
         since service providers are faced with different requirements regarding the types of traffic and location data to be retained
         and the conditions and periods of retention.
      
(7)      The Conclusions of the Justice and Home Affairs Council of December underline that, because of the significant growth
         in the possibilities afforded by electronic communications, data relating to the use of electronic communications are particularly
         important and therefore a valuable tool in the prevention, investigation, detection and prosecution of criminal offences,
         in particular organised crime.
      
(8)       The Declaration on Combating Terrorism adopted by the European Council on March instructed the Council to examine
         measures for establishing rules on the retention of communications traffic data by service providers.
      
(9)       Under Article of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR), everyone has
         the right to respect for his private life and his correspondence. Public authorities may interfere with the exercise of that
         right only in accordance with the law and where necessary in a democratic society, inter alia, in the interests of national
         security or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.
         Because retention of data has proved to be such a necessary and effective investigative tool for law enforcement in several
         Member States, and in particular concerning serious matters such as organised crime and terrorism, it is necessary to ensure
         that retained data are made available to law enforcement authorities for a certain period, subject to the conditions provided
         for in this Directive. The adoption of an instrument on data retention that complies with the requirements of Article of
         the ECHR is therefore a necessary measure.
      
(10) On July 2005, the Council reaffirmed in its declaration condemning the terrorist attacks on London the need to adopt
         common measures on the retention of telecommunications data as soon as possible.
      
(11) Given the importance of traffic and location data for the investigation, detection and prosecution of criminal offences,
         as demonstrated by research and the practical experience of several Member States, there is a need to ensure at European level
         that data that are generated or processed, in the course of the supply of communications services, by providers of publicly
         available electronic communications services or of a public communications network are retained for a certain period, subject
         to the conditions provided for in this Directive. ’
      
Recital in the preamble to Directive 2006/states:
      
‘Since the objectives of this Directive, namely to harmonise the obligations on providers to retain certain data and to ensure
         that those data are available for the purpose of the investigation, detection and prosecution of serious crime, as defined
         by each Member State in its national law, cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States and can therefore, by reason
         of the scale and effects of this Directive, be better achieved at Community level, the Community may adopt measures, in accordance
         with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article of the [EC] Treaty. In accordance with the principle of proportionality,
         as set out in that Article, this Directive does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives.’
      
Recital in the preamble to Directive 2006/is worded as follows:
      
‘This Directive is without prejudice to the power of Member States to adopt legislative measures concerning the right of access
         to, and use of, data by national authorities, as designated by them. Issues of access to data retained pursuant to this Directive
         by national authorities for such activities as are referred to in the first indent of Article 3(2) of Directive 95/46/EC fall
         outside the scope of Community law. However, they may be subject to national law or action pursuant to Title VI of the Treaty
         on European Union. Such laws or action must fully respect fundamental rights as they result from the common constitutional
         traditions of the Member States and as guaranteed by the ECHR. …’
      
Article 1(1) of Directive 2006/provides:
      
‘This Directive aims to harmonise Member States’ provisions concerning the obligations of the providers of publicly available
         electronic communications services or of public communications networks with respect to the retention of certain data which
         are generated or processed by them, in order to ensure that the data are available for the purpose of the investigation, detection
         and prosecution of serious crime, as defined by each Member State in its national law.’
      
Article 3(1) of that directive provides:
      
‘By way of derogation from Articles 5, and of Directive 2002/58/EC, Member States shall adopt measures to ensure that
         the data specified in Article of this Directive are retained in accordance with the provisions thereof, to the extent that
         those data are generated or processed by providers of publicly available electronic communications services or of a public
         communications network within their jurisdiction in the process of supplying the communications services concerned.’
      
Article of Directive 2006/states:
      
‘Member States shall adopt measures to ensure that data retained in accordance with this Directive are provided only to the
         competent national authorities in specific cases and in accordance with national law. The procedures to be followed and the
         conditions to be fulfilled in order to gain access to retained data in accordance with necessity and proportionality requirements
         shall be defined by each Member State in its national law, subject to the relevant provisions of European Union law or public
         international law, and in particular the ECHR as interpreted by the European Court of Human Rights.’
      
Article of Directive 2006/states:
      
‘Member States shall ensure that the following categories of data are retained under this Directive:
(a)      data necessary to trace and identify the source of a communication:
…
(b)       data necessary to identify the destination of a communication:
…
(c)      data necessary to identify the date, time and duration of a communication:
…
(d)      data necessary to identify the type of communication:
…
(e)      data necessary to identify users’ communication equipment or what purports to be their equipment:
…
(f)      data necessary to identify the location of mobile communication equipment:
…
2.      No data revealing the content of the communication may be retained pursuant to this Directive.’
Article of Directive 2006/provides:
      
‘Member States shall ensure that the categories of data specified in Article are retained for periods of not less than six
         months and not more than two years from the date of the communication.’
      
Article of Directive 2006/states:
      
‘Without prejudice to the provisions adopted pursuant to Directive 95/46/EC and Directive 2002/58/EC, each Member State shall
         ensure that providers of publicly available electronic communications services or of a public communications network respect,
         as a minimum, the following data security principles with respect to data retained in accordance with this Directive:
      
…’
Under Article of Directive 2006/24:
      
‘Member States shall ensure that the data specified in Article are retained in accordance with this Directive in such a
         way that the data retained and any other necessary information relating to such data can be transmitted upon request to the
         competent authorities without undue delay.’
      
Article of Directive 2006/is worded as follows:
      
‘The following paragraph shall be inserted in Article of Directive 2002/58/EC:
“1a. Paragraph shall not apply to data specifically required by Directive [2006/24] to be retained for the purposes referred
         to in Article 1(1) of that Directive”.’
      
 Background to the dispute
On April 2004, the French Republic, Ireland, the Kingdom of Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
         Ireland submitted to the Council of the European Union a proposal for a framework decision to be adopted on the basis of Articles
         31(1)(c) EU and 34(2)(b) EU. The subject of that proposal was the retention of data processed and stored in connection with
         the provision of publicly available electronic communications services or data in public communication networks for the purposes
         of the prevention, investigation, detection and prosecution of criminal offences, including terrorism (Council Document 8958/04).
      
The Commission of the European Communities stated that it favoured the legal basis used in that proposed framework decision
         with respect to a part of it. In particular, it pointed out that Article EU did not allow an instrument based on the EU
         Treaty to affect the acquis communautaire, in this case Directives 95/and 2002/58. Taking the view that the determination of the categories of data to be retained
         and of the relevant retention period fell within the competence of the Community legislature, the Commission reserved the
         right to submit a proposal for a directive.
      
On September 2005, the Commission adopted a proposal, based on Article EC, for a directive of the European Parliament
         and of the Council on the retention of data processed in connection with the provision of public electronic communication[s]
         services and amending Directive 2002/[COM(2005) final].
      
During its session on and December 2005, the Council decided to seek the adoption of a directive based on the EC Treaty,
         rather than pursuing the adoption of a framework decision.
      
On December 2005, the European Parliament delivered its opinion in accordance with the co-decision procedure under Article
         EC.
      
The Council adopted Directive 2006/by qualified majority at its session on February 2006. Ireland and the Slovak Republic
         voted against the adoption of that directive.
      
 Forms of order sought by the parties
Ireland claims that the Court should:
      
–        annul Directive 2006/on the ground that it was not adopted on an appropriate legal basis, and
–        order the Council and the Parliament to pay the costs.
The Parliament contends that the Court should:
      
–        primarily, dismiss the action as unfounded, and
–        order Ireland to pay all the costs of the present proceedings,
–        or, in the alternative, should the Court annul Directive 2006/24, declare that the effects of that directive are to remain
         in force until a new measure enters into force.
      
The Council contends that the Court should:
      
–        dismiss the action brought by Ireland, and
–        order Ireland to pay the costs.
By orders of February 2007, the President of the Court granted leave to the Slovak Republic to intervene in support of the
         form of order sought by Ireland and to the Kingdom of Spain, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Commission and the European
         Data Protection Supervisor to intervene in support of the forms of order sought by the Parliament and the Council.
      
 The action
 Arguments of the parties
Ireland submits that the choice of Article EC as the legal basis for Directive 2006/is a fundamental error. Neither
         Article EC nor any other provision of the EC Treaty is, in its view, capable of providing an appropriate legal basis for
         that directive. Ireland argues principally that the sole objective or, at least, the main or predominant objective of that
         directive is to facilitate the investigation, detection and prosecution of crime, including terrorism. Therefore, the only
         legal basis on which the measures contained in Directive 2006/may be validly based is Title VI of the EU Treaty, in particular
         Articles EU, 31(1)(c) EU and 34(2)(b) EU.
      
Ireland argues that an examination of, in particular, recitals to and in the preamble to Directive 2006/and of
         the fundamental provisions laid down therein, in particular Article 1(1) thereof, shows that reliance on Article EC as
         the legal basis for that directive is inappropriate and unjustifiable. That directive, it contends, is clearly directed towards
         the fight against crime.
      
Ireland submits that measures based on Article EC must have as their ‘centre of gravity’ the harmonisation of national
         laws in order to improve the functioning of the internal market (see, inter alia, Joined Cases C‑317/and C-318/Parliament v Council and Commission [2006] ECR I‑4721). The provisions of Directive 2006/concern the fight against crime and are not intended to address defects
         in the internal market.
      
If, contrary to its main argument, the Court were to hold that Directive 2006/is indeed intended, inter alia, to prevent
         distortions or obstacles to the internal market, Ireland submits in the alternative that that objective must be regarded as
         being purely incidental to the main or predominant objective of combating crime.
      
Ireland adds that Directive 2002/could be amended by another directive, but the Community legislature is not competent
         to use an amending directive adopted on the basis of Article EC in order to incorporate into Directive 2002/provisions
         falling outside the competence conferred on the Community under the first pillar. The obligations designed to ensure that
         data are available for the investigation, detection and prosecution of criminal offences fall within an area which may only
         be the subject of a measure based on Title VI of the EU Treaty. The adoption of such an instrument would not affect the provisions
         of Directive 2002/within the meaning of Article EU. If the verb ‘affect’, which is used in that article, were to be
         properly construed, it would be necessary to interpret it as not precluding a random or incidental overlap of unimportant
         and secondary subject matter between instruments of the Community and those of the Union.
      
The Slovak Republic supports Ireland’s position. It takes the view that Article EC cannot serve as the legal basis for
         Directive 2006/24, since the latter’s main objective is not to eliminate barriers and distortions in the internal market.
         The directive’s purpose, it submits, is to harmonise the retention of personal data in a manner which goes beyond commercial
         objectives in order to facilitate action by the Member States in the area of criminal law and, for that reason, it cannot
         be adopted under Community competence.
      
According to the Slovak Republic, the retention of personal data to the extent required by Directive 2006/amounts to an
         extensive interference in the right of individuals to privacy as provided for by Article of the ECHR. It is questionable
         whether such far-reaching interference may be justified on economic grounds, in this case the enhanced functioning of the
         internal market. The adoption of an act outside the scope of Community competence, the primary and undisguised purpose of
         which is the fight against crime and terrorism, would be a more appropriate solution, providing a more proportionate justification
         for interference with the right of individuals to protection of their privacy.
      
The Parliament submits that Ireland is being selective in its interpretation of the provisions of Directive 2006/24. Recitals
         and in the preamble thereto, it argues, make it clear that the main or predominant purpose of that directive is to eliminate
         obstacles to the internal market for electronic communications services, while recital confirms that the access to and
         use of the retained data for law-enforcement purposes fall outside the scope of Community competence.
      
The Parliament submits that, following the terrorist attacks of September in New York (United States), March in Madrid (Spain) and July in London (United Kingdom), a number of Member States adopted divergent rules on the retention
         of data. Such differences were liable to impede the provision of electronic communications services. The Parliament takes
         the view that the retention of data constitutes a significant cost element for the providers of publicly available electronic
         communications services or of public communications networks (‘service providers’) and the existence of different requirements
         in that field may distort competition within the internal market. It adds that the main purpose of Directive 2006/is to
         harmonise the obligations imposed by the Member States on service providers in regard to data retention. It follows that Article
         EC is the correct legal basis for that directive.
      
The Parliament also argues that reliance on Article EC as the legal basis is not invalidated by the importance attributed
         to combating crime. While crime prevention has clearly influenced the choices made in Directive 2006/24, that concern does
         not invalidate the choice of Article EC as the legal basis for that directive.
      
Furthermore, Article of Directive 2006/provides, in a manner consistent with the view expressed in recital in the
         preamble thereto, that the conditions for access to and processing of retained data must be defined by the Member States subject
         to the legal provisions of the Union and international law, in particular the ECHR. That approach differs from that adopted
         for the measures which were the subject of the judgment in Parliament v Council and Commission, a case in which airline companies were obliged to grant access to passenger data to a law-enforcement authority in a non-member
         country. Directive 2006/thus respects the separation of areas of competence between the first and third pillars.
      
According to the Parliament, although the retention of an individual’s personal data may in principle constitute interference
         within the meaning of Article of the ECHR, that interference may be justified, in terms of that article, by reference to
         public safety and crime prevention. The issue of justification for such interference must be distinguished from that of the
         correct choice of the legal basis within the legal system of the Union, that being an unrelated matter.
      
The Council submits that, in the years following the adoption of Directive 2002/58, national law-enforcement authorities were
         becoming increasingly concerned about the exploitation of developments in the area of electronic communications for the purpose
         of committing criminal acts. Those new concerns led the Member States to adopt measures to prevent data relating to those
         communications from being erased and to ensure that they were available to law-enforcement authorities. Those measures, the
         Council continues, were divergent and began to affect the proper functioning of the internal market. Recitals and in the
         preamble to Directive 2006/are explicit in that regard.
      
That situation obliged the Community legislature to ensure that uniform rules were imposed on service providers with regard
         to the conditions under which they carried out their activities.
      
For those reasons, during the Community legislature considered it necessary to put an end to the obligation to erase
         data imposed by Articles 5, and of Directive 2002/and to provide that, in future, the data referred to in Article of Directive 2006/would have to be retained for a certain period. That amendment obliges the Member States to ensure that
         such data are retained for a minimum period of six months and a maximum of two years from the date of the communication. The
         purpose of that amendment was to establish precise and harmonised conditions with which service providers must comply in respect
         of the erasure or non-erasure of the personal data referred to in Article of Directive 2006/by thus introducing common
         rules in the Community with a view to ensuring the unity of the internal market.
      
The Council takes the view that, while the need to combat crime, including terrorism, was a determining factor in the decision
         to amend the scope of the rights and obligations laid down in Articles 5, and of Directive 2002/58, that circumstance
         did not prevent Directive 2006/from having to be adopted on the basis of Article EC.
      
Neither Articles EU, EU and EU nor any other article in the EU Treaty can serve as the basis for a measure which,
         in substance, has the objective of amending the conditions under which service providers carry out their activities or of
         making the system established by Directive 2002/inapplicable to them.
      
Rules relating to the categories of data to be retained by service providers and the retention period for those data which
         amend the obligations imposed on the latter by Directive 2002/cannot be the subject of an instrument based on Title VI
         of the EU Treaty. The adoption of such an instrument would affect the provisions of that directive, in breach of Article EU.
      
According to the Council, the rights protected by Article of the ECHR are not absolute and may be subject to restrictions
         under the conditions laid down in Article 8(2) thereof. As provided in Directive 2006/24, the retention of data serves a legitimate
         public interest, recognised in Article 8(2) of the ECHR, and constitutes an appropriate means by which to protect that interest.
      
The Kingdom of Spain and the Kingdom of the Netherlands submit that, as is apparent from recitals 1, 2, and in the preamble
         to Directive 2006/24, the main purpose of that directive is to eliminate obstacles to the internal market generated by existing
         legal and technical differences between the national provisions of the Member States. That directive, in their view, regulates
         the retention of data with the aim of eliminating that type of obstacles, first, by harmonising the obligation to retain data
         and, second, by specifying the criteria relevant to that obligation, such as the categories of data to be retained and the
         retention period.
      
The fact that, under Article 1, Directive 2006/effects such harmonisation ‘in order to ensure that the data are available
         for the purpose of the investigation, detection and prosecution of serious crime, as defined by each Member State in its national
         law’ is a separate matter. Directive 2006/does not regulate the processing of data by the public or law-enforcement authorities
         of the Member States. On the contrary, that harmonisation relates only to the aspects of data retention which directly affect
         the commercial activities of service providers.
      
In so far as Directive 2006/amends Directive 2002/and has a connection with Directive 95/46, the amendments which it
         contains may be properly implemented only by means of a Community instrument and not by an instrument based on the EU Treaty.
      
The Commission recalls that, prior to the adoption of Directive 2006/24, several Member States had adopted national measures
         on data retention pursuant to Article 15(1) of Directive 2002/58. It highlights the significant divergences which existed
         between those measures. For example, the retention periods varied from three months in the Netherlands to four years in Ireland.
         The obligations relating to data retention have significant economic implications for service providers. Divergences between
         those obligations could lead to distortions in the internal market. In that context, it was legitimate to adopt Directive
         2006/on the basis of Article EC.
      
Furthermore, Directive 2006/limits, in a manner harmonised at Community level, the obligations laid down by Directive 2002/58.
         Since the latter was based on Article EC, the legal basis of Directive 2006/cannot be different.
      
The reference to the investigation, detection and prosecution of serious crime in Article 1(1) of Directive 2006/falls
         under Community law because it serves to indicate the legitimate objective of the restrictions imposed by that directive on
         the rights of individuals with regard to data protection. Such an indication is necessary in order to comply both with the
         requirements of Directives 95/and 2002/and with those of Article of the ECHR.
      
The European Data Protection Supervisor submits that the subject-matter of Directive 2006/is covered by Article EC because,
         first, that directive has a direct impact on the economic activities of service providers and may therefore contribute to
         the establishment and functioning of the internal market and, second, had the Community legislature not intervened, a distortion
         of competition in the internal market might have occurred. The aim of combating crime is not the sole, or even the predominant,
         objective of that directive. On the contrary, it was intended in the first place to contribute to the establishment and functioning
         of the internal market and to the elimination of distortions of competition. The directive harmonises the national provisions
         on the retention by private undertakings of certain data in the course of their normal economic activities.
      
Furthermore, Directive 2006/amends Directive 2002/58, which was adopted on the basis of Article EC, and ought for that
         reason to be adopted on the same legal basis. Under Article EU, the Community legislature alone is competent to amend obligations
         arising from a directive based on the EC Treaty.
      
According to the European Data Protection Supervisor, if the EC Treaty could not serve as the basis for Directive 2006/24,
         the provisions of Community law relating to data protection would not protect citizens in cases where the processing of their
         personal data would facilitate crime prevention. In such a situation, the general system of data protection under Community
         law would apply to data-processing for commercial purposes but not to the processing of those data for purposes of crime prevention.
         That would give rise to difficult distinctions for service providers and to a reduction in the level of protection for data
         subjects. Such a situation should be avoided. The need for consistency justifies the adoption of Directive 2006/under the
         EC Treaty.
      
 Findings of the Court
It must be noted at the outset that the question of the areas of competence of the European Union presents itself differently
         depending on whether the competence in issue has already been accorded to the European Union in the broad sense or has not
         yet been accorded to it. In the first hypothesis, it is a question of ruling on the division of areas of competence within
         the Union and, more particularly, on whether it is appropriate to proceed by way of a directive based on the EC Treaty or
         by way of a framework decision based on the EU Treaty. By contrast, in the second hypothesis, it is a question of ruling on
         the division of areas of competence between the Union and the Member States and, more particularly, on whether the Union has
         encroached on the latters’ areas of competence. The present case comes under the first of those two hypotheses.
      
It must also be stated that the action brought by Ireland relates solely to the choice of legal basis and not to any possible
         infringement of fundamental rights arising from interference with the exercise of the right to privacy contained in Directive
         2006/24.
      
Ireland, supported by the Slovak Republic, contends that Directive 2006/cannot be based on Article EC since its ‘centre
         of gravity’ does not concern the functioning of the internal market. The sole objective of the directive, or at least its
         principal objective, is, it is contended, the investigation, detection and prosecution of crime.
      
That argument cannot be accepted.
      
According to the Court’s settled case-law, the choice of legal basis for a Community measure must rest on objective factors
         which are amenable to judicial review, including in particular the aim and the content of the measure (see Case C-440/Commission v Council [2007] ECR I‑9097, paragraph and the case-law cited). 
      
Directive 2006/was adopted on the basis of the EC Treaty and, in particular, Article EC.
      
Article 95(1) EC provides that the Council is to adopt the measures for the approximation of the provisions laid down by law,
         regulation or administrative action in Member States which have as their object the establishment and functioning of the internal
         market. 
      
The Community legislature may have recourse to Article EC in particular where disparities exist between national rules
         which are such as to obstruct the fundamental freedoms or to create distortions of competition and thus have a direct effect
         on the functioning of the internal market (see, to that effect, Case C‑380/Germany v Parliament and Council [2006] ECR I-11573, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Furthermore, although recourse to Article EC as a legal basis is possible if the aim is to prevent the emergence of future
         obstacles to trade resulting from the divergent development of national laws, the emergence of such obstacles must be likely
         and the measure in question must be designed to prevent them (Germany v Parliament and Council, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
It is necessary to ascertain whether the situation which led to the adoption of Directive 2006/satisfies the conditions
         set out in the preceding two paragraphs.
      
As is apparent from recitals and in the preamble to that directive, the Community legislature started from the premiss
         that there were legislative and technical disparities between the national provisions governing the retention of data by service
         providers.
      
In that connection, the evidence submitted to the Court confirms that, following the terrorist attacks mentioned in paragraph
         of this judgment, several Member States, realising that data relating to electronic communications constitute an effective
         means for the detection and prevention of crimes, including terrorism, adopted measures pursuant to Article 15(1) of Directive
         2002/with a view to imposing obligations on service providers concerning the retention of such data.
      
It is also clear from the file that the obligations relating to data retention have significant economic implications for
         service providers in so far as they may involve substantial investment and operating costs.
      
The evidence submitted to the Court shows, moreover, that the national measures adopted up to pursuant to Article 15(1)
         of Directive 2002/differed substantially, particularly in respect of the nature of the data retained and the periods of
         data retention.
      
Finally, it was entirely foreseeable that the Member States which did not yet have rules on data retention would introduce
         rules in that area which were likely to accentuate even further the differences between the various existing national measures.
      
In the light of that evidence, it is apparent that the differences between the various national rules adopted on the retention
         of data relating to electronic communications were liable to have a direct impact on the functioning of the internal market
         and that it was foreseeable that that impact would become more serious with the passage of time.
      
Such a situation justified the Community legislature in pursuing the objective of safeguarding the proper functioning of the
         internal market through the adoption of harmonised rules.
      
Furthermore, it must also be noted that, by laying down a harmonised level of retention of data relating to electronic communications,
         Directive 2006/amended the provisions of Directive 2002/58.
      
Directive 2002/is based on Article EC.
      
Under Article EU, none of the provisions of the EC Treaty may be affected by a provision of the EU Treaty. That requirement
         appears in the first paragraph of Article EU, which introduces Title VI of the EU Treaty, entitled ‘Provisions on police
         and judicial cooperation in criminal matters’ (Case C-440/Commission v Council, paragraph 52).
      
In providing that nothing in the EU Treaty is to affect the Treaties establishing the European Communities or the subsequent
         Treaties and Acts modifying or supplementing them, Article EU aims, in accordance with the fifth indent of Article EU
         and the first paragraph of Article EU, to maintain and build on the acquis communautaire (Case C-91/Commission v Council [2008] ECR I-0000, paragraph 59).
      
It is the task of the Court to ensure that acts which, according to one party, fall within the scope of Title VI of the Treaty
         on European Union and which, by their nature, are capable of having legal effects, do not encroach upon the powers conferred
         by the EC Treaty on the Community (Case C-91/Commission v Council, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In so far as the amendment of Directive 2002/effected by Directive 2006/comes within the scope of Community powers,
         Directive 2006/could not be based on a provision of the EU Treaty without infringing Article thereof.
      
In order to determine whether the legislature has chosen a suitable legal basis for the adoption of Directive 2006/24, it
         is also appropriate, as follows from paragraph of this judgment, to examine the substantive content of its provisions.
      
In that connection, the provisions of Directive 2006/are essentially limited to the activities of service providers and
         do not govern access to data or the use thereof by the police or judicial authorities of the Member States.
      
More specifically, the provisions of Directive 2006/are designed to harmonise national laws on the obligation to retain
         data (Article 3), the categories of data to be retained (Article 5), the periods of retention of data (Article 6), data protection
         and data security (Article 7) and the conditions for data storage (Article 8). 
      
By contrast, the measures provided for by Directive 2006/do not, in themselves, involve intervention by the police or law-enforcement
         authorities of the Member States. Thus, as is clear in particular from Article of the directive, it is provided that service
         providers are to retain only data that are generated or processed in the course of the provision of the relevant communication
         services. Those data are solely those which are closely linked to the exercise of the commercial activity of the service providers.
      
Directive 2006/thus regulates operations which are independent of the implementation of any police and judicial cooperation
         in criminal matters. It harmonises neither the issue of access to data by the competent national law-enforcement authorities
         nor that relating to the use and exchange of those data between those authorities. Those matters, which fall, in principle,
         within the area covered by Title VI of the EU Treaty, have been excluded from the provisions of that directive, as is stated,
         in particular, in recital in the preamble to, and Article of, Directive 2006/24.
      
It follows that the substantive content of Directive 2006/is directed essentially at the activities of service providers
         in the relevant sector of the internal market, to the exclusion of State activities coming under Title VI of the EU Treaty.
      
In light of that substantive content, Directive 2006/relates predominantly to the functioning of the internal market.
      
Against such a finding, Ireland argues that, by the judgment in Parliament v Council and Commission, the Court annulled Council Decision 2004/496/EC of May on the conclusion of an Agreement between the European Community
         and the United States of America on the processing and transfer of PNR data by Air Carriers to the United States Department
         of Homeland Security, Bureau of Customs and Border Protection (OJ L 183, p. 83, and – corrigendum – OJ L 255, p.
         168).
      
In paragraph of the judgment in Parliament v Council and Commission, the Court held that that agreement related to the same transfer of data as did Commission Decision 2004/535/EC of May
         on the adequate protection of personal data contained in the Passenger Name Record of air passengers transferred to the
         United States Bureau of Customs and Border Protection (OJ L 235, p. 11).
      
The latter decision concerned the transfer of passenger data from the reservation systems of air carriers situated in the
         territory of the Member States to the United States Department of Homeland Security, Bureau of Customs and Border Protection.
         The Court held that that the subject-matter of that decision was data-processing which was not necessary for a supply of services
         by the air carriers, but which was regarded as necessary for safeguarding public security and for law-enforcement purposes.
         In paragraphs to of the judgment in Parliament v Council and Commission, the Court held that such data-processing was covered by Article 3(2) of Directive 95/46, according to which that directive
         does not apply, in particular, to the processing of personal data relating to public security and the activities of the State
         in areas of criminal law. The Court accordingly concluded that Decision 2004/did not fall within the scope of Directive
         95/46.
      
Since the agreement which was the subject of Directive 2004/related, in the same way as Decision 2004/535, to data-processing
         which was excluded from the scope of Directive 95/46, the Court held that Decision 2004/could not have been validly adopted
         on the basis of Article EC (Parliament v Council and Commission, paragraphs and 69).
      
Such a line of argument cannot be transposed to Directive 2006/24.
      
Unlike Decision 2004/496, which concerned a transfer of personal data within a framework instituted by the public authorities
         in order to ensure public security, Directive 2006/covers the activities of service providers in the internal market and
         does not contain any rules governing the activities of public authorities for law-enforcement purposes.
      
It follows that the arguments which Ireland draws from the annulment of Decision 2004/by the judgment in Parliament v Council and Commission cannot be accepted.
      
Having regard to all of the foregoing considerations, Directive 2006/had to be adopted on the basis of Article EC.
      
The present action must accordingly be dismissed.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful parties’ pleadings. Since the Parliament and the Council have applied for Ireland to be ordered
         to pay the costs and Ireland has been unsuccessful, Ireland must be ordered to pay the costs. Pursuant to the first subparagraph
         of Article 69(4), the interveners in this case are to bear their own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby:
1.      Dismisses the action;
2.      Orders Ireland to pay the costs;
3.      Orders the Kingdom of Spain, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Slovak Republic, the Commission of the European Communities
            and the European Data Protection Supervisor to bear their own respective costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 