
Order of the Court (Sixth Chamber) of January – Entorn v Commission
(Case C‑162/P)
Appeal – EAGGF – Financial participation in a demonstration project concerning the introduction of new cultivation techniques in sumac production
         – Withdrawal of financial aid).
      
1.                     Appeals – Grounds – Mere repetition of the pleas and arguments put forward before the Court of First Instance – Failure to
            specify the error of law relied on – Inadmissibility (Art. EC; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.;
            Rules of Procedure of the Court, Art. 112(1), first subpara., (c)) (see paras 42-44)
2.                     Appeals – Grounds – Review by the Court of the assessment of the evidence – Possible only where the clear sense of the evidence
            has been distorted (Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance, Art. 66(1) (see  para. 49)
3.                     Procedure – Measures of inquiry (see paras 55-56)
4.                     Community law – Principles – Fundamental rights – Presumption of innocence (Art. EU) (see  paras 59-60)
5.                     Appeals – Grounds – Review by the Court of the assessment of the facts and evidence – Possible only where the clear sense
            of the evidence has been distorted (Art. EC; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58) (see paras 65, 68)
Re:
Application for suspension of the operation of the judgment of the Court of First Instance (Second Chamber) of January
                  in Case T-141/Entorn
 v 
Commission
, rejecting an application for annulment of the Commission decision withdrawing aid under the European Agricultural Guidance
                  and Guarantee Fund (EAGGF), Guidance Section, granted to the applicant for a demonstration project concerning the introduction
                  of new cultivation techniques
               
Operative part:
The Court:
1.
Dismisses the appeal;
2.
Orders Entorn, Societat Limitada Enginyeria i Serveis to pay the costs.
Top  
 