
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-282/Refinarias de Açúcar Reunidas SA (RAR)vSociedade de Indústrias Agricolas Açoreanas SA (Sinaga)(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Tribunal Judicial da Comarca de Ponta Delgada)
         
«(Sugar – Decision 91/315/EEC – Poseima Programme – Specific measures in favour of the Azores and Madeira – Regulation (EEC) No 1600/– Shipment to the rest of the Community of white sugar produced in the Azores from sugarbeet harvested there or from raw beet
               sugar imported exempt from levies and/or customs duties – Meaning of processing of products – Meaning of traditional shipment to the rest of the Community)»
            
Opinion of Advocate General Mischo delivered on May I - Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber), May I - Summary of the Judgment
1..
Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar – Regulation No 1600/concerning specific measures for the Azores and Madeira relating to certain agricultural products – Second paragraph of Article – Meaning of processing of products – Refining of raw beet sugar into white sugar – Whether included  (Council Regulation No 1600/92, Art. 8, second para.) 
2..
Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar – Regulation No 1600/concerning specific measures for the Azores and Madeira relating to certain agricultural products – Second paragraph of Article – Meaning of traditional shipment to the rest of the Community  (Council Regulation No 1600/92, Art. 8, second para.) 
3..
Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar – Regulation No 1600/concerning specific measures for the Azores and Madeira relating to certain agricultural products – White sugar produced in the Azores from sugarbeet harvested in the Azores and which receives Community aid provided for in
                     Article – Shipment to mainland Portugal – Whether permissible – Conditions  
                  (Council Regulation No 1600/92, Art. 25) 
4..
Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar – Regulation No 1600/concerning specific measures for the Azores and Madeira relating to certain agricultural products – White sugar produced in the Azores from raw beet sugar imported under the specific supply arrangements provided for under
                     Title I – Shipment to mainland Portugal – Whether permissible – Conditions  
                  (Council Regulation No 1600/92, Title I, Art. 8, second para.) 
1.
 The refining of raw beet sugar into white sugar must be considered to be the processing of a product within the meaning of
         the second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 1600/concerning specific measures for the Azores and Madeira relating
         to certain agricultural products since first, that refining is an important stage of manufacture and, second, the Community
         rules take account of the objective differences between raw and white sugar. see paras 38-39, operative part 2.
 Shipments which, at the time of the entry into force of Regulation No 1600/concerning specific measures for the Azores
         and Madeira relating to certain agricultural products on July 1992, were ongoing, regular and significant are traditional
         shipments to the rest of the Community within the meaning of the second paragraph of Article of that regulation. If the
         Community legislature intended to take account of traditional trade flows it was not for the purpose of acknowledging historical
         rights but in order to prevent the introduction of the specific supply arrangements, intended for the benefit of those islands,
         from resulting in the loss of markets on which their products were regularly sold. It follows that the shipments of sugar
         must satisfy relatively strict conditions in order to be classified as traditional trade flows or traditional shipments. Those
         requirements refer as much to the magnitude of the shipments as to their frequency and the fact that they are ongoing. Sporadic
         and small-scale shipments made in the past cannot satisfy those requirements.  see paras 43-44, 49, operative part 3.
 Community law does not preclude the shipment to mainland Portugal of white sugar produced in the Azores from sugarbeet harvested
         in the Azores and which receives the Community aid provided for in Article of Regulation No 1600/concerning specific
         measures for the Azores and Madeira relating to certain agricultural products, up to a limit of tonnes of production
         per year. In the absence of an express prohibition and in the light of the fundamental principle of the free movement of goods,
         it is apparent that there is no restriction on shipping sugar produced from sugarbeet harvested in the Azores to the rest
         of the Community.  see paras 55, 62, operative part 4.
 Community law does not preclude the shipment to mainland Portugal of white sugar produced in the Azores from raw beet sugar
         imported under the specific supply arrangements provided for under Title I of Regulation No 1600/92, provided that it corresponds
         to traditional shipments within the meaning of the second paragraph of Article of that regulation. see para. 68, operative part JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)May (1)
((Sugar – Decision 91/315/EEC – Poseima Programme – Specific measures in favour of the Azores and Madeira – Regulation (EEC) No 1600/– Shipment to the rest of the Community of white sugar produced in the Azores from sugarbeet harvested there or from raw beet
                  sugar imported exempt from levies and/or customs duties – Meaning of processing of products – Meaning of traditional shipment to the rest of the Community))
               
In Case C-282/00, 
            REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Tribunal Judicial da Comarca de Ponta Delgada (Portugal) for a preliminary
            ruling in the proceedings pending before that court between 
            
 Refinarias de Açúcar Reunidas SA (RAR)
and
 Sociedade de Indústrias Agricolas Açoreanas SA (Sinaga),
on the interpretation of Council Regulation (EEC) No 1600/of June concerning specific measures for the Azores and
            Madeira relating to certain agricultural products (OJ L 173, p. 1),
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),,
composed of: M. Wathelet, President of the Chamber, C.W.A. Timmermans, D.A.O. Edward, P. Jann and S. von Bahr (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
Advocate General: J. Mischo, Registrar: H.A. Rühl, Principal Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
Refinarias de Açúcar Reunidas SA (RAR), by P. Reis, advogado, 
               
─
Sociedade de Indústrias Agricolas Açoreanas SA (Sinaga), by M. Marques Mendes and R. Bastos, advogados, and by M.L. Duarte,
               professor of law, 
               
─
the Portuguese Government, by L. Fernandes, acting as Agent, 
               
─
the Commission of the European Communities, by A. Alves Vieira and G. Berscheid, acting as Agents, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of Refinarias de Açúcar Reunidas SA (RAR), represented by P. Reis, Sociedade de Indústrias
               Agricolas Açoreanas SA (Sinaga), represented by M. Marques Mendes, R. Bastos and M.L. Duarte, the Portuguese Government, represented
               by L. Fernandes, and the Commission, represented by A.M. Alves Vieira and G. Berscheid, assisted by N. Castro Marques, advogado,
               at the hearing on March 2002,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2002, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By order of July 2000, received at the Court on July 2000, the Tribunal Judicial da Comarca de Ponta Delgada (Ponta
         Delgada Local Court) referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC four questions on the interpretation
         of Council Regulation (EEC) No 1600/of June concerning specific measures for the Azores and Madeira relating to
         certain agricultural products (OJ L 173, p. 1). 
         
            
Those questions were raised in proceedings between Refinarias de Açúcar Reunidas SA (
         RAR), established in Oporto (Portugal), and Sociedade de Indústrias Agricolas Açoreanas SA (
         Sinaga), established in Ponta Delgada in the Azores, concerning the marketing by Sinaga in mainland Portugal of white sugar produced
         from sugarbeet harvested in the Azores and in receipt of aid for processing established by the Poseima Programme, or from
         raw sugarbeet imported exempt from levies and/or customs duties under that programme. 
         
Law
            
Council Decision 91/315/EEC of June setting up a programme of options specific to the remote and insular nature of
         Madeira and the Azores (Poseima) (OJ L 171, p. 10) notes, in the first recital to the preamble, that the autonomous Portuguese
         regions of the Azores and Madeira belong politically and economically to the Community by virtue of the Act concerning the
         conditions of accession of the Kingdom of Spain and the Portuguese Republic and the adjustments to the Treaties (OJ L
         302, p. 23,  
         the Act of Accession) which did, however, recognise some of their specific characteristics by allowing various isolated exceptions in the application
         of the common policies.  
         
            
Article of Decision 91/provides that: 
         
1.
 An action programme for Madeira and the Azores, known as Poseima (Programme of options specific to the remote and insular
         nature of Madeira and the Azores) and set out in the Annex, is hereby established. This programme shall cover regulatory measures
         and financial commitments.
         
2.
 Within the context of the powers conferred upon it by the Treaty, the Council shall adopt the provisions necessary for the
         execution of this programme and invite the Commission to submit the relevant proposals as soon as possible.
         
            
The Poseima Programme, as set out in the Annex to Decision 91/315, includes a Title I entitled  
         General principles, which covers sections to 4.  
         
            
According to section of the Poseima Programme, the programme is based on the twofold principle that the Azores and Madeira
         form an integral part of the Community and the recognition of the regional reality characterised by the special features and
         constraints specific to the regions concerned as distinct from the Community as a whole. 
         
            
Pursuant to section 3.of the Poseima Programme, the programme will help to attain the general aims of the Treaty by contributing
         to the achievement of the following specific objectives: 
         
─
better integration of the Azores and Madeira into the Community by establishing an appropriate framework for the application
            of common policies in those regions, 
         
─
the full involvement of the Azores and Madeira in the dynamic of the internal market by making optimum use of existing Community
            regulations and instruments, 
         
─
assisting the Azores and Madeira to catch up economically and socially, principally through Community financing of the specific
            measures contained in Poseima. 
         
            
Under section of the Poseima Programme, the measures and operations contained in the programme should enable the specific
         nature and constraints of the Azores and Madeira to be taken into account without undermining the integrity and coherence
         of the Community legal order. 
         
            
Title IV of the Poseima Programme, which covers sections to 12, sets out specific measures to mitigate the effects of the
         exceptional geographical situation of the Azores and Madeira. 
         
            
According to section 9.of the Poseima Programme, the Council or the Commission, as appropriate, are to adopt the measures
         laid down in sections 9.to 9.5, which are intended to alleviate the impact of the additional costs involved in maintaining
         supplies of agricultural products resulting from the remote and insular nature of the Azores and Madeira. 
         
            
According to section 9.of the Poseima Programme: In the case of essential agricultural products for consumption or processing in the two regions, this Community action will,
         within the limits of market requirements of the Azores and Madeira and taking into account local production and traditional
         trade flows, and making sure that the proportion of Community supplies of the products concerned is maintained, consist in:─ [exempting] from levies and/or customs duties and the amounts specified in Article of the Act of Accession products
         originating in third countries, ─ permitting, on equivalent terms, without application of the amounts laid down in the aforementioned Article 240, the supply
         of Community products taken into intervention storage or available on the Community market. The principles underlying the application of this system will be as follows: ─ the quantities covered by this supply system will be determined annually in supply estimates, ─ in order to ensure that these measures have an impact on the level of production costs and consumer prices, a mechanism
         will have to be set up to monitor this impact up to the end user stage, ─ with respect to raw sugar supplies for the Azores, the system will be applicable until such time as local production of
         sugarbeet is sufficient to satisfy local market needs and as long as the total volume of sugar refined in the Azores does
         not exceed tonnes, 
         
─
...
         
            
Title V of the Poseima Programme, which covers sections to 16, sets out specific measures to support products of the Azores
         and Madeira. 
         
            
According to the first indent of section 14.of the Poseima Programme, the measures to help support the local production
         of sugarbeet in the Azores may take the form of: 
         
─
flat-rate aid per hectare for the development of local production, subject to a limit on quantities corresponding to production
            of tonnes of sugar; 
         
─
specific aid for the processing of locally grown beet into white sugar, with a view to stabilising supply costs.  
         
            
Following the adoption of Decision 91/315, the Council adopted Regulation No 1600/92.  
         
            
Under the 12th recital of the preamble to Regulation No 1600/92, the specific measures for the Azores must, in particular,
         help to improve the conditions in which sugarbeet is produced and the competitiveness of local sugar manufacturing, within
         the limit of determined quantities. 
         
            
Title I of Regulation No 1600/92, entitled  
         Specific supply arrangements, contains Articles to of that regulation. 
         
            
Article of Regulation No 1600/provides: For each marketing year, forecast supply balances shall be established for the agricultural products necessary for human consumption
         and processing listed in Annex I for the Azores and Annex II for Madeira. These balances may be revised during the year on
         the basis of trends in the regions' requirements. Separate forecasts may be made to assess the requirements of the processing
         and packaging industries regarding products for the local market or traditionally dispatched to the rest of the Community.
         
            
Article of Regulation No 1600/provides: 
         
1.
 Levies and/or customs duties shall not apply to direct import into the Azores and Madeira from third countries of products
         covered by the specific supply arrangements, within the limit of the quantities determined in the supply balances.
         
2.
 To ensure coverage of the requirements referred to in Article in terms of quantity, price and quality, with a view to [ensuring]
         that the proportion of products supplied by the Community is preserved, supplies to these regions shall also be effected through
         the mobilisation of Community products held in intervention storage or available on the Community market, on terms equivalent,
         for the end user, to the advantage resulting from exemption from import duties on imports of products from third countries.
         The terms of supply shall be fixed by reference to the costs of various sources of supply and the prices applied to exports
         to third countries.
         
3.
 The arrangements provided for in this article shall be implemented in such a way as to take account, without prejudice to
         paragraph 4, in particular, of:
         
─
the specific requirements of the regions concerned and, in the case of products intended for processing, the specific quality
            requirements, 
         
─
traditional trade flows with the rest of the Community. 
         
4.
 In the case of the supply of raw sugar to the Azores, requirements shall be assessed taking account of the development of
         local sugarbeet production. The quantities covered by the supply arrangements shall be determined in such a way that the total
         annual volume of sugar refined in the Azores does not exceed tonnes.
         Article of Regulation (EEC) No 1785/shall not apply to the Azores with regard to raw sugar.
         
            
Under Article of Regulation No 1600/92: Application of the supply arrangements provided for in Articles and shall be subject to the advantage derived from exemption
         from the levy and/or customs duty or, in the case of supply from the rest of the Community, from the Community aid being actually
         passed on to the end user.
         
            
Article of Regulation No 1600/provides: The products covered by the specific supply arrangements provided for in this Title may not be re-exported to third countries
         or redispatched to the rest of the Community.Where the products in question are processed in the Azores and Madeira, the aforesaid prohibition shall not apply to traditional
         exports or shipments to the rest of the Community.
         
            
Under the sixth recital of the preamble to Regulation No 1600/92, the purpose of the prohibition on redispatching to other
         parts of the Community or re-exporting to third countries is to avoid any deflection of trade in respect of products covered
         by the specific supply arrangements. 
         
            
Title II of Regulation No 1600/is entitled  
         Measures to support products of the Azores and Madeira. Section of that title, which concerns measures to support products of the Azores, contains Articles to of that regulation.
         
         
            
Article of Regulation No 1600/provides: 
         
1.
 Aid at a flat rate per hectare shall be granted for the development of sugarbeet production within the limit of an area corresponding
         to the production of tonnes of white sugar per year.
         The amount of the aid shall be ECU per hectare sown and harvested.
         
2.
 Special aid shall be granted for the processing of sugarbeet harvested in the Azores into white sugar, within the limit of
         a total annual production of tonnes of refined sugar.
         The amount of the aid shall be ECU per kilograms of refined sugar. This amount may be adjusted in accordance with the
         procedure referred to in paragraph 3.
         
3.
 Detailed rules for the application of this article shall be adopted in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article
         of Regulation (EEC) No 1785/81.
         
The main proceedings
            
Sinaga runs a sugar refinery in the Autonomous Region of the Azores. It refines sugar from both sugarbeet harvested in the
         Azores and imported raw sugar. For that it receives both aid for the processing of sugarbeet harvested in the Azores into
         white sugar, under Article of Regulation No 1600/92, and exemption from levies and/or customs duties on imported raw sugarbeet,
         under Article of that regulation.  
         
            
The sugar production plant and refinery in the Autonomous Region of the Azores in question, now known as Sinaga, has, since
         1907, made sales of sugar outside the Azores in the quantities specified in a table set out in the order for reference. 
         
            
RAR produces and sells white sugar in mainland Portugal. It sought an order from the Tribunal Judicial da Comarca de Ponta
         Delgada restraining Sinaga from marketing in mainland Portugal white sugar produced from raw sugarbeet which it has imported
         exempt from levies and/or customs duties under the Poseima Programme or which has benefited from aid for processing established
         by that programme. RAR considers that that sugar is intended exclusively for supply to, and consumption in, the Autonomous
         Region of the Azores. 
         The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
In doubt as to the correct interpretation of Articles 2, and of Regulation No 1600/and considering that the interpretation
         of those articles is necessary for the resolution of the dispute pending before it, the Tribunal Judicial da Comarca de Ponta
         Delgada decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
         
1.
 Does the second paragraph of Article of Council Regulation (EEC) No 1600/of June apply to: 
         
(i)
sugar processed from raw sugar (sugar properly speaking, whether it comes from locally-grown sugarbeet or imported raw sugar),
         or 
         
(ii)
only to sugar added to products which include it (such as cakes, soft drinks etc.)? (Essentially, what is meant by the expression
          
         products are processed contained in that provision?) 
         
2.
 Are the sales [of sugar made since outside the Azores by the plant currently operated by Sinaga] referred to [in the
         table set out in the order for reference] covered by the concepts “traditional trade flows”, “traditional exports” and “traditional
         … shipments” to “the rest of the Community”, contained in the second indent of Article 3(3) and the second paragraph of Article
         of the abovementioned regulation? 
         
3.
 Irrespective of the answers to the preceding questions, does the legal framework in force from September to date allow
         Sinaga to sell in mainland Portugal sugar produced by it from sugarbeet harvested in the Azores and for the production of
         which it obtains Community aid under the Poseima programme? 
         
4.
 Again irrespective of the answers to the preceding questions, does the legal framework in force from September to date
         allow Sinaga to sell in mainland Portugal sugar produced by it from imported raw sugar which is exempt from levies under the
         Poseima programme?
         
The first question
            
By its first question, the referring court asks essentially whether the refining of raw  beet sugar into white sugar constitutes
         the processing of a product, within the meaning of the second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 1600/92. 
         
            
The purpose of Article of Regulation No 1600/is to set the conditions for the movement of goods imported exempt from
         levies and/or customs duties under the specific supply arrangements laid down by that regulation.  
         
            
The concept of processing of a product, used in the second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 1600/92, should be interpreted
         in the light of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/of October establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L
         302, p. 1). 
         
            
Article of Regulation No 2913/provides that  
         [g]oods whose production involved more than one country shall be deemed to originate in the country where they underwent their
         last, substantial, economically justified processing or working in an undertaking equipped for that purpose and resulting
         in the manufacture of a new product or representing an important stage of manufacture. 
         
            
It follows from that article that the processing of a product must represent at least an important stage of manufacture. 
         
            
Such an interpretation of the concept of processing of a product appears to conform to the ordinary meaning of the terms used,
         which imply an important change in the product, and should be adopted in interpreting the same terms employed in the second
         paragraph of Article of Regulation No 1600/92.  
         
            
It should be noted that the refining of raw sugar into white sugar intended for the end consumer is an elaborate process at
         the end of which a product is obtained the objective qualities of which and the purposes for which it is used differ from
         those of the original product. 
         
            
It should be added that the Community rules take account of the objective differences between raw and white sugar. 
         
            
Thus, Article 1(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 1785/of June on the common organisation of the markets in the
         sugar sector (OJ L 177, p. 4) sets out a different definition of white and raw sugar, and the regulation sets out rules
         which differ in part for the two types of sugar.  
         
            
Moreover, raw sugar, cane sugar or beet sugar and white sugar fall within different subheadings of the combined nomenclature
         set out in Annex I to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on
         the Common Customs Tariff (OJ L 256, p. 1). 
         
            
It is thus established, first, that the refining of raw sugar into white sugar is an important stage of manufacture and, second,
         that the Community rules take account of the objective differences between raw and white sugar. 
         
            
In those circumstances, the answer to the first question must be that the refining of raw beet sugar into white sugar must
         be considered to be the processing of a product within the meaning of the second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 1600/92.
         
         The second question
            
By its second question, the referring court asks whether shipments of sugar from the Azores to mainland Portugal and to Madeira
         between and and specified in the table set out in the order for reference must be regarded as  
         traditional shipments to the rest of the Community within the meaning of the second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 1600/92. 
         
            
Pursuant to Article 3(3) of Regulation No 1600/92, the specific supply arrangements are to be implemented in such a way as
         to take account of traditional trade flows with the Community.  
         
            
Thus, the second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 1600/provides that the prohibition on re-exporting to third countries
         or redispatching to other parts of the Community does not apply where the products having benefited from the specific supply
         arrangements are processed in the Azores, or to traditional exports or shipments to the rest of the Community. 
         
            
As the Advocate General states at point of his Opinion, if the Community legislature intended to take account of traditional
         trade flows it was not for the purpose of acknowledging historical rights but in order to prevent the introduction of the
         specific supply arrangements, intended for the benefit of the Azores, from resulting in the loss of markets on which their
         products were regularly sold. 
         
            
It follows that the shipments of sugar must satisfy relatively strict conditions in order to be classified as traditional
         trade flows or traditional shipments. Those requirements refer as much to the magnitude of the shipments as to their frequency
         and the fact that they are ongoing. Sporadic and small-scale shipments made in the past cannot satisfy those requirements.
         
         
            
In order to determine whether shipments of sugar to mainland Portugal and to Madeira between and and referred to
         in the table set out in the order for reference are traditional exports it must, therefore, be determined whether, at the
         time that the Poseima Programme was implemented by Regulation No 1600/92, with effect from July 1992, those shipments were
         ongoing, regular and significant. 
         
            
With regard to the assessment of the facts set out in the order for reference, it must be noted that in proceedings under
         Article EC, which is based on a clear separation of functions between the national courts and the Court of Justice, any
         assessment of the facts in the case is a matter for the national court (see Case 36/Denkavit Futtermittel   [1979] ECR 3439, paragraph 12, Case C-235/Dumon and   Froment  [1998] ECR I-4531, paragraph 25, and Joined Cases C-175/and C-177/Lirussi and Bizzaro  [1999] ECR I-6881, paragraph 37).  
         
            
The Court thus has no jurisdiction to give a ruling on the facts in an individual case or to apply the rules of Community
         law which it has interpreted to national measures or situations, since those questions are matters for the exclusive jurisdiction
         of the national court (see Case 13/Salgoil  [1968] ECR 453, Case 51/Van der Hulst   [1975] ECR 79, paragraph 12, and Case C-320/Shipping and Forwarding Enterprise Safe  [1990] ECR I-285, paragraph 11, and  
          Lirussi and Bizzaro , cited above, paragraph 38).  
         
            
It should be added that, even if the referring court reaches the conclusion that the shipments made between and referred to in the table set out in the order for reference were traditional shipments, it will also have to be satisfied,
         where it considers subsequent shipments, that such shipments retain that same character of traditional shipments. 
         
            
In those circumstances, the reply to the second question must be that shipments which, at the time of the entry into force
         of Regulation No 1600/on July 1992, were ongoing, regular and significant are traditional shipments to the rest of the
         Community within the meaning of the second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 1600/92. It is for the referring court
         to assess whether that was the case for the shipments of sugar from the Azores to mainland Portugal and to Madeira between
         and referred to in the table set out in the order for reference. 
         The third question
            
By its third question, the referring court wishes to know whether Community law precludes the shipment to mainland Portugal
         of white sugar produced in the Azores from sugarbeet harvested in the Azores and which receives Community aid under Article
         of Regulation No 1600/92. 
         
            
Article of Regulation No 1600/prohibits the redispatching to the rest of the Community of products covered by the specific
         supply arrangements provided for in Title I of that regulation. 
         
            
Sugar produced from sugarbeet harvested in the Azores is not a product covered by the specific supply arrangements provided
         for in Title I of Regulation No 1600/92. 
         
            
Pursuant to Article of that regulation, which falls within Title II thereof, relating to measures to support products of
         the Azores and Madeira, there are to be granted, first, aid at a flat rate per hectare for the development of sugarbeet production
         in the Azores and, second, special aid for the processing of sugarbeet harvested in the Azores into white sugar. 
         
            
The grant of those aids is limited to a total annual production in the Azores of tonnes of white sugar. On the other
         hand there is nothing in Regulation No 1600/which prohibits the shipment to the rest of the Community of sugar produced
         from sugarbeet harvested in the Azores. 
         
            
In the absence of an express prohibition and in the light of the fundamental principle of the free movement of goods, it is
         apparent that there is no restriction on shipping sugar produced from sugarbeet harvested in the Azores to the rest of the
         Community. 
         
            
RAR submits, however, that if shipping sugar produced from sugarbeet harvested in the Azores to the rest of the Community
         was not prohibited, the purpose of the Poseima Programme, the effects of which are supposed to be confined to the Azores,
         would be undermined. Referring in particular to section 9.of that programme and Article 3(4) of Regulation No 1600/92, RAR
         asserts that the local production of sugarbeet should be taken into account in assessing the supply needs of the Azores. In
         its view, if the needs of the market in the Azores were met by local production, the importation of raw sugar under the special
         arrangements laid down by that programme would no longer be justified and the programme should be ended. 
         
            
The first point to note in that regard is that a joint declaration concerning the economic and social development of the autonomous
         regions of the Azores and Madeira, annexed to the Final Act of the Treaty concerning the accession of the Kingdom of Spain
         and the Portuguese Republic to the European Communities (OJ L 302, p. 466), called on the Community institutions to devote
         special attention to the policy of social and economic development for the Azores and Madeira pursued by the Portuguese Government
         and the authorities of those two autonomous regions, the object of which is to overcome the handicaps of those regions arising
         from their geographical situation, far away from mainland Europe, their physical geographical features, the serious deficiency
         of infrastructures and their economic backwardness. 
         
            
It should also be noted that, pursuant to section 3.of the Poseima Programme, which sets out one of the general principles
         of that programme, that programme must help to attain the general aims of the Treaty by contributing to the achievement of
         the specific objectives of better integration of the Azores and Madeira into the Community, their full involvement in the
         dynamic of the internal market and assisting them to catch up economically and socially.  
         
            
It is apparent from section 3.of the Poseima Programme that its objective is not to partition the market in the Azores for
         agricultural products or to create insurmountable obstacles to trade between the Azores and the rest of the Community, but
         to contribute to their full involvement in the dynamic of the internal market whilst granting certain benefits to those islands.
          
         
            
Accordingly, the possibility of exporting sugar produced from sugarbeet harvested in the Azores appears to comply with the
         objectives of the Poseima Programme. 
         
            
With regard to section 9.of the Poseima Programme and Article 3(4) of Regulation No 1600/92, relied on by RAR, the fact
         that the production of sugar from sugarbeet harvested in the Azores is taken into account in assessing the supply requirements
         of those islands does not mean that that sugar must necessarily be sold on the local market. By contrast, local sugar production
         is taken into account in fixing the quantity of imported sugar which may benefit from the specific supply arrangements, since
         the total annual volume of sugar refined in the Azores cannot exceed tonnes. There is, therefore, no prohibition under
         those provisions on the shipment of sugar produced from sugarbeet harvested in the Azores. 
         
            
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the third question must be that Community law does not preclude the shipment
         to mainland Portugal of white sugar produced in the Azores from sugarbeet harvested in the Azores and which receives the Community
         aid provided for in Article of Regulation No 1600/up to a limit of tonnes of production per year. 
         The fourth question
            
By its fourth question, the referring court asks whether Community law precludes the shipment to mainland Portugal of white
         sugar produced in the Azores from raw beet sugar imported under the specific supply arrangements provided for by Title I of
         Regulation No 1600/92. 
         
            
Under the first paragraph of Article of Regulation No 1600/the redispatching to the rest of the Community and the re-exporting
         to third countries of sugar covered by the specific supply arrangements are prohibited.  
         
            
As is apparent from the sixth recital of the preamble to Regulation No 1600/92, the purpose of those prohibitions on redispatching
         to other parts of the Community or re-exporting to third countries is to avoid any deflection of trade in respect of products
         covered by the specific supply arrangements. 
         
            
Pursuant to the second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 1600/92, that prohibition does not, however, apply, where those
         products are processed in the Azores, to traditional shipments to the rest of the Community. 
         
            
It follows that the reply to the first question must be that the refining of raw beet sugar into white sugar constitutes the
         processing of a product within the meaning of the second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 1600/92. 
         
            
In those circumstances, the reply to the fourth question must be that Community law does not preclude the shipment to mainland
         Portugal of white sugar produced in the Azores from raw beet sugar imported under the specific supply arrangements provided
         for under Title I of Regulation No 1600/92, provided that it corresponds to traditional shipments within the meaning of the
         second paragraph of Article of that regulation. 
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the Portuguese Government and by the Commission, which have submitted observations to the Court, are
         not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before
         the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
in answer to the questions referred to it by the Tribunal Judicial da Comarca de Ponta Delgada by order of July 2000, hereby
         rules: 
         
1.
 The refining of raw beet sugar into white sugar must be considered to be the processing of a product within the meaning of
            the second paragraph of Article of  
             Council Regulation (EEC) No 1600/of June concerning specific measures for the Azores and Madeira relating to certain
               agricultural products.
2.
 Shipments which, at the time of the entry into force of Regulation No 1600/on July 1992, were ongoing, regular and significant
               are traditional shipments to the rest of the Community within the meaning of the second paragraph of Article of Regulation
               No 1600/92. It is for the referring court to assess whether that was the case for the shipments of sugar from the Azores to
               mainland Portugal and to Madeira between and referred to in the table set out in the order for reference.
3.
 Community law does not preclude the shipment to mainland Portugal of white sugar produced in the Azores from sugarbeet harvested
               in the Azores and which receives the Community aid provided for in Article of Regulation No 1600/up to a limit of tonnes of production per year. 
4.
 Community law does not preclude the shipment to mainland Portugal of white sugar produced in the Azores from raw beet sugar
               imported under the specific supply arrangements provided for under Title I of Regulation No 1600/92, provided that it corresponds
               to traditional shipments within the meaning of the second paragraph of Article of that regulation.
Wathelet
Timmermans 
Edward 
Jann
von Bahr 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on May 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
M. Wathelet  
Registrar
President of the Fifth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: Portuguese.
Top  
 