
Case C-119/Ministero dell’Industria, del Commercio e dell’Artigianato
v
Lucchini SpA, formerly Lucchini Siderurgica SpA
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Consiglio di Stato)
(State aid – ECSC – Steel industry – Aid declared incompatible with the common market – Recovery – Whether a judgment of a national court has the authority of res judicata)
Opinion of Advocate General Geelhoed delivered on September Judgment of the Court (Grand Chamber), July Summary of the Judgment
1.     Preliminary rulings – Jurisdiction of the Court – Reference for interpretation of ECSC Treaty rules after expiry of the ECSC
            – Included 
(ECSC Treaty, Art. 41; Art. EC)
2.     Preliminary rulings – Jurisdiction of the Court – Limits – Jurisdiction of the national court 
(Art. EC)
3.     Preliminary rulings – Jurisdiction of the Court – Limits – Clearly irrelevant questions and hypothetical questions put in
            a context not permitting a useful answer 
(Art. EC)
4.     State aid – Concept – Interpretation 
(ECSC Treaty, Art. 4(c); Arts 87(1) EC and 88(3) EC; Decision No 3484/85, Arts and 6)
5.     Preliminary rulings – Assessment of validity – Finding of invalidity – Lack of jurisdiction of national courts
(ECSC Treaty, Art. 41; Art. EC)
6.     State aid – Commission decision finding aid incompatible with the common market and ordering its repayment 
(Art. 88(2) EC; Art. 230, second and fifth paras, EC)
7.     Community law – Direct effect – Primacy – Commission decision ordering recovery of aid
(Arts EC and 88(2) EC)
1.     The Court retains jurisdiction to deliver preliminary rulings on questions referred to it concerning the interpretation and
         application of the ECSC Treaty and on measures adopted under that Treaty, even if those questions are referred to it after
         the expiry of the ECSC Treaty. Although Article of the ECSC Treaty may no longer be applied in those circumstances to confer
         jurisdiction on the Court, it would be contrary to the objectives and the coherence of the Treaties and irreconcilable with
         the continuity of the Community legal order if the Court did not have jurisdiction to ensure uniform interpretation of the
         rules deriving from the ECSC Treaty, which continue to produce effects even after the expiry of that Treaty.
      
(see para. 41)
2.     In proceedings under Article EC, which are based on a clear separation of functions between the national courts and the
         Court of Justice, any assessment of the facts in the case is a matter for the national court. Similarly, it is solely for
         the national court before which the dispute has been brought, and which must assume responsibility for the subsequent judicial
         decision, to determine in the light of the particular circumstances of the case both the need for a preliminary ruling in
         order to enable it to deliver judgment and the relevance of the questions which it submits to the Court. Consequently, where
         the questions submitted concern the interpretation of Community law, the Court is in principle bound to give a ruling.
      
(see para. 43)
3.     In exceptional circumstances, the Court can examine the conditions in which the case was referred to it by the national court,
         in order to confirm its own jurisdiction. The Court may refuse to rule on a question referred for a preliminary ruling by
         a national court only where it is quite obvious that the interpretation of Community law that is sought bears no relation
         to the facts of the main action or its purpose, where the problem is hypothetical, or where the Court does not have before
         it the factual or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions submitted to it.
      
(see para. 44)
4.     Proceedings concerning State aid may be commenced before national courts requiring those courts to interpret and apply the
         concept of aid contained in Article 87(1) EC, in particular in order to determine whether State aid introduced without observance
         of the preliminary examination procedure provided for in Article 88(3) EC ought to have been subject to that procedure. Similarly,
         in order to be able to determine whether a State measure established without taking account of the preliminary examination
         procedure laid down by Article of Decision No 3484/establishing Community rules for aid to the steel industry (‘the third
         code’) should or should not be made subject to that procedure, a national court may have occasion to interpret the concept
         of aid referred to in Article 4(c) of the ECSC Treaty and Article of the third code.
      
On the other hand, national courts do not have jurisdiction to give a decision on whether State aid is compatible with the
         common market. The assessment of the compatibility of aid measures or of an aid scheme with the common market falls within
         the exclusive competence of the Commission, subject to review by the Community Courts.
      
(see paras 50-52, 62)
5.     Whilst national courts may, in principle, have occasion to consider whether a Community act is valid, they none the less have
         no jurisdiction themselves to declare acts of Community institutions invalid. The Court of Justice alone therefore has jurisdiction
         to determine that a Community act is invalid. That exclusive jurisdiction is also expressly set out in Article of the ECSC
         Treaty. 
      
(see para. 53)
6.     A decision adopted by a Community institution which has not been challenged by its addressee within the time-limit laid down
         by the fifth paragraph of Article EC becomes definitive as against that person.
      
In that regard, it is not possible for a recipient of State aid forming the subject-matter of a Commission decision addressed
         directly solely to the Member State of that beneficiary, who could undoubtedly have challenged that decision and who allowed
         the mandatory time-limit laid down in that regard by the fifth paragraph of Article EC to pass, effectively to call into
         question the lawfulness of that decision before the national courts in an action brought against the measures taken by the
         national authorities in implementation of that decision. The same principles necessarily apply mutatis mutandis within the scope of application of the ECSC Treaty.
      
(see paras 54-55)
7.     It is for the national courts to interpret, as far as it is possible, the provisions of national law in such a way that they
         can be applied in a manner which contributes to the implementation of Community law.
      
In that regard, a national court which is called upon, within the exercise of its jurisdiction, to apply provisions of Community
         law is under a duty to give full effect to those provisions, if necessary refusing of its own motion to apply any conflicting
         provision of national legislation.
      
Consequently, Community law precludes the application of a provision of national law which seeks to lay down the principle
         of res judicata in so far as the application of that provision prevents the recovery of State aid granted in breach of Community law which
         has been found to be incompatible with the common market in a decision of the Commission which has become final.
      
(see paras 60-63, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
July (*)
      
(State Aid – ECSC – Steel industry – Aid declared incompatible with the common market – Recovery – Whether a judgment of a national court has the authority of res judicata)
In Case C‑119/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Consiglio di Stato (Italy), made by decision of October
         2004, received at the Court on March 2005, in the proceedings
      
Ministero dell’Industria, del Commercio e dell’Artigianato
v
Lucchini SpA, formerly Lucchini Siderurgica SpA,
      
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas and K. Lenaerts, Presidents of Chambers, J.N. Cunha
         Rodrigues, R. Silva de Lapuerta, K. Schiemann (Rapporteur), J. Makarczyk, G. Arestis, A. Borg Barthet, M. Ilešič and J. Malenovský,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on June 2006,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Lucchini SpA, formerly Lucchini Siderurgica SpA, initially by F. Lemme, avvocato, and subsequently by G. Lemme and A. Anselmo,
         avvocati,
      
–       the Czech Government, by T. Boček, acting as Agent,
–       the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and P. Gentili, avvocato dello Stato,
–       the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster, M. de Grave and C. ten Dam, acting as Agents,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by V. Di Bucci and E. Righini, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the principles of Community law applicable to the revocation of a national
         measure granting State aid incompatible with Community law which was adopted pursuant to a final decision of a national court.
         
      
This reference was made in proceedings brought by Lucchini SpA (formerly Siderpotenza SpA and subsequently Lucchini Siderurgica
         SpA) (‘Lucchini’), a company incorporated under Italian law, against the decision of the Ministero dell’Industria, del Commercio
         e dell’Artigianato (Ministry for Industry, Trade and Crafts) (‘MICA’) ordering the recovery of State aid. MICA was the successor
         to other bodies which had previously been responsible for the management of State aid in the Mezzogiorno region (collectively,
         ‘the competent authorities’). 
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
Article 4(c) of the ECSC Treaty prohibits the Member States from granting subsidies or aid, in any form whatsoever, in the
         steel and coal sectors. 
      
From 1980, as a result of the increasingly serious and widespread crisis in the steel sector in Europe, a series of measures
         derogating from this absolute and unconditional prohibition was adopted on the basis of the first and second paragraphs of
         Article of the ECSC Treaty. 
      
In particular, Commission Decision No 2320/81/ECSC of August establishing Community rules for aids to the steel industry
         (OJ L 228, p. 14) (‘the second code’) established a second code on State aid for the steel industry. The purpose of that
         code was to permit aid to be granted for the restructuring of undertakings in the steel industry and for a reduction in their
         production capacity to the level of foreseeable demand whilst at the same time providing that such aid should be phased out
         in accordance with a fixed timetable as regards the notification of such aid to the Commission (up to September 1982),
         approval of such aid (up to July 1983) and disbursement of such aid (up to December 1984). Those periods were extended
         as regards notification until May 1985, as regards approval until August 1985, and as regards payment until December
         by Commission Decision No 1018/85/ECSC of April amending Decision No 2320/(OJ L 110, p. 5). 
      
The second code provided for a procedure of mandatory approval by the Commission of all the aid covered. In particular, Article
         8(1) of that code states that:
      
‘The Commission shall be informed, in sufficient time to enable it to submit its comments, of any plans to grant or alter
         aids. … The Member State concerned shall put its proposed measures into effect only with the approval of and subject to any
         conditions laid down by the Commission.’
      
Commission Decision No 3484/85/ECSC of November establishing Community rules for aid to the steel industry (OJ L 340, p. 1) (‘the third code’) replaced the second code and established a third code on State aid for the steel industry
         with a view to permitting a further, albeit more restricted, exception to the prohibition laid down in Article 4(c) of the
         ECSC Treaty between January and December 1988. 
      
Under Article of the third code, the Commission was able, inter alia, to approve general aid to bring plants into line with
         new statutory environmental standards. The amount granted could not exceed 15% net grant equivalent of the investment costs.
         
      
Article 1(3) of the third code stipulated that aid could be granted only after the procedures laid down in Article had been
         complied with and was not to be payable after December 1988. 
      
Article 6(1), (2) and (4) of the third code provided as follows:
‘1.      The Commission shall be informed, in sufficient time to enable it to submit its comments, of any plans to grant or alter aid
         … It shall likewise be informed of plans to grant aid to the steel industry under schemes on which it has already taken a
         decision under the EEC Treaty. The notification of aid plans required by this Article must be lodged with the Commission by
         June at the latest. 
      
2.      The Commission shall be informed, in sufficient time for it to submit its comments, and by June at the latest, of
         any plans for transfers of State resources by Member States, regional or local authorities or other bodies to steel undertakings
         in the form of acquisitions of shareholdings or provisions of capital or similar financing. 
      
The Commission shall determine whether the financial transfers involve aid elements … and, if so, shall examine whether they
         are compatible with the common market under the provisions of Articles to 5.
      
…
4.      Where, after inviting interested parties to submit their comments, the Commission finds that aid in a given case is incompatible
         with the provisions of this Decision, it shall inform the Member State concerned of its decision. The Commission shall take
         such a decision not later than three months after receiving the information needed to assess the proposed aid. Article of the ECSC Treaty shall apply in the event of a Member State’s failing to comply with that decision. The planned measures
         falling within paragraphs or may be put into effect only with the approval of and subject to any conditions laid down
         by the Commission.’
      
The third code was replaced with effect from January until December by a fourth code, established by Commission
         Decision No 322/89/ECSC of February establishing Community rules for aid to the steel industry (OJ L 38, p. 8),
         which reproduced, inter alia, Article of the third code. 
      
Since the ECSC Treaty expired on July 2002, the regime laid down in the EC Treaty has also applied to State aid granted
         to the steel industry. 
      
 National legislation
Legge n° 183/sulla disciplina dell’intervento straordinario nel Mezzogino (Law No relating to special intervention
         measures for the Mezzogiorno) of May (GURI No of May 1976) (‘Law No 183/1976’) provided, inter alia, for the
         possibility of awarding subsidies by way of capital grants and interest rate subsidies of up to 30% of the investment costs
         for industrial projects in the Mezzogiorno. 
      
Article of the Italian Codice Civile (Civil Code), entitled ‘Final judgments’, provides as follows:
‘Findings made in judgments which have acquired the force of res judicata shall be binding on the parties, their lawful successors and assignees.’
      
According to the Consiglio di Stato (Council of State), that provision covers not only the pleas in law actually invoked in
         the course of the proceedings in question but also those which could have been invoked.
      
In procedural terms, that provision precludes all possibility of bringing before a court a dispute in respect of which another
         court has already delivered a final judgment. 
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 Lucchini’s aid application
On November 1985, Lucchini applied to the competent authorities for aid under Law No 183/for the modernisation of certain
         steel plants. For a total investment of ITL million, Lucchini applied for a subsidy of ITL million (corresponding
         to 30% of the costs) and for an interest rate subsidy in respect of a loan of ITL million. The credit institution charged
         with examining the loan application approved a loan in the sum requested over a period of years at a reduced rate of interest
         of 4.25%. 
      
By letter of April 1988, the competent authorities informed the Commission of the plan to grant aid to Lucchini in accordance
         with Article 6(1) of the third code. According to the notification, the aid concerned an investment in the improvement of
         environmental protection. The value of the subsidy in respect of the interest on the loan of ITL million was stated
         to be ITL million. 
      
By letter of June 1988, the Commission requested further information on this aid measure with regard to the nature of the
         assisted investment and the precise conditions (interest rate, term) of the requested loan. That letter also requested the
         competent authorities to indicate whether the aid was granted under a general scheme for the protection of the environment
         aimed at enabling plants to be brought into line with new standards and for details of those standards. The competent authorities
         did not respond to that letter. 
      
On November 1988, close to the time-limit of December for the granting of aid under the third code, the competent
         authorities decided to grant Lucchini, on a provisional basis, a capital injection amounting to ITL 382.million, equivalent
         to 15% of the investment costs (rather than 30% as provided for in Law No 183/76) to be disbursed before December 1988,
         as required by the third code. The interest rate subsidy, however, was refused on the ground that the total aid granted would
         otherwise exceed the 15% permitted by the third code. Pursuant to Article of the third code, adoption of the final measure
         granting aid was made conditional on the Commission’s approval and no payment was made by the competent authorities. 
      
Having been unable immediately to assess whether the proposed aid measures were compatible with the common market owing to
         the competent authorities’ failure to provide clarifications, the Commission initiated against them the procedure laid down
         in Article 6(4) of the third code and informed the authorities to that effect by letter of January 1989. A communication
         detailing that procedure was published in the Official Journal of the European Communities of March (OJ C 73, p. 5).
      
By telexed message of August 1989, the competent authorities forwarded further information on the aid in question. By letter
         of October 1989, the Commission notified those authorities that their answer was unsatisfactory in that a number of details
         were still missing. In that letter the Commission also indicated that, failing an acceptable answer within working days,
         it would be entitled to take a final decision solely on the basis of the information at its disposal. No answer was received
         to that letter. 
      
 Commission Decision 90/555/ECSC
On June the Commission stated, by way of Decision 90/555/ECSC concerning aid which the Italian authorities plan to
         grant to the Tirreno and Siderpotenza steelworks (No 195/– No 200/88) (OJ L 314, p. 17), that all of the aid intended
         for Lucchini was incompatible with the common market as it took the view that it had not been demonstrated that the conditions
         necessary for the application of the exception provided for in Article of the third code had been satisfied. 
      
The competent authorities were notified of the decision on July and it was published in the Official Journal of the European Communities of November 1990. Lucchini did not challenge that decision within the one-month period laid down in the third paragraph
         of Article of the ECSC Treaty. 
      
 Proceedings before the civil court
Prior to the adoption of Decision 90/955, as the aid had not been disbursed to it, Lucchini had brought proceedings against
         the competent authorities before the Tribunale civile e penale di Roma (Civil and Criminal Court, Rome) on April to
         establish its right to the payment of all of the aid initially claimed (namely, a subsidy of ITL million and an interest
         rate subsidy amounting to ITL million). 
      
By judgment of July 1991, that is, subsequent to Decision 90/555, the Tribunale civile e penale di Roma held that Lucchini
         was entitled to the aid in question and ordered the competent authorities to pay the amounts claimed. That judgment was based
         entirely on Law No 183/1976. The parties before the Tribunale civile e penale di Roma did not refer to the ECSC Treaty, the
         third code, the fourth code or Decision 90/and nor did that court refer to any of those provisions of its own motion.
         The competent authorities had referred to the second code but that court disregarded it as it was no longer in force at the
         material time. 
      
The competent authorities appealed against that judgment to the Corte d’appello di Roma (Court of Appeal, Rome). They disputed
         the civil courts’ jurisdiction and submitted that they were under no obligation to pay the aid and, for the first time, in
         the alternative, argued that such an obligation would have extended only to the ceiling of 15% of investment costs under Article
         of the third code. 
      
On May the Corte d’Appello di Roma dismissed that appeal and confirmed the judgment of the Tribunale civile e penale
         di Roma. 
      
In a note of January 1995, the Avvocatura Generale dello Stato (State Legal Advisory Service) examined the judgment of
         the Corte d’appello di Roma and concluded that it complied with the rules on reasoned decisions and the rules of law. As a
         consequence, the competent authorities did not lodge an appeal in cassation. Since the judgment in question was not challenged,
         it became final on February 1995. 
      
As the aid had still not been disbursed, Lucchini filed an application and on November the President of the Tribunale
         civile e penale di Roma ordered the competent authorities to pay the sums due to Lucchini. That order was declared provisionally
         enforceable and, in February 1996, Lucchini had certain assets belonging to MICA seized, in particular some of its fleet of
         cars, on the ground that the order had not been complied with. 
      
As a result of Decree No of the Director General of MICA of March 1996, Luccchini was granted aid in the form of a
         capital injection of ITL million and in the form of an interest rate subsidy of ITL million in implementation of the
         judgment of the Corte d’Appello di Roma. That decree stated that the aid would be recovered in whole or in part ‘in the event
         of any adverse Community decisions concerning the validity of the grant or disbursement of that aid’. On March that
         aid, amounting to ITL million, was disbursed and the sum of ITL million was added to this by way of statutory
         interest on April 1996. 
      
 The exchange of correspondence between the Commission and the Italian authorities
By a note dated July to the Italian authorities, the Commission observed that, notwithstanding Decision 90/555:
‘… following a judgment of the [Corte d’appello di Roma] of May 1994, which, in disregard of the most fundamental principles
         of Community law, found that [Lucchini] was entitled to aid which had already been declared incompatible by the Commission,
         in April the [competent] authorities, deeming it inappropriate to lodge an appeal in cassation, granted that aid, which
         is incompatible with the common market.’ 
      
The competent authorities replied by a note dated July stating that the aid had been granted ‘subject to the right
         of recovery’. 
      
By Note No of September 1996, the Commission expressed its opinion that, by disbursing aid to Lucchini which had already
         been declared incompatible with the common market in Decision 90/555, the competent authorities had infringed Community law
         and called on those authorities to recover the aid in question within days and to inform it, within one month, of the specific
         measures adopted to comply with that decision. If the competent authorities failed to comply with that instruction, the Commission
         intended to take the view that there was a failure to fulfil obligations under Article of the ECSC Treaty and would invite
         those authorities to submit any additional observations pursuant to the first paragraph of Article of the ECSC Treaty within
         working days. 
      
 Revocation of the aid
On September MICA adopted Decree No revoking Decree No of March and ordered Lucchini to repay the
         sum of ITL million, together with interest thereon at the reference rate, and the sum of ITL million, increased
         in line with the rate of monetary inflation. 
      
 Proceedings before the Consiglio di Stato
On November Lucchini challenged Decree No before the Tribunale amminstrativo regionale del Lazio (Regional Administrative
         Court, Lazio). That court granted Lucchini’s application by judgment of April 1999, finding that the public authorities’
         powers to revoke their own invalid acts on the ground that they are unlawful or contain substantive errors were limited in
         the present case by the finding in a final judgment of the Corte d’appello di Roma that there was a right to be granted aid.
         
      
On November 1999, the Avvocatura Generale dello Stato, acting on behlf of MICA, lodged an appeal with the Consiglio di Stato
         relying, inter alia, on a plea that the immediately applicable Community law, namely the third code and Decision 90/555, should
         take precedence over a final judgment of the Corte d’appello di Roma. 
      
The Consiglio di Stato found that that there was a conflict between that judgment and Decision 90/555. 
According to the Consiglio di Stato, it is clear that the competent authorities could and should have relied in time on the
         existence of Decision 90/in the proceedings before the Corte d’appello di Roma, in the course of which, inter alia, the
         legality of the decision not to disburse the aid, on the ground that the grant of aid had been made subject to approval by
         the Commission, was in issue. Accordingly, since the competent authorities abstained from challenging the judgment of the
         Corte d’appello di Roma, there is no doubt that that judgment acquired the authority of res judicata and that that authority extends to the question whether the aid is compatible with Community law, at least in so far as Community
         decisions taken prior to the delivery of the judgment are concerned. The fact that the judgment was final may therefore, in
         principle, also be relied on against Decision 90/555, which was adopted before the proceedings were concluded. 
      
In those circumstances, the Consiglio di Stato decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following two questions to
         the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      In the light of the principle of the primacy of immediately applicable Community law, in the form in this case of [the third
         code], Decision [90/555] … and [Note] No … , requiring the recovery of aid – which all formed the basis for the recovery
         measure challenged in the present proceedings (namely, Decree No …) – is it legally possible and compulsory for the
         national administrative authority to recover aid from a private recipient even though a final civil judgment has been delivered
         confirming the unconditional obligation to pay the aid in question?
      
(2)      Or, in view of the generally accepted principle that decisions on the recovery of aid are governed by Community law but the
         implementation thereof and the associated recovery procedure, in the absence of Community provisions on the matter, is governed
         by national law (regarding which principle, see the judgment of the Court of Justice in Joined Cases 205/to 215/Deutsche Milchkontor [and Others] v Germany [1983] ECR 2663), is the recovery procedure rendered legally impossible by virtue of a specific judicial decision that has
         become res judicata (Article of the [Italian] Civil Code), thereby being conclusive as between the private individual and the administration,
         and requires the administration to comply with it?
      
 Whether the Court has jurisdiction
By way of preliminary point, it should be noted that the Court retains jurisdiction to deliver preliminary rulings on questions
         referred to it concerning the interpretation and application of the ECSC Treaty and on measures adopted under that Treaty,
         even if those questions are referred to it after the expiry of the ECSC Treaty. Although Article of the ECSC Treaty may
         no longer be applied in those circumstances to confer jurisdiction on the Court, it would be contrary to the objectives and
         the coherence of the Treaties and irreconcilable with the continuity of the Community legal order if the Court did not have
         jurisdiction to ensure uniform interpretation of the rules deriving from the ECSC Treaty, which continue to produce effects
         even after the expiry of that Treaty (see, to that effect, Case C‑221/Busseni [1990] ECR I-495, paragraph 16). None of the parties which submitted observations has, moreover, disputed the Court’s jurisdiction
         in that regard. 
      
However, Lucchini challenges the admissibility of the order for reference on other grounds. Its pleas of inadmissibility are
         based on submissions that there is no Community rule to be interpreted, that the Court does not have jurisdiction to interpret
         a judgment of a national court or Article of the Italian Civil Code, and that the questions are of a hypothetical nature.
         
      
In this regard, it must be recalled that, in proceedings under Article EC, which are based on a clear separation of functions
         between the national courts and the Court of Justice, any assessment of the facts in the case is a matter for the national
         court. Similarly, it is solely for the national court before which the dispute has been brought, and which must assume responsibility
         for the subsequent judicial decision, to determine in the light of the particular circumstances of the case both the need
         for a preliminary ruling in order to enable it to deliver judgment and the relevance of the questions which it submits to
         the Court. Consequently, where the questions submitted concern the interpretation of Community law, the Court is in principle
         bound to give a ruling (see, inter alia, Case C-326/IKA [2003] ECR I-1703, paragraph 27; Case C-145/Keller [2005] ECR I-2529, paragraph 33; and Case C-419/Conseil général de la Vienne [2006] ECR I-5645, paragraph 19). 
      
Nevertheless, the Court has also held that, in exceptional circumstances, it can examine the conditions in which the case
         was referred to it by the national court, in order to confirm its own jurisdiction (see, to that effect, Case 244/Foglia [1981] ECR 3045, paragraph 21). The Court may refuse to rule on a question referred for a preliminary ruling by a national
         court only where it is quite obvious that the interpretation of Community law that is sought bears no relation to the facts
         of the main action or its purpose, where the problem is hypothetical, or where the Court does not have before it the factual
         or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions submitted to it (see, inter alia, Case C-379/PreussenElektra [2001] ECR I-2099, paragraph 39; Case C-390/Canal Satélite Digital [2002] ECR I-607, paragraph 19; and Conseil général de la Vienne, paragraph 20).
      
That is not the case here.
It is clear that this reference for a preliminary ruling concerns rules of Community law. In the present case, the Court is
         not called upon to interpret national law or a judgment of a national court but to make clear the extent to which national
         courts are required under Community law to exclude the application of national law. The questions submitted therefore appear
         to relate to the subject-matter of the main proceedings, as defined by the Consiglio di Stato, and the answers to the questions
         submitted may be useful to that court in enabling it to rule on the annulment of the measures taken to recover the aid in
         question. 
      
The Court therefore has jurisdiciton to rule on the present reference for a preliminary ruling. 
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
By its questions, which it is appropriate to consider together, the national court asks essentially whether Community law
         precludes the application of a provision of national law, such as Article of the Italian Civil Code, which seeks to lay
         down the principle of res judicata in so far as the application of that provision prevents the recovery of State aid granted in breach of Community law which
         has been found to be incompatible with the common market in a Commission decision  which has become final. 
      
Against that background, it should be noted as a preliminary point that, within the Community legal order, the jurisdiction
         of national courts is limited both in the field of State aid and as regards jurisdiction to declare Community acts invalid.
         
      
 The jurisdiction of national courts in regard to State aid
Proceedings concerning State aid may be commenced before national courts requiring those courts to interpret and apply the
         concept of aid contained in Article 87(1) EC, in particular in order to determine whether State aid introduced without observance
         of the preliminary examination procedure provided for in Article 88(3) EC ought to have been subject to this procedure (Case
         78/Steinike & Weinlig [1977] ECR 595, paragraph 14, and Case C-354/Fédération nationale du commerce extérieur des produits alimentaires and Syndicat national des négociants et transformateurs
            de saumon [1991] ECR I-5505, paragraph 10). Similarly, in order to be able to determine whether a State measure established without
         taking account of the preliminary examination procedure laid down by Article of the third code should or should not be made
         subject to that procedure, a national court may have occasion to interpret the concept of aid referred to in Article 4(c)
         of the ECSC Treaty and Article of the third code (see, by analogy, Case C-390/Banks [2001] ECR I-6117, paragraph 71).
      
On the other hand, national courts do not have jurisdiction to give a decision on whether State aid is compatible with the
         common market. 
      
It is settled case-law that the assessment of the compatibility of aid measures or of an aid scheme with the common market
         falls within the exclusive competence of the Commission, subject to review by the Community Courts (see Steinike & Weinlig, paragraph 9; Fédération nationale du commerce extérieur des produits alimentaires and Syndicat national des négociants et transformateurs
            de saumon, paragraph 14; and Case C‑39/SFEI and Others [1996] ECR I-3547, paragraph 42).
      
 The jurisdiction of national courts to declare Community acts invalid.
While national courts may, in principle, have occasion to consider whether a Community act is valid, they nonetheless have
         no jurisdiction themselves to declare acts of Community institutions invalid (Case 314/Foto-Frost [1987] ECR 4199, paragraph 20). The Court of Justice alone therefore has jurisdiction to determine that a Community act is
         invalid (Joined Cases C-143/and C-92/Zuckerfabrik Süderdithmarschen and Zuckerfabrik Soest [1991] ECR I‑415, paragraph 17, and Case C-344/IATE and ELFAA [2006] ECR I-403, paragraph 27). That exclusive jurisdiction is also expressly set out in Article of the ECSC Treaty. 
      
Moreover, it is settled case-law that a decision adopted by a Community institution which has not been challenged by its addressee
         within the time-limit laid down by the fifth paragraph of Article EC becomes definitive as against that person (see, inter
         alia, Case C-188/TWD Textilwerke Deggendorf [1994] ECR I-833, paragraph 13, and Case C‑241/National Farmers’ Union [2002] ECR I-9079, paragraph 34). 
      
The Court has also held that it is not possible for a recipient of State aid forming the subject-matter of a Commission decision
         addressed directly solely to the Member State of that beneficiary, who could undoubtedly have challenged that decision and
         who allowed the mandatory time-limit laid down in this regard by the fifth paragraph of Article EC to pass, effectively
         to call in question the lawfulness of that decision before the national courts in an action brought against the measures taken
         by the national authorities in implementation of that decision (TWD Textilwerke Deggendorf, paragraphs and 20, and National Farmers’ Union, paragraph 35). The same principles necessarily apply mutatis mutandis within the scope of application of the ECSC Treaty. 
      
It must therefore be held that the Consiglio di Stato was right to refuse to refer to the Court a question concerning the
         validity of Decision 90/555, a decision which Lucchini could have challenged, but failed to do so, within the period of one
         month following publication of that decision by virtue of Article of the ECSC Treaty. For those same reasons, Lucchini’s
         request asking the Court in the alternative to determine of its own motion whether that decision is valid cannot be accepted.
         
      
 The jurisdiction of the national courts in the main proceedings
It is apparent from the foregoing considerations that neither the Tribunale civile e penale di Roma not the Corte d’appello
         di Roma had jurisdiction to determine whether the State aid sought by Lucchini was compatible with the common market and that
         neither of those courts could have invalidated Decision 90/declaring that aid incompatible with the common market. 
      
It may also be noted that the judgment of the Corte d’appello di Roma, the authority of which as a final judgment is invoked,
         does not, to any greater extent than the judgment of the Tribunale civile e penale di Roma, expressly rule on the compatibility
         of the State aid sought by Lucchini with Community law or the lawfulness Decision 90/555. 
      
 The application of Article of the Italian Civil Code
According to the national court, Article of the Italian Civil Code precludes not only the reopening, in a second set
         of proceedings, of pleas in law which have already been expressly and definitively determined but also precludes the examination
         of matters which could have been raised in earlier proceedings but were not. One of the consequences of such an interpretation
         of that provision may be that effects are attributed to a decision of a national court which exceed the limits of the jurisdiction
         of the court in question as laid down in Community law. It is clear, as the Consiglio di Stato has observed, that the effect
         of applying that provision, interpreted in such a manner, in the present case would be to frustrate the application of Community
         law in so far as it would make it impossible to recover State aid that was granted in breach of Community law. 
      
In that context, it should be noted that it is for the national courts to interpret, as far as it is possible, the provisions
         of national law in such a way that they can be applied in a manner which contributes to the implementation of Community law.
         
      
It also follows from settled case-law that a national court which is called upon, within the exercise of its jurisdiction,
         to apply provisions of Community law is under a duty to give full effect to those provisions, if necessary refusing of its
         own motion to apply any conflicting provision of national legislation (see, inter alia, Case 106/Simmenthal [1978] ECR 629, paragraphs to 24; Case 130/Salumificio di Cornuda [1979] ECR 867, paragraphs to 27; and Case C-213/Factortame and Others [1990] ECR I-2433, paragraphs to 21). 
      
As stated at paragraph above, the assessment of the compatibility of aid measures or of an aid scheme with the common market
         falls within the exclusive competence of the Commission, subject to review by the Community Courts. That rule applies within
         the national legal order as a result of the principle of the primacy of Community law. 
      
The answer to the questions referred must therefore be that Community law precludes the application of a provision of national
         law, such as Article of the Italian Civil Code, which seeks to lay down the principle of res judicata in so far as the application of that provision prevents the recovery of State aid granted in breach of Community law which
         has been found to be incompatible with the common market in a decision of the Commission which has become final.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:
Community law precludes the application of a provision of national law, such as Article of the Italian Codice Civile
            (Civil Code), which seeks to lay down the principle of res judicata in so far as the application of that provision prevents the recovery of State aid granted in breach of Community law which
            has been found to be incompatible with the common market in a decision of the Commission of the European Communities which
            has become final.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 