
Judgment of the Court (Seventh Chamber) of July – Commission v Austria
(Case C‑189/09)
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 2006/24/EC – Respect for private life – Retention of data generated or processed in connection with the provision of electronic communications services – Failure to transpose within the prescribed period
1.                     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Disregard of the obligations imposed by a directive – Defences – Challenge to
            the lawfulness of the directive – Inadmissibility – Limits – Non-existent measure (Art. EC, EC, EC and EC)
            (see paras 15-16)
2.                     Member States – Obligations – Implementation of directives – Failure to fulfil obligations – National system pleaded as justification
            – Not permissible (Art. EC) (see para. 18)
3.                     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Examination of the merits by the Court – Situation to be taken into consideration
            – Situation on expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion (Art. EC; European Parliament and Council Directive
            2006/24) (see paras 19-22)
Re: 
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Failure to adopt or communicate, within the prescribed period, the provisions
                  necessary to comply with Directive 2006/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of March on the retention
                  of data generated or processed in connection with the provision of publicly available electronic communications services or
                  of public communications networks and amending Directive 2002/58/EC (OJ L 105, p. 54).
               
Operative part
The Court:
1.
	Declares that, by failing to adopt within the prescribed period the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary
                     to comply with Directive 2006/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of March on the retention of data
                     generated or processed in connection with the provision of publicly available electronic communications services or of public
                     communications networks and amending Directive 2002/58/EC, the Republic of Austria has failed to fulfil its obligations under
                     that directive; 
                  
2.
	Orders the Republic of Austria to pay the costs.
Top  
 