
Case C-453/Proceedings brought by
innoventif Limited
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Landgericht Berlin)
(Freedom of establishment – Articles EC and EC – Branch of a limited company established in another Member State – Registration of the objects of the company in the national register of companies – Requirement to pay an advance on the cost of publication of the full text of the objects of the company – Compatibility)
Summary of the Judgment
Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Restrictions 
(Arts EC and EC; Council Directive 89/666)
Articles EC and EC do not preclude legislation of a Member State which makes registration, in the register of companies,
         of a branch of a limited company established in another Member State subject to the payment of an advance on the anticipated
         cost of the publication of the objects of the company as set out in its instrument of constitution.
      
The requirement for payment of an advance that merely reflects the actual administrative costs of publication in accordance
         with Eleventh Directive 89/concerning disclosure requirements in respect of branches opened in a Member State by certain
         types of company governed by the law of another State cannot constitute a restriction on freedom of establishment in so far
         as it neither prohibits, impedes nor renders less attractive the exercise of that freedom. Moreover, such legislation is not
         liable to place companies from other Member States in a less favourable factual or legal situation than companies from the
         Member State of establishment. 
      
(see paras 38-39, 43, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
June (*)
      
(Freedom of establishment – Articles EC and EC – Branch of a limited company established in another Member State – Registration of the objects of the company in the national register of companies – Requirement to pay an advance on the cost of publication of the full text of the objects of the company – Compatibility)
In Case C-453/04,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Landgericht Berlin (Germany), made by decision of August
         2004, received at the Court on October 2004, in the proceedings brought by
      
innoventif Limited,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, R. Schintgen,  R. Silva de Lapuerta, P. Kūris and L. Bay Larsen (Rapporteur),
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: A. Tizzano,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        the German Government, by C. Schulze-Bahr, acting as Agent,
–        the Spanish Government, by F. Díez Moreno, acting as Agent,
–        the Slovak Government, by R. Procházka, acting as Agent,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by G. Braun, acting as Agent,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article EC and Article EC.
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings brought by innoventif Limited (‘innoventif’) against a decision of the
         Amstgericht Charlottenburg (Local Court, Charlottenburg) rejecting its application to register its branch established in Germany
         in the national register of companies on the ground that innoventif had refused to pay an advance on the anticipated cost
         of publication of the objects of the company as set out in its memorandum of association.
      
 Legal context
 Community law
First Council Directive 68/151/EEC of March on co-ordination of safeguards which, for the protection of the interests
         of members and others, are required by Member States of companies within the meaning of the second paragraph of Article of the Treaty, with a view to making such safeguards equivalent throughout the Community (OJ, English Special Edition (I), p. 41) (‘the First Directive’) applies to companies with share capital. It is intended to protect third parties dealing
         with those companies and provides, inter alia, for the establishment of a file containing certain information. A file is maintained
         for each company registered in the register of companies covering a given area.
      
Under Article 2(1)(a) of the First Directive:
      
‘1. Member States shall take the measures required to ensure compulsory disclosure by companies of at least the following
         documents and particulars:    
      
(a)      The instrument of constitution, and the statutes if they are contained in a separate instrument’.
Article 3(2) and (4) of the First Directive provides:
      
‘2.      All documents and particulars which must be disclosed in pursuance of Article shall be kept in the file or entered in the
         register …
      
…
4.      Disclosure of the documents and particulars referred to in paragraph shall be effected by publication in the national gazette
         appointed for that purpose by the Member State, either of the full or partial text, or by means of a reference to the document
         which has been deposited in the file or entered in the register.’
      
Eleventh Council Directive 89/666/EEC of December concerning disclosure requirements in respect of branches opened
         in a Member State by certain types of company governed by the law of another State (OJ L 395, p. 36) (‘the Eleventh Directive’)
         relates to branches of companies with share capital.  
      
Under Article 1(1) of the Eleventh Directive:
      
‘Documents and particulars relating to a branch opened in a Member State by a company which is governed by the law of another
         Member State and to which [the First] Directive … applies shall be disclosed pursuant to the law of the Member State of the
         branch, in accordance with Article of that Directive.’
      
Article 2(1) of the Eleventh Directive lists the documents and particulars that must be disclosed in the Member State where
         a branch is established. Article 2(2)(b) permits the Member State in which a branch has been opened to prescribe additional
         compulsory disclosure relating, inter alia, to ‘the instruments of constitution and the memorandum and articles of association
         if they are contained in a separate instrument in accordance with Article 2(1)(a), (b) and (c) of [the First] Directive’.
         
      
Article of the Eleventh Directive provides that the Member State in which a branch has been opened may stipulate that the
         documents referred to, inter alia, in Article 2(2)(b) of that directive must be published in another official language of
         the European Community and that the translation of such documents must be certified.
      
 National law
Paragraph 8(1) and (2) of the Gesetz über die Kosten in Angelegenheiten der freiwilligen Gerichtsbarkeit (Federal Law on costs
         in non-contentious matters) of July (BGB1. I, p. (‘the KostO’), provides under the heading ‘Advances’.
      
‘(1)      With regard to operations to be undertaken upon application, the party liable for the costs shall pay an advance sufficient
         to cover such costs …
      
(2)      With regard to operations to be undertaken upon application, the carrying out of such operations shall be subject to the payment
         or guarantee of payment of an advance.’ 
      
Paragraph of the KostO, entitled ‘Determination of costs, applications for review, appeals’, provides:
      
‘(1) The costs shall be determined by the court before which the matter is pending or was last pending, even where they were
         incurred before the court seised of the matter …
      
(2) The court which has determined the costs shall rule on applications for review made by the party liable for the costs
         or by the Treasury against the determination.
      
(3) The party liable for the costs or the Treasury may appeal against the decision given on the application for review if
         the value of the subject‑matter of the appeal exceeds EUR 200.’
      
The Handelsgesetzbuch (Commercial Code) of May (RGB1. 1897, p. 219), as amended most recently by Article of the
         Law of December (BGB1. I, p. 3408) (‘the HGB’), contains rules on the entry of branches in the register of companies.
         
      
Paragraph 13b of the HGB, entitled ‘Branches of limited companies having their registered office in national territory’, provides
         in subparagraphs (2) and (3):
      
‘(2)      The establishment of a branch shall be notified by the officers of a company. A certified copy of the statutes … shall be
         attached to the notification.
      
(3)      The registration shall also contain the details referred to at Paragraph 10(1) and (2) of the Law on limited companies.’
With regard to branches of limited companies having their registered offices abroad, Paragraph 13g(2) and (3) of the HGB provides:
      
‘(2)      A certified copy of the statutes and, where the statutes are not in German, a certified translation in that language, shall
         be attached to the notification. … 
      
(3)      Registration of the establishment of a branch shall also contain the details set out at Paragraph 10(1) and (2) of the Law
         on limited companies …’. 
      
Paragraph 10(1) of the Gesetz betreffend die Gesellschaften mit beschränkter Haftung (Law on limited companies) of April
         (RGB1. 1892, p. 477), as amended most recently by Article of the Law of December (BGB1. I, p. 3214) (‘the
         GmbHG’), provides, under the heading ‘Entry in the register of companies’:
      
‘The entry made in the register of companies shall include the name and registered office of the company, the object of the
         undertaking … and its officers’ powers of representation.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
Innoventif, a limited company under English law having its registered office in Birmingham (United Kingdom), was registered
         at Companies House in Cardiff (United Kingdom) on April 2004. The objects of the company are described in detail in Clause
         of the Memorandum of Association, headed ‘The objects of which the Company is established are [sic]:–’. Clause consists
         of sub-clauses from (A) to (W) and covers several pages.
      
On April 2004, innoventif set up a branch in Berlin and applied to the Amtsgericht Charlottenburg for registration of the
         branch in the register of companies.
      
By order of April the Amtsgericht Charlottenburg required an advance on costs of EUR as a condition of its effecting
         the registration applied for. It based that amount on the anticipated cost of the publication of the objects of the company
         as set out in innoventif’s memorandum of association and, as it considered that the description in Clause 3(A) to (W) of the
         memorandum corresponded to the objects of the company, decided that it was necessary for them to be recorded in the register
         in their entirety.
      
On May 2004, taking the view that its objects were defined in Clause 3(A) and (B) of its memorandum only, innoventif made
         an application for review to the Amtsgericht Charlottenburg under Paragraph 14(2) of the KostO.
      
That court dismissed the application, stating that an advance on anticipated costs, such as that requested in the main proceedings,
         is demanded where it is likely that the party liable for the costs in unaware of the amount of costs to be incurred. 
      
Innoventif appealed to the referring court under Paragraph 14(3) of the KostO, arguing that a requirement to pay an advance
         in the amount requested is contrary to the Eleventh Directive and infringes the principle of freedom of establishment.
      
For the Landgericht Berlin (Regional Court, Berlin), the determination as to whether the registration of innovatif’s branch
         in the register of companies may be subject to the payment of an advance on the anticipated cost of the publication of the
         objects of that company, as required under national law, hinges on the interpretation of Article EC and Article EC.
         
      
In those circumstances, the Landgericht Berlin decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question to the
         Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Is it consistent with the freedom of establishment for companies provided for by Article EC and Article EC for the
         registration, in the register of companies,  of a branch set up in … Germany of a company limited by shares which has its
         registered office [in the United Kingdom] to be made subject to the payment of an advance calculated on the basis of the anticipated
         cost of the publication of the objects of the company as set out in the relevant clauses of the memorandum of association?’
      
 Consideration of the question referred for a preliminary ruling
 Admissibility 
The Commission of the European Communities and the Spanish Government entertain doubts as to whether the question referred
         for a preliminary ruling is admissible.
      
The Commission considers that the question may be inadmissible in that the national court failed to state the reasons which
         led it to refer that question.
      
In that regard, it should be noted that the Court has stressed that it is important for the referring court to set out the
         precise reasons why it was unsure as to the interpretation of Community law and why it considered it necessary to refer questions
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling. The Court has thus ruled that it is essential that the referring court provide at the
         very least some explanation of the reasons for the choice of the Community provisions which it requires to be interpreted
         and of the link it establishes between those provisions and the national legislation applicable to the dispute (see, inter
         alia, the order in Case C‑190/Viacom [2002] ECR I-8287, paragraph 16, and the judgment in Joined Cases C‑453/03, C-11/04, C-12/and C-194/ABNA and Others [2005] ECR I-0000, paragraph 46). 
      
In the main proceedings, the national court has, firstly, set out the factual and legislative background to the question it
         has referred and, secondly, stated, concisely but adequately, that the reason causing it to refer the question for a preliminary
         ruling is because it is uncertain as to whether the requirement under national law for payment of an advance on the anticipated
         cost of the publication of the objects of a company which has its registered office in another Member State and seeks registration
         of its branch in the national register of companies may restrict the freedom of establishment conferred on that company by
         the EC Treaty.
      
According to the Spanish Government, the question referred for a preliminary ruling is inadmissible since it concerns the
         interpretation of a national provision.
      
In that connection, it must be noted that the jurisdiction of the Court is confined to considering provisions of Community
         law only (see the order in Case C-307/Max Mara [1995] ECR I-5083, paragraph 5). It is for national courts to assess the scope of national provisions and the manner in which
         they must be applied (see the judgment in Case C‑45/Ayuntamiento de Ceuta [1995] ECR I-4385, paragraph 26).
      
In the main proceedings, whilst the national court alone has jurisdiction to determine whether there should be a requirement
         for payment of an advance on costs such as that provided for in Paragraph of the KostO and, as the case may be, to calculate
         the amount of that payment and refuse an application for registration in the event of non‑payment, the question of whether
         the requirement for payment of such an advance may be regarded as a restriction on freedom of establishment falls within the
         jurisdiction of the Court.
      
It follows that the question referred for a preliminary ruling is admissible.
      
 Substance
By its question, the national court asks, in essence, whether Article EC and Article EC preclude national legislation
         which makes registration, in the register of companies, of a branch of a limited company established in another Member State
         subject to the payment of an advance on the anticipated cost of the publication of the objects of the company as set out in
         its instrument of constitution.
      
Firstly, it must be stated that the requirement in a Member State where a branch of a company having its registered office
         in another Member State is established that the full text is to be published of the objects of limited companies applying
         for registration of their branches in the register of companies is consistent with the Eleventh Directive.
      
Article 2(2)(b) of the Eleventh Directive expressly authorises Member States to require publication of the instrument of constitution
         of a foreign company and of the memorandum and articles of association, if they are contained in a separate instrument, on
         registration of its branch in the register of companies.
      
Paragraph 13b(3) and Paragraph 13g(3) of the HGB, in conjunction with Paragraph 10(1) of the GmbHG, which applies in the same
         way to companies established in national territory and abroad, merely require publication of the objects of limited companies
         applying for the registration of a branch in the register of companies and not, as the Eleventh Directive permits, publication
         of the full text of the instrument of constitution of those companies.
      
Further, it is clear from Article of the First Directive, to which, in accordance with Article 1(1) of the Eleventh Directive,
         reference must be made with regard to branches, that the documents and particulars which must be disclosed are to be published
         in one of the various forms set out in Article of the First Directive.
      
Secondly, with regard to whether the requirement for payment of an advance on costs calculated on the basis of the publication
         of the full text of the objects of a company is consistent with Article EC and Article EC, it must be considered whether
         such a requirement constitutes an obstacle to freedom of establishment where it requires a branch of a company constituted
         in accordance with the law of another Member State to comply with the rules of the State of establishment on advances on the
         anticipated cost of publication.
      
The requirement for payment of an advance that merely reflects the actual administrative costs of publication in accordance
         with the Eleventh Directive cannot constitute a restriction on freedom of establishment in so far as it neither prohibits,
         impedes nor renders less attractive the exercise of that freedom.
      
Moreover, legislation which, in circumstances such as those in the main proceedings, requires the payment of an advance is
         not liable to place companies from other Member States in a less favourable factual or legal situation than companies from
         the Member State of establishment (see, to that effect, Case C‑70/Sodemareand Others [1997] ECR I-3395, paragraph 33).
      
It follows that, for a limited company established in a Member State, the requirement to pay such an advance on the anticipated
         cost of publication does not constitute an obstacle to the pursuit of its activities in another Member State through a branch
         situated there.
      
It is for national courts, on the basis of the length of the text recording the objects of a company, to satisfy themselves
         that the amount of the advance demanded corresponds to the anticipated cost of publication in the relevant gazette. In so
         doing, they should have regard to the objects as set out in the instrument of constitution of the company applying for the
         registration of a branch.
      
In that connection, national courts cannot be required to investigate whether, under the law of the Member State in which
         a company applying for registration of a branch is established, the objects of the company may be regarded as being fully
         defined by only some of the provisions under the heading ‘Objects of the company’ in that company’s instrument of constitution.
      
The answer to the question referred must therefore be that Article EC and Article EC do not preclude legislation of
         a Member State which makes registration, in the register of companies, of a branch of a limited company established in another
         Member State subject to the payment of an advance on the anticipated cost of the publication of the objects of the company
         as set out in its instrument of constitution.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
Article EC and Article EC do not preclude legislation of a Member State which makes registration, in the register of
            companies, of a branch of a limited company established in another Member State subject to the payment of an advance on the
            anticipated cost of the publication of the objects of the company as set out in its instrument of constitution.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 