
Case C-132/European Commission
v
Kingdom of Belgium
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Jurisdiction of the Court – Statute of the European Schools – Establishment Agreement of – Conventions of and – Arbitration clause – Article EC – Financing of the European Schools – Costs of furniture and teaching equipment)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Application initiating proceedings – Statement of subject-matter and pleas in
            law – Formal requirements
(Art. EC; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 21, first para.; Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, Art. 38(1)(c))
2.        Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Jurisdiction of the Court – Limits – Statute of the European Schools
(Art. EC and EC)
1.        Under Articles 21(1) of the Statute of the Court of Justice and 38(1) of the latter’s Rules of Procedure, in any application
         made under Article EC, the Commission must indicate the specific complaints on which the Court is called upon to rule.
         These heads of claim must be set out unambiguously, so that the Court does not rule ultra petita or, indeed. fail to rule on a complaint.
      
(see paras 36-37)
2.        The Court does not have jurisdiction to rule on the action of the European Commission, brought on the basis of Article EC, on the ground that the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under the Establishment Agreement concluded
         on October between the Board of Governors of the European School and the Government of the Kingdom of Belgium, read
         in conjunction with Article EC. Accordingly, as is apparent from Article of the convention signed in Luxembourg on April  defining the Statute of the European School, the rules in that agreement have to be consistent with those laid
         down in the convention that the Court lacks jurisdiction to interpret inasmuch as, the links of that statute to the Community
         and the functioning of its institutions notwithstanding, it is an international agreement concluded by the Member States which
         does not form an integral part of Community law. This assessment is not to be restricted to the procedural context of a reference
         for a preliminary ruling, but likewise applies in the context of the proceedings provided for in Article EC, the subject-matter
         of which can only be a failure by a Member State to fulfil one of its obligations under the treaty.   
      
Furthermore, neither any consolidation of the acquis of the Convention by the convention concluded in Luxembourg on June 1994, which is currently in force, nor the reference
         made by the latter to the establishment agreements, can retroactively modify the legal nature of the Establishment Agreement,
         which is an international agreement concluded between the Governing Body and the government of a single Member State. Finally,
         with regard to the applicability or otherwise of the arbitration clause appearing in Article of the Convention, infringement
         proceedings, within the meaning of the EC Treaty and of the case-law of the Court, can be brought only on the basis of Article
         EC.
      
 (see paras 44-46, 51-53, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
September (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Jurisdiction of the Court – Statute of the European Schools – Establishment Agreement of – Conventions of and – Arbitration clause – Article EC – Financing of the European Schools – Costs of furniture and teaching equipment)
In Case C‑132/09,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on April 2009,
European Commission, represented by J.-P. Keppenne and B. Eggers, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Kingdom of Belgium, represented by J.-C. Halleux, acting as Agent,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, E. Juhász (Rapporteur), G. Arestis, J. Malenovský and T. von Danwitz, Judges,
Advocate General: P. Mengozzi,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on June 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities asks the Court to declare that, by refusing to finance the
         costs of furniture and teaching equipment for the European Schools, the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under the Establishment Agreement concluded on October between the Board of Governors of the European School and the
         Government of the Kingdom of Belgium (‘the Establishment Agreement’), read in conjunction with Article EC. 
      
 Legal context
 Statute of the European Schools  
When they were first set up, the European Schools were governed by two instruments: the Statute of the European School, signed
         at Luxembourg on April (United Nations Treaty Series, Volume 443, p. 129, ‘the Convention’), and the Protocol
         on the setting-up of European Schools with reference to the Statute of the European School, signed at Luxembourg on April
         (United Nations Treaty Series, Volume 752, p. 267, ‘the Protocol’). Those two instruments were concluded by the
         six founding Member States of the European Communities.
      
The Board of Governors of the European School (‘the Board of Governors’), established under Article of the Convention,
         is composed, under Article thereof, of the competent Minister or Ministers of each of the Contracting Parties. Under Article
         of that convention, the Board of Governors is to be responsible for the application of the convention and, for that purpose,
         is to have the necessary powers in educational, financial and administrative matters. It is to adopt the General Regulations
         of the School by common agreement. Article of the convention provides that the Board of Governors may negotiate with the
         government of the country in which the headquarters of the school are situated any further agreements for the purpose of ensuring
         that the school operates in the best possible material and moral conditions.
      
The Convention and the Protocol were cancelled and replaced by the Convention defining the Statute of the European
         Schools, concluded in Luxembourg on June (OJ L 212, p. 3, ‘the Convention’), as laid down in Article of that convention, which is currently in force. The Convention was concluded by the Member States and the European Communities,
         the latter empowered to do so under Council Decision 94/557/EC, Euratom of June authorising the European Community
         and the European Atomic Energy Community to sign and conclude the Convention defining the Statute of the European Schools
         (OJ L 212, p. 1).
      
In accordance with Article 34, fourth paragraph, of the Convention, references in the acts prior to the adoption of the
         convention which concern the schools are to be understood as relating to the corresponding articles thereof.
      
The schools listed in Annex I to the Convention, which include the Brussels I, Brussels II and Brussels III European
         Schools as well as the European School in Mol (Belgium), fall within the scope of that convention.
      
Under Article 2(3) of the Convention, before a new school may be opened in the territory of a Member State, an agreement
         must be concluded between the Board of Governors and the host Member State concerning the free provision and maintenance of
         suitable premises for the new school.
      
The second paragraph of Article of the Convention provides that, as far as their rights and obligations are concerned,
         the schools are to be treated in each Member State, subject to the specific provisions of the convention, as educational establishments
         governed by public law.
      
Pursuant to Article 10, first paragraph, of the Convention, the Board of Governors – which is composed, in particular,
         of a representative at ministerial level of each of the Member States and of a member of the Commission – is to supervise
         the implementation of the convention and, for this purpose, is to have the necessary decision-making powers in educational,
         budgetary and administrative matters and those required for the negotiation of the agreements referred to in Articles to
         of the convention.
      
Article of the Convention provides that the budget of the schools is to be financed, inter alia, by contributions
         from the Member States through the continuing payment of the remuneration for seconded or assigned teaching staff and, where
         appropriate, a financial contribution, and by the contribution from the European Communities, which is intended to cover the
         difference between the total amount of expenditure by the schools and the total of other revenue.
      
Under Article of the Convention, the Court of Justice is to have sole jurisdiction in disputes between Contracting
         Parties relating to the interpretation and application of the convention that have not been resolved by the Board of Governors.
      
Under Article of the convention, the Board of Governors may negotiate with the government of a country in which a school
         is located any additional agreement required to ensure that the school can operate under the best possible conditions.
      
Article 33, first and second paragraphs, of the Convention states, inter alia, that the convention is to be ratified
         by the Member States as Contracting Parties in accordance with their respective constitutional requirements and that it is
         to enter into force on the first day of the month following the deposit of all instruments of ratification by the Member States
         and of the acts notifying conclusion by the European Communities.
      
It is common ground that the Convention entered into force on October 2002.
      
 Establishment Agreement
The Establishment Agreement, approved by the Belgian Law of November (Moniteur belge, February 1976, p. 1415) was concluded for the purpose of ensuring that the European Schools in Brussels and Mol would
         operate in the best possible material and moral conditions, as provided for by Article of the Convention.
      
In Chapter I of the Establishment Agreement, which is entitled ‘School buildings and equipment’, Article reads as follows:
      
‘The Government of the Kingdom of Belgium undertakes to provide the Schools with the buildings that are necessary for their
         activity and meet the objectives set for themselves by the governments that are signatories to the Protocol on the setting-up
         of European Schools.
      
It shall maintain those buildings and insure them in accordance with the rules governing property owned by the Belgian State.
It undertakes to provide those Schools with furniture and teaching equipment in accordance with the criteria applied to its
         own establishments.’
      
 Pre-litigation procedure
In a letter of formal notice dated October 2007, the Commission alleged that the Kingdom of Belgium had failed to observe
         the provisions of the Establishment Agreement and of Article EC, first, by refusing since to finance the initial fitting-out
         of the European Schools located in its territory with furniture and teaching equipment, and second, by refusing since to pay an annual operating and equipment grant intended to cover the running costs of the European Schools established in
         its territory.
      
As it was not satisfied with the reply sent by the Kingdom of Belgium to that letter of formal notice, on June the
         Commission issued a reasoned opinion inviting that Member State to take the necessary measures to comply with that opinion
         within two months of its receipt.
      
Since the Kingdom of Belgium failed to take the required measures within the prescribed period, the Commission brought the
         present action.
      
 On the request that the oral procedure be reopened 
In a letter dated June 2010, the Commission requested that the oral procedure be reopened.
      
The Court may, of its own motion, on a proposal from the Advocate General or at the request of the parties, order reopening
         of the oral procedure under Article of its Rules of Procedure if it considers that it lacks sufficient information, or
         that the case must be dealt with on the basis of an argument that has not been debated between the parties (Case C-28/P
         Commission v Bavarian Lager [2010] ECR I-0000, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
In its application, the Commission claims that the Opinion of the Advocate General is based on arguments that were not debated
         before the Court. First, the Commission maintains that it had no opportunity, during the procedure, to take a position regarding
         the ground of lack of jurisdiction raised in the Opinion of the Advocate General, according to which the arbitration clause
         set out in Article of the Convention excludes the application of Article EC. Second, it emphasises that the Opinion
         of the Advocate General proposes a restrictive interpretation of Article EC, regarding which it has not had the opportunity
         to express its views during the procedure.
      
The Court considers that it has all the information necessary to deliberate on the dispute before it and that the dispute
         should not be examined in the light of arguments that were not debated before the Court.
      
Accordingly, it is not appropriate to order reopening of the oral procedure.
      
 Jurisdiction of the Court 
 Arguments of the parties 
The Kingdom of Belgium disputes the jurisdiction of the Court to hear and determine disputes relating to the Establishment
         Agreement. It claims that infringement proceedings under Article EC cannot be brought unless the Commission establishes
         the infringement of a provision of Community law or of an agreement to which the European Community is a party, or the existence
         of a clause conferring jurisdiction. 
      
In this case, the Kingdom of Belgium submits that no Community provision has been infringed as there is no infringement of
         the provisions of the EC Treaty or of its annexes, or of secondary Community law. That Member State maintains that the Establishment
         Agreement is not an agreement to which the Community is a party and that there is no clause which confers jurisdiction.
      
The Kingdom of Belgium claims that the Establishment Agreement is distinct from the Convention and that only the latter
         provides a clause conferring jurisdiction, in Article thereof. In its view, the Establishment Agreement cannot be regarded
         as an act deriving from the Convention. The fact that the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) was a voting member
         of the Board of Governors, which has an international legal personality that is separate from that of the ECSC, does not mean
         that the latter was a Contracting Party to the Establishment Agreement concluded between the Board of Governors and the Belgian
         Government.
      
Furthermore, if, as the Commission claims, the ECSC was a Contracting Party to the Establishment Agreement, as a voting member
         of the Board of Governors, the same would apply to the Kingdom of Belgium, given that it is a member of the Board. In those
         circumstances, that Member State would itself be a Contracting Party which, as a general principle of law, is impossible.
      
Moreover, that Member State claims that the act under which it concluded such agreement draws its binding force solely from
         its own sovereignty. 
      
The Commission rejects this interpretation on two grounds.
      
First, it points out that the application does not refer to the Establishment Agreement alone, but also to Article EC,
         read in conjunction with that agreement.
      
Second, the Commission submits that the Establishment Agreement is undoubtedly part of Community law, independently of Article
         EC, since it must be regarded as an act ‘deriving from’ the Convention, which is itself part of Community law.
      
The Commission states that in accordance with settled case-law, as far as provisions coming within Community competence are
         concerned, agreements concluded by the Community and its Member States with non-member countries have the same status in the
         Community legal order as purely Community agreements, and that the Convention was concluded between the Communities and
         their Member States.
      
The Commission observes that the Establishment Agreement was originally an act deriving from the Convention and that,
         as early as 1962, the High Authority of the ECSC was a voting member of the Board of Governors. The Commission therefore considers
         that the High Authority was a Contracting Party to the Establishment Agreement. The Commission explains that it took the place
         of the ECSC High Authority on the signature of the Merger Treaty of April and that the purpose of the Convention
         was both to consolidate the acquis of the Convention and to strengthen the role of the Communities as Contracting Parties.
         The Commission therefore concludes that, in the light of the fact that the Establishment Agreement was adopted on the basis
         of Article of the Convention and that provision is likewise made for establishment agreements in the Convention,
         the Establishment Agreement forms part of the rights and obligations to which the Communities subscribed in 1994.
      
 Findings of the Court
It should be emphasised that an action must be considered having regard only to the pleadings contained in the original application
         (Case C-256/Commission v France [2000] ECR I-2487, paragraph 31, and Case C-508/Commission v United Kingdom [2006] ECR I‑3969, paragraph 61).
      
It should also be noted that, under Articles 21(1) of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union and 38(1)(c)
         of the Rules of Procedure thereof, in any application made under Article EC, the Commission must indicate the specific
         complaints on which the Court is called upon to rule (Cases C-52/Commission v Denmark [1992] ECR I-2187, paragraph 17, and C-255/Commission v France [2006], ECR I‑5251, paragraph 24).
      
These heads of claim must be set out unambiguously, so that the Court does not rule ultra petita or indeed fail to rule on a complaint (Case C-296/Commission v France [2003] ECR I-13909, paragraph 121, and Case C-255/Commission v France, cited above, paragraph 24). 
      
In this case, the Court finds that the only complaint referred to in the claims at the end of the application initiating proceedings
         relates to the alleged infringement of the obligations of the Kingdom of Belgium under the Establishment Agreement, read in
         conjunction with Article EC.
      
Admittedly, Article EC is referred to twice in the grounds of the application. The Commission remarks that the conduct
         of the Belgian authorities interferes with the system adopted for financing the Community and apportioning financial burdens
         between the Member States, thereby infringing that article, pointing out that the consequences of this conduct are detrimental.
         The Commission adds that the obligations of the Kingdom of Belgium under the Establishment Agreement must be interpreted in
         the light of the principle of good faith, which forms an integral part of Article EC and of general international law.
      
However, it is apparent from the application initiating the proceedings that the alleged infringement of Article EC by
         the Kingdom of Belgium is only ancillary to the alleged infringement regarding the Establishment Agreement. Indeed, according
         to the Commission, it is the Kingdom of Belgium's failure to observe its obligations under the Establishment Agreement that
         also results in a breach of Article EC.
      
Furthermore, in its reply, the Commission expressly states that it has never relied on Article EC per se in this case,
         that is, independently of the Establishment Agreement.
      
In these circumstances, the fact that the Court may lack jurisdiction to determine, on the basis of Article EC, the infringement
         by the Kingdom of Belgium of its obligations under the Establishment Agreement would necessarily result in the inadmissibility
         of the application in its entirety.
      
In relation to international conventions in general, it should be noted that, according to the case-law of the Court, if the
         Community is not a Contracting Party to a convention, in principle the Court is not competent to interpret the provisions
         of that convention in the context of preliminary proceedings (Case 130/Vandeweghe and Others [1973] ECR 1329, paragraph 2; Order C‑162/Hartmann [1998] ECR I-7083, paragraph 9; Case C-301/Bogiatzi [2009] ECR I-10185, paragraph 24; and Case C-533/TNT Express Nederland [2010] ECR I-0000, paragraph 61).
      
Specifically in relation to the Convention, it should be borne in mind that the Court has already held that it lacks
         jurisdiction to give a ruling on its interpretation, and on the obligations arising under it for the Member States since,
         despite the fact that that convention was linked to the Community and the functioning of its institutions, it was an international
         agreement concluded by the Member States which did not form an integral part of Community law (Case 44/Hurd [1986] ECR 29, paragraphs to 22).
      
This assessment, as the Advocate General has pointed out in point of his Opinion, does not have to be restricted to the
         procedural context in Hurd, where the Court was asked to give a preliminary ruling, but likewise applies in the context of the proceedings provided
         for in Article EC, the subject-matter of which can only be a failure by a Member State to fulfil one of its obligations
         under the EC Treaty.
      
It is apparent from the preamble to the Establishment Agreement that it was based on Article of the Convention, which
         affords the Board of Governors the power to negotiate with the government of the Member State in which a school is established,
         any further agreements for the purpose of ensuring that the European Schools operate in the best possible material and moral
         conditions. The rules in that agreement therefore have to be consistent with those laid down in the Convention. 
      
The view of the Commission, according to which the ECSC, and then the Community, must be considered to be a Contracting Party
         to the Establishment Agreement, given that the High Authority of the ECSC was a voting member of the Governing Board and that
         the Commission took the place of it, does not invalidate the finding set out in the previous paragraph and therefore this
         submission must be rejected.
      
Indeed, there is nothing to suggest that the possibility of granting the ECSC High Authority the right to participate in the
         Governing Body, as a voting member thereof, set out by the Contracting Parties in the Convention and subsequently exercised
         by the High Authority, would imply that the parties signing the Establishment Agreement intended to grant the ECSC the status
         of Contracting Party to that agreement. Furthermore, that is the submission of the Kingdom of Belgium, one of the Contracting
         Parties to the Establishment Agreement. 
      
Accordingly, it cannot be maintained that the Community is involved as a Contracting Party in the Establishment Agreement
         and that this agreement would, therefore, establish rights and obligations for the Community.
      
With regard to the other submission of the Commission, that the Establishment Agreement forms an integral part of the rights
         and obligations to which the Communities signed up in 1994, this cannot succeed either. This submission is based on the fact
         that the Convention, which was concluded and approved by the Communities, has the purpose of consolidating the acquis
         of the Convention and the fact that the Convention provides for establishment agreements.
      
In that regard, it should be observed that neither the alleged consolidation of the acquis of the Convention by the Convention, which, furthermore, only entered into force on October 2002, nor the reference made by the latter to the establishment
         agreements, can retroactively modify the legal nature of the Establishment Agreement, which is an international agreement
         concluded between the Governing Body and the government of a single Member State.
      
With regard to the applicability or otherwise of the arbitration clause appearing in Article of the Convention, it
         should be noted that infringement proceedings, within the meaning of the EC Treaty and of the case-law of the Court, can only
         be brought on the basis of Article EC, which was indeed the case in this matter. 
      
In those circumstances, it must be held that the Court lacks jurisdiction to give a ruling on the Commission’s action, brought
         on the basis of Article EC, on the ground that the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under the Establishment
         Agreement, read in conjunction with Article EC.  
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Kingdom of Belgium applied for costs and the Commission has been
         unsuccessful, the Commission must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that the Court of Justice of the European Union does not have jurisdiction to rule on the action of the European
            Commission, brought on the basis of Article EC, on the ground that the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations
            under the Establishment Agreement concluded on October between the Board of Governors of the European School and the
            Government of the Kingdom of Belgium, read in conjunction with Article EC;
2.      Orders the European Commission to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 