
Case C-467/Criminal proceedings
against
Giuseppe Francesco Gasparini and Others
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Audiencia Provincial de Málaga)
(Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement – Article – Ne bis in idem principle – Scope – Acquittal of the accused because their prosecution for the offence is time-barred)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        European Union – Police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters – Protocol integrating the Schengen acquis – Convention
            implementing the Schengen Agreement – Ne bis in idem principle 
(Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement, Art. 54)
2.        European Union – Police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters – Protocol integrating the Schengen acquis – Convention
            implementing the Schengen Agreement – Ne bis in idem principle 
(Art. 2, first para., fourth indent, EU; Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement, Art. 54)
3.        Free movement of goods – Products in free circulation 
(Art. EC; Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement, Art. 54)
4.        European Union – Police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters – Protocol integrating the Schengen acquis – Convention
            implementing the Schengen Agreement – Ne bis in idem principle 
(Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement, Art. 54)
1.        The ne bis in idem principle, enshrined in Article of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement, applies in respect of a decision
         of a court of a Contracting State, made after criminal proceedings have been brought, by which the accused is acquitted finally
         because prosecution of the offence is time-barred.
      
The main clause of the single sentence comprising Article of the Convention makes no reference to the content of the judgment
         that has become final. It is not applicable solely to judgments convicting the accused.
      
Furthermore, not to apply Article where the accused is finally acquitted because prosecution for the offence is time-barred
         would undermine the implementation of the objective of that provision which is to ensure that no one is prosecuted for the
         same acts in several Contracting States on account of the fact that he exercises his right to freedom of movement. Such a
         person must therefore be regarded as having had his trial finally disposed of for the purposes of that provision.
      
It is true that the laws of the Contracting States on limitation periods have not been harmonised. However, nowhere in Title
         VI of the EU Treaty, relating to police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters, or in the Schengen Agreement or the
         Convention implementing the latter is the application of Article made conditional upon harmonisation, or at the least approximation,
         of the criminal laws of the Member States relating to procedures whereby further prosecution is barred or, more generally,
         upon harmonisation or approximation of their criminal laws. There is a necessary implication in the ne bis in idem principle that the Contracting States have mutual trust in their criminal justice systems and that each of them recognises
         the criminal law in force in the other Contracting States even when the outcome would be different if its own national law
         were applied.
      
Finally, Framework Decision 2002/on the European arrest warrant and the surrender procedures between Member States does
         not preclude the ne bis in idem principle from applying in the case of a final acquittal because prosecution of the offence is time-barred. Exercise of the
         power, provided for in Article 4(4) of the framework decision, to refuse to execute a European arrest warrant inter alia where
         the criminal prosecution of the requested person is time-barred according to the law of the executing Member State and the
         acts fall within the jurisdiction of that State under its own criminal law is not conditional on the existence of a judgment
         whose basis is that a prosecution is time-barred. The situation where the requested person has been finally judged by a Member
         State in respect of the same acts is governed by Article 3(2) of the framework decision, a provision which lays down a mandatory
         ground for non-execution of a European arrest warrant.
      
(see paras 24, 27-31, 33, operative part 1)
2.        The ne bis in idem principle, enshrined in Article of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement, does not apply to persons other
         than those whose trial has been finally disposed of in a Contracting State. This interpretation, based on the wording of Article
         of the Convention, is borne out by the purpose of the provisions of Title VI of the Treaty on European Union, as set out
         in the fourth indent of the first paragraph of Article EU.
      
(see paras 36-37, operative part 2)
3.        A criminal court of a Contracting State cannot hold goods to be in free circulation in national territory solely because a
         criminal court of another Contracting State has found, in relation to the same goods, that prosecution for the offence of
         smuggling is time-barred.
      
In order for products coming from a third country to be considered to be in free circulation in a Member State the three conditions
         laid down in Article EC must be met. A finding by a court of a Member State that prosecution of a defendant for the offence
         of smuggling is time-barred does not alter the legal classification of the products in question, since the ne bis in idem principle, enshrined in Article of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement, binds the courts of a Contracting
         State only in so far as it precludes a defendant who has already had his case finally disposed of in another Contracting State
         from being prosecuted a second time for the same acts.
      
(see paras 49-52, operative part 3)
4.        The only relevant criterion for applying the concept of ‘the same acts’ within the meaning of Article of the Convention
         implementing the Schengen Agreement is identity of the material acts, understood as the existence of a set of concrete circumstances
         which are inextricably linked together. Accordingly, the marketing of goods in another Member State, after their importation
         into the Member State where the accused was acquitted because prosecution for the offence of smuggling was time-barred, constitutes
         conduct which may form part of the ‘same acts’ within the meaning of Article of the Convention. However, the definitive
         assessment in this regard is a matter for the competent national courts which are charged with the task of determining whether
         the material acts at issue constitute a set of facts which are inextricably linked together in time, in space and by their
         subject-matter.
      
(see paras 54, 56-57, operative part 4)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
September (*)
      
(Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement – Article – Ne bis in idem principle – Scope – Acquittal of the accused because their prosecution for the offence is time-barred)
In Case C-467/04,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EU from the Audiencia Provincial de Málaga (Spain), made by decision of
         July 2004, received at the Court on November 2004, in the criminal proceedings against
      
Giuseppe Francesco Gasparini,
José Ma L.A. Gasparini,
Giuseppe Costa Bozzo,
Juan de Lucchi Calcagno,
Francesco Mario Gasparini,
José A. Hormiga Marrero,
Sindicatura Quiebra,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann, President of the Chamber, N. Colneric (Rapporteur), J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, M. Ilešič and E. Levits, Judges,
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on March 2006,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        G.F. Gasparini, by H. Oliva García, L. Pinto, I. Ayala Gómez and P. González Rivero, abogados,
–        J. Mª L.A. Gasparini, by C. Font Felíu, abogado,
–        G. Costa Bozzo, by L. Rodríguez Ramos, abogado, and J.C. Randón Reyna, procurador,
–        J. de Lucchi Calcagno, by F. García Guerrero-Strachan, abogado, and B. De Lucchi López, procuradora,
–        F.M. Gasparini, by J. García Alarcón, abogado,
–        the Spanish Government, by M. Muñoz Pérez, acting as Agent,
–        the French Government, by J.-C. Niollet, acting as Agent,
–        the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and G. Aiello, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster, C. Wissels and C. ten Dam, acting as Agents,
–        the Polish Government, by T. Nowakowski, acting as Agent,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by L. Escobar Guerrero, W. Bogensberger and F. Jimeno Fernández, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on June 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of, first, Article of the Convention implementing the
         Schengen Agreement of June between the Governments of the States of the Benelux Economic Union, the Federal Republic
         of Germany and the French Republic on the gradual abolition of checks at their common borders (OJ L 239, p. 19), signed
         in Schengen (Luxembourg) on June (‘the CISA’), and, second, Article EC.
      
The reference was made in the course of criminal proceedings brought against Mr G.F. Gasparini, Mr J. Ma L.A. Gasparini, Mr Costa Bozzo, Mr de Lucchi Calcagno, Mr F.M. Gasparini, Mr Hormiga Marrero and the Sindicatura Quiebra,
         who are suspected of having put smuggled olive oil on the Spanish market.
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
Under Article of the Protocol integrating the Schengen acquis into the framework of the European Union, annexed to the Treaty on European Union and to the Treaty establishing the European
         Community by the Treaty of Amsterdam (‘the Protocol’), Member States of the European Union, amongst them the Kingdom of
         Spain and the Portuguese Republic, are authorised to establish closer cooperation among themselves within the scope of the
         Schengen acquis as set out in the annex to the Protocol.
      
The Schengen acquis thus defined includes, inter alia, the Agreement between the Governments of the States of the Benelux Economic Union, the
         Federal Republic of Germany and the French Republic on the gradual abolition of checks at their common borders (OJ L
         239, p. 13), signed in Schengen on June (‘the Schengen Agreement’), and the CISA.
      
By virtue of the first subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the Protocol, from the date of entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam
         the Schengen acquis was to apply immediately to the Member States referred to in Article of the Protocol.
      
Pursuant to the second sentence of the second subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the Protocol, on May the Council of
         the European Union adopted Decision 1999/436/EC determining, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Treaty establishing
         the European Community and the Treaty on European Union, the legal basis for each of the provisions or decisions which constitute
         the Schengen acquis (OJ L 176, p. 17). It is apparent from Article of the decision, in conjunction with Annex A thereto, that the Council
         selected Articles EU and EU, which form part of Title VI of the EU Treaty entitled ‘Provisions on police and judicial
         cooperation in criminal matters’, as the legal basis for Articles to of the CISA.
      
Articles to form Chapter (‘Application of the ne bis in idem principle’) of Title III (‘Police and security’) of the CISA. 
      
Article of the CISA provides: 
      
‘A person whose trial has been finally disposed of in one Contracting Party may not be prosecuted in another Contracting Party
         for the same acts provided that, if a penalty has been imposed, it has been enforced, is actually in the process of being
         enforced or can no longer be enforced under the laws of the sentencing Contracting Party.’
      
Council Framework Decision 2002/584/JHA of June on the European arrest warrant and the surrender procedures between
         Member States (OJ L 190, p. 1) provides in Article 3, headed ‘Grounds for mandatory non-execution of the European arrest
         warrant’:
      
‘The judicial authority of the Member State of execution (hereinafter “executing judicial authority”) shall refuse to execute
         the European arrest warrant in the following cases:
      
…
(2)      if the executing judicial authority is informed that the requested person has been finally judged by a Member State in respect
         of the same acts provided that, where there has been sentence, the sentence has been served or is currently being served or
         may no longer be executed under the law of the sentencing Member State;
      
…’
Article of the framework decision, headed ‘Grounds for optional non-execution of the European arrest warrant’, is worded
         as follows:
      
‘The executing judicial authority may refuse to execute the European arrest warrant:
…
(4)      where the criminal prosecution or punishment of the requested person is statute-barred according to the law of the executing
         Member State and the acts fall within the jurisdiction of that Member State under its own criminal law;
      
…’
The Court’s jurisdiction to give preliminary rulings on matters falling within Title VI of the EU Treaty is governed by Article
         thereof.
      
The Kingdom of Spain has declared that it accepts the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice to give preliminary rulings on
         the validity and interpretation of the acts referred to in Article EU in accordance with the arrangements laid down in
         Article 35(2) and (3)(a) EU (OJ C 120, p. 24).
      
Article EC provides:
      
‘Products coming from a third country shall be considered to be in free circulation in a Member State if the import formalities
         have been complied with and any customs duties or charges having equivalent effect which are payable have been levied in that
         Member State, and if they have not benefited from a total or partial drawback of such duties or charges.’
      
 National legislation
The first two subparagraphs of Article 1(1) of Organic Law No 7/of July amending the legislation on smuggling
         and regulating related offences and administrative infringements (BOE No 181, July 1982, p. 20623) provide:
      
‘1.      The offence of smuggling is committed, where the value of the goods or articles is ESP or more, by any person who:
(1)      imports or exports lawfully traded goods without presenting them to a customs office;
(2)      carries out commercial transactions in respect of, possesses or puts into circulation lawfully traded goods from abroad without
         fulfilling the statutory conditions for importation.’
      
In accordance with Article of the Ley de Enjuiciamento Criminal (Code of Criminal Procedure), no appeal lies against a
         decision made on appeal by an Audiencia Provincial (Provincial Court).
      
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
According to the Audiencia Provincial de Málaga (Provincial Court, Málaga), there is coherent evidence that, at some unspecified
         time in 1993, the shareholders and directors of the company Minerva agreed to import through the port of Setúbal (Portugal)
         lampante (refined) olive oil from Tunisia and Turkey, which was not declared to the customs authorities. The goods were then
         transported in lorries from Setúbal to Málaga (Spain). The defendants devised a system of false invoicing to create the impression
         that the oil came from Switzerland. 
      
The Audiencia Provincial de Málaga further states that the Supremo Tribunal de Justiça (Supreme Court of Justice, Portugal),
         in a decision on an appeal against a judgment of the Tribunal de Setúbal, found that the lampante olive oil imported into
         Portugal originated on ten occasions in Tunisia and on one occasion in Turkey and that a lesser quantity than was actually
         imported was declared to the Portuguese customs authorities. 
      
The Supremo Tribunal de Justiça acquitted two of the defendants in the case before it, on the ground that their prosecution
         was time-barred. They are both also being prosecuted in the main proceedings.
      
The Audiencia Provincial de Málaga explains that it has to rule on whether an offence of smuggling can be found or whether,
         on the contrary, no such offence can be found having regard to the binding force of the judgment of the Supremo Tribunal de
         Justiça or to the fact that the goods were in free circulation in the Community. 
      
It was in those circumstances that the Audiencia Provincial de Málaga decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following
         questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Is a finding by the courts of one Member State that prosecution of an offence is time-barred binding on the courts of the
         other Member States?
      
(2)      Does the acquittal of a defendant on account of the fact that prosecution of the offence is time-barred benefit, by extension,
         persons being prosecuted in another Member State where the facts are identical? In other words, can persons being prosecuted
         in another Member State on the basis of the same facts also benefit from a limitation period?
      
(3)      If the criminal courts of one Member State declare that the extra-Community nature of goods has not been established for the
         purposes of an offence of smuggling and acquit the defendant, may the courts of another Member State broaden the investigation
         in order to prove that the introduction of goods without payment of customs duties was from a non-member State?
      
(4)      Where a criminal court in a Member State has declared either that it is not established that goods have been unlawfully introduced
         into the Community or that prosecution of the offence of smuggling is time-barred:
      
(a)      can the goods be regarded as being in free circulation in the rest of the Community?
(b)      can the sale of the goods in another Member State following their importation into the Member State where the acquittal was
         given be regarded as independent conduct which may therefore be punished or, instead, as conduct forming an integral part
         of the importation?’
      
 The Court’s jurisdiction
It is apparent from paragraphs and of this judgment that in the present case the Court has jurisdiction to rule on the
         interpretation of Article of the CISA by virtue of Article 35(1) to (3)(a) EU.
      
 The questions
 Question By this question, the national court essentially asks whether the ne bis in idem principle, enshrined in Article of the CISA, applies in respect of a decision of a court of a Contracting State by which
         the accused is acquitted finally because prosecution of the offence is time-barred.
      
Under Article of the CISA, a person may not be prosecuted in a Contracting State for the same acts as those in respect
         of which his trial has already been ‘finally disposed of’ in another Contracting State provided that, in the event of conviction,
         the penalty has been enforced, is actually in the process of being enforced or can no longer be enforced.
      
The main clause of the single sentence comprising Article of the CISA makes no reference to the content of the judgment
         that has become final. It is not applicable solely to judgments convicting the accused (see, to this effect, the judgment
         delivered today in Case C-150/Van Straaten [2006] ECR I-0000, paragraph 56).
      
Thus, the ne bis in idem principle, enshrined in Article of the CISA, falls to be applied in respect of a decision of the judicial authorities
         of a Contracting State by which the accused is acquitted finally for lack of evidence (Van Straaten, paragraph 61).
      
The main proceedings raise the question whether the same is true with regard to a final acquittal because prosecution of the
         offence is time-barred.
      
It is settled case-law that Article of the CISA has the objective of ensuring that no one is prosecuted for the same acts
         in several Contracting States on account of the fact that he exercises his right to freedom of movement (see Joined Cases
         C‑187/and C-385/Gözütok and Brügge [2003] ECR I-1345, paragraph 38, and Van Straaten, paragraph 57). It ensures that persons who, when prosecuted, have their cases finally disposed of are left undisturbed.
         They must be able to move freely without having to fear a fresh prosecution for the same acts in another Contracting State.
         
      
Not to apply Article of the CISA when a court of a Contracting State, following the bringing of criminal proceedings, has
         made a decision acquitting the accused finally because prosecution of the offence is time-barred would undermine the implementation
         of that objective. Such a person must therefore be regarded as having had his trial finally disposed of for the purposes of
         that provision.
      
It is true that the laws of the Contracting States on limitation periods have not been harmonised. However, nowhere in Title
         VI of the EU Treaty, relating to police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters (Articles and of which were selected
         as the legal basis for Articles to of the CISA), or in the Schengen Agreement or the CISA itself is the application
         of Article of the CISA made conditional upon harmonisation or approximation of the criminal laws of the Member States relating
         to procedures whereby further prosecution is barred (Gözütok and Brügge, paragraph 32) or, more generally, upon harmonisation or approximation of their criminal laws (see Case C-436/Van Esbroeck [2006] ECR I-2333, paragraph 29).
      
It should be added that there is a necessary implication in the ne bis in idem principle, enshrined in Article of the CISA, that the Contracting States have mutual trust in their criminal justice systems
         and that each of them recognises the criminal law in force in the other Contracting States even when the outcome would be
         different if its own national law were applied (Van Esbroeck, paragraph 30). 
      
Framework Decision 2002/does not preclude the ne bis in idem principle from applying in the case of a final acquittal because prosecution of the offence is time-barred. Article 4(4)
         of the framework decision, relied upon by the Netherlands Government in the observations which it submitted to the Court,
         permits the executing judicial authority to refuse to execute a European arrest warrant inter alia where the criminal prosecution
         of the requested person is time-barred according to the law of the executing Member State and the acts fall within the jurisdiction
         of that State under its own criminal law. In order for that power to be exercised, a judgment whose basis is that a prosecution
         is time-barred does not have to exist. The situation where the requested person has been finally judged by a Member State
         in respect of the same acts is governed by Article 3(2) of the framework decision, a provision which lays down a mandatory
         ground for non-execution of a European arrest warrant.
      
Having regard to the complexity of the main proceedings, it should be pointed out, finally, that it is for national courts
         to determine whether the acts in respect of which a case has been finally disposed of are the same as those at issue before
         them.
      
It follows from the foregoing that the answer to the first question must be that the ne bis in idem principle, enshrined in Article of the CISA, applies in respect of a decision of a court of a Contracting State, made
         after criminal proceedings have been brought, by which the accused is acquitted finally because prosecution of the offence
         is time-barred.
      
 Question By its second question, the national court essentially asks who is capable of benefiting from the ne bis in idem principle. 
      
It is clear from the wording of Article of the CISA that only persons who have already had a trial finally disposed of
         once may derive advantage from the ne bis in idem principle.
      
This interpretation is borne out by the purpose of the provisions of Title VI of the EU Treaty, as set out in the fourth indent
         of the first paragraph of Article EU, namely ‘to maintain and develop the Union as an area of freedom, security and justice,
         in which the free movement of persons is assured in conjunction with appropriate measures with respect to ... the prevention
         and combating of crime’.
      
Consequently, the answer to the second question must be that the ne bis in idem principle, enshrined in Article of the CISA, does not apply to persons other than those whose trial has been finally disposed
         of in a Contracting State.
      
 Question The third question is based on the premiss that the criminal courts of a Member State declare that it has not been established
         for the purposes of the offence of smuggling that the goods are from outside the Community.
      
Such a premiss is inconsistent, however, with the facts of the main proceedings as described by the national court and reproduced
         in paragraphs to of the present judgment.
      
Admittedly, the majority of the defendants in the main proceedings allege that the national court has misread the judgment
         of the Supremo Tribunal de Justiça. They contend that, contrary to what is stated in the order for reference, the Supremo
         Tribunal de Justiça did not find that a lesser quantity than was actually imported into Portugal was declared to the customs
         authorities. According to them, the criminal proceedings relating to the offences of smuggling and of falsification of documents
         were declared time-barred by a judicial decision made prior to the commencement of the hearing before the Supremo Tribunal
         de Justiça. In addition, judgment was given in favour of the defendants on an application for compensation under civil law
         made in the same proceedings, because the facts alleged were not proved. 
      
It is to be recalled that the system under Article EC is capable of being applied to references for a preliminary ruling
         pursuant to Article EU, subject to the conditions laid down in the latter article (see Case C-105/Pupino [2005] ECR I-5285, paragraph 28). Under the procedure envisaged in Article EC, which is based on a clear separation of
         functions between the national courts and the Court of Justice, any assessment of the facts in the case is a matter for the
         national court. The Court of Justice is thus empowered to rule on the interpretation or validity of Community provisions only
         on the basis of the facts which the national court puts before it (see Case C-235/Dumon and Froment [1998] ECR I‑4531, paragraph 25, and Case C-421/Traunfellner [2003] ECR I‑11941, paragraph 21).
      
In the light of the national court’s reading of the judgment of the Supremo Tribunal de Justiça, doubts arise as to the admissibility
         of the third question.
      
On such a reading, the premiss upon which the third question is founded, namely the acquittal of the defendants because there
         was no, or insufficient, evidence that the goods were from outside the Community, is not present.
      
According to the Court’s settled case-law, while the Court is in principle bound to give a ruling where the questions submitted
         concern the interpretation of Community law, it can in exceptional circumstances examine the conditions in which the case
         was referred to it by the national court, in order to confirm its own jurisdiction. The Court may refuse to rule on a question
         referred for a preliminary ruling by a national court only where it is quite obvious that the interpretation of Community
         law that is sought bears no relation to the actual facts of the main action or its purpose, where the problem is hypothetical,
         or where the Court does not have before it the factual or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions
         submitted to it (see, inter alia, Case C-13/Chacón Navas [2006] ECR I-0000, paragraphs and 33, and the case-law cited).
      
Here, having regard to the national court’s description of the facts, the third question concerns a hypothetical problem.
      
Consequently, there is no reason for the Court to answer this question.
      
 Question For the reasons set out in paragraphs to of the present judgment, the fourth question is inadmissible in so far as it
         is founded on the premiss of acquittal of the defendants because there was no, or insufficient, evidence. On the other hand,
         it is admissible in so far as it relates to the situation where a court of a Member State has declared that prosecution of
         the offence of smuggling is time-barred.
      
 Question 4(a)
By Question 4(a), the national court essentially asks whether it may be inferred from the decision of a court of a Contracting
         State which has become final finding that a prosecution for the offence of smuggling is time-barred that the goods in question
         are in free circulation in the other Member States. 
      
Under Article EC, three conditions must be met in order for products coming from a third country to be considered to be
         in free circulation in a Member State. Products are regarded as so being if (i) the import formalities have been complied
         with, (ii) any customs duties or charges having equivalent effect which are payable have been levied in that Member State
         and (iii) the products have not benefited from a total or partial drawback of such duties or charges.
      
A finding by a court of a Member State that prosecution of a defendant for the offence of smuggling is time-barred does not
         alter the legal classification of the products in question.
      
The ne bis in idem principle binds the courts of a Contracting State only in so far as it precludes a defendant who has already had his case
         finally disposed of in another Contracting State from being prosecuted a second time for the same acts. 
      
The answer to Question 4(a) must therefore be that a criminal court of a Contracting State cannot hold goods to be in free
         circulation in national territory solely because a criminal court of another Contracting State has found, in relation to the
         same goods, that prosecution for the offence of smuggling is time-barred.
      
 Question 4(b)
By Question 4(b), the national court essentially asks whether the marketing of goods in another Member State, after their
         importation into the Member State where the accused was acquitted because the prosecution was time-barred, forms part of the
         same acts or constitutes conduct independent of importation into the latter Member State.
      
The only relevant criterion for applying the concept of ‘the same acts’ within the meaning of Article of the CISA is identity
         of the material acts, understood as the existence of a set of concrete circumstances which are inextricably linked together
         (see Van Esbroeck, paragraph 36).
      
More specifically, a situation such as that at issue in the main proceedings may involve such a set of facts.
      
However, the definitive assessment in this regard is a matter for the competent national courts which are charged with the
         task of determining whether the material acts at issue constitute a set of facts which are inextricably linked together in
         time, in space and by their subject-matter (see Van Esbroeck, paragraph 38). 
      
It follows from the foregoing that the marketing of goods in another Member State, after their importation into the Member
         State where the accused was acquitted, constitutes conduct which may form part of the ‘same acts’ within the meaning of Article
         of the CISA.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      The ne bis in idem principle, enshrined in Article of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement of June between the Governments of
            the States of the Benelux Economic Union, the Federal Republic of Germany and the French Republic on the gradual abolition
            of checks at their common borders, signed in Schengen on June 1990, applies in respect of a decision of a court of a Contracting
            State, made after criminal proceedings have been brought, by which the accused is acquitted finally because prosecution of
            the offence is time-barred.
2.      That principle does not apply to persons other than those whose trial has been finally disposed of in a Contracting State.
3.      A criminal court of a Contracting State cannot hold goods to be in free circulation in national territory solely because a
            criminal court of another Contracting State has found, in relation to the same goods, that prosecution for the offence of
            smuggling is time-barred.
4.      The marketing of goods in another Member State, after their importation into the Member State where the accused was acquitted,
            constitutes conduct which may form part of the ‘same acts’ within the meaning of Article of the Convention.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Spanish.
      
Top  
 