
Case C-399/Commission of the European Communities
v
Council of the European Union
(State aid – Existing aid scheme – Tax scheme for coordination centres established in Belgium – Competence of the Council)
Summary of the Judgment
State aid – Power of the Council to authorise aid by way of derogation in view of exceptional circumstances – Conditions of
            exercise 
(Arts EC and 88(2) EC)
The power held by the Council, laid down in the third subparagraph of Article 88(2) EC, is clearly exceptional in character.
         It follows that, if the Member State concerned has made no application to the Council under that provision before the Commission
         declares the aid incompatible with the common market, the Council is no longer authorised to exercise the exceptional power
         conferred upon it by that provision in order to declare such aid compatible with the common market. Such an interpretation,
         which makes it possible to avoid the same State aid being the subject of conflicting decisions taken successively by the Commission
         and the Council, contributes to legal certainty.
      
Furthermore, to hold that a Member State is able to grant to beneficiaries of such unlawful aid new aid in an amount equivalent
         to that of the unlawful aid, intended to neutralise the impact of the repayments which the beneficiaries are obliged to make
         pursuant to the decision finding the aid incompatible with the common market would clearly undermine the effectiveness of
         decisions taken by the Commission under Articles EC and EC. Therefore, the Council can neither counter such a Commission
         decision by itself declaring that aid compatible with the market, nor undermine the effectiveness of that decision by declaring
         compatible with the common market, in accordance with the third subparagraph of Article 88(2) EC, an aid designed to compensate
         the beneficiaries of the unlawful aid declared incompatible with the common market for the repayments they are required to
         make pursuant to that decision.
      
It follows that the Council was not able validly to adopt a decision finding aid which the Belgian State proposed to grant
         to certain coordination centres established in Belgium compatible with the common market, contrary to a Commission decision
         adopted prior to the application to the Council which concerned an identical aid scheme and declared it to be incompatible
         with the common market. 
      
 (see paras 24-30, 36-37)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
June (*)
      
(State aid – Existing aid scheme – Tax scheme for coordination centres established in Belgium – Competence of the Council)
In Case C-399/03,
ACTION for annulment under Article EC, brought on September 2003,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by G. Rozet, V. Di Bucci and R. Lyal, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Council of the European Union, represented by A.-M. Colaert and F. Florindo Gijón, acting as Agents,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, J. Makarczyk, R. Schintgen, P. Kūris (Rapporteur) and J. Klučka,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Léger,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2005,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on February 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities seeks annulment of Council Decision 2003/531/EC of July
         on the granting of aid by the Belgian Government to certain coordination centres established in Belgium (OJ L 184,
         p. 17; the ‘contested decision’). 
      
 Legal context
Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 659/of March laying down detailed rules for the application of Article
         [88] of the EC Treaty (OJ L 83, p. 1) provides: 
      
‘For the purpose of this Regulation:
…
(b)       “existing aid” shall mean: 
         …
(ii)      authorised aid, that is to say, aid schemes and individual aid which have been authorised by the Commission or by the Council;
         
      
(iii)  aid which is deemed to have been authorised pursuant to Article 4(6) of this Regulation or prior to this Regulation but in
         accordance with this procedure; 
      
(iv)      aid which is deemed to be existing aid pursuant to Article 15; 
(v)      aid which is deemed to be an existing aid because it can be established that at the time it was put into effect it did not
         constitute an aid, and subsequently became an aid due to the evolution of the common market and without having been altered
         by the Member State. Where certain measures become aid following the liberalisation of an activity by Community law, such
         measures shall not be considered as existing aid after the date fixed for liberalisation; 
      
(c)      “new aid” shall mean all aid, that is to say, aid schemes and individual aid, which is not existing aid, including alterations
         to existing aid; 
      
…’
 The contested decision and its background
By Royal Decree No of December on the creation of coordination centres (Moniteur belge of January 1983), the Kingdom of Belgium provided for a tax exemption, for a period of years, applicable to tax on the
         profits of coordination centres which carry out, for undertakings of the group to which they belong, some administrative,
         preparatory or auxiliary tasks and some financial centralising activities.
      
On February 1983, the Commission informed the Belgian Government that the intervention provided for by that royal decree
         was caught by Article 92(1) of the EEC Treaty (which became Article 92(1) of the EC Treaty, now, after amendment, Article
         87(1) EC), and requested that it notify the Commission of that tax scheme and suspend its implementation without delay. 
      
Following the notification, on April 1984, of a draft law amending the tax scheme applicable to coordination centres, the
         Commission decided on May that the scheme as amended no longer contained any element of aid for the purposes of Article
         92(1) of the Treaty. The Belgian Government was informed of that decision by letter of May 1984.  
      
However, in the light of the fact that the amendments introduced by the law did not completely correspond to that draft, on
         December the Commission initiated the procedure provided for in Article 93(2) of the EEC Treaty (which became Article
         93(2) of the EC Treaty, now Article 88(2) EC).  
      
Following another amendment to the law on August 1986, the Commission terminated the procedure and communicated its decision
         to the Belgian Government on March 1987. 
      
The Council, first of all, unanimously adopted on December a series of conclusions and a resolution on a code of conduct
         for business taxation. A Council report of February classed the Belgian provisions relating to the coordination centres
         as harmful tax measures which had to be abolished by December 2005. Then, on and November 2000, the Council (Ecofin)
         decided that that final date for the harmful measures to produce effects would apply to those subject to such measures on
         December 2000.  Finally, on January 2003, the Council ruled in favour of maintaining the effects of some harmful arrangements
         beyond 2005, and specifically in respect of the Belgian coordination centres until December 2010.  
      
In connection with the examination of all the tax schemes in force in the Member States, the Commission asked the Belgian
         authorities on February to provide it with information on the coordination centres. By letter of July 2000, it
         informed the Belgian authorities that the tax scheme applicable to the coordination centres appeared to constitute State aid
         within the meaning of Article 87(1) EC. 
      
On July 2001, the Commission adopted proposals for appropriate measures which provided, as a transitional measure, that
         the coordination centres authorised before the date of acceptance of those measures might continue to qualify for the tax
         scheme until December 2005. 
      
By a letter of February 2002, the Commission notified the Kingdom of Belgium that it had decided to initiate the investigation
         procedure laid down in Article 88(2) EC, before adopting Decision 2003/757/EC  of February on the aid scheme implemented
         by Belgium for coordination centres established in Belgium (OJ L 282, p. 25). That last decision has been the subject
         of two actions for annulment before the Court. 
      
Following the notification made to it of a preliminary draft law to amend Royal Decree No 187, the Commission, by letter of
         April 2003, notified the Kingdom of Belgium of its decision to initiate an investigation procedure concerning part of the
         measure contemplated. 
      
As early as March 2003, the Kingdom of Belgium sent simultaneous applications to the Commission and the Council for ‘the
         necessary to be done in order for the coordination centres whose authorisation expir[ed] after February to be maintained
         until December 2005’. That request was renewed on March and May on the basis of the third subparagraph of Article
         88(2) EC.   
      
The Council, meeting on July 2003, adopted the contested decision, by which it concluded that the aid which the Kingdom
         of Belgium planned to grant to undertakings authorised as at December to act as coordination centres under Royal Decree
         No 187, and whose authorisations were to expire between February and December 2005, was compatible with the common
         market. That aid involved application of the normal corporate taxation rate to a taxation base determined according to the
         ‘cost plus’ method,  application of a special annual tax of EUR per employee with a ceiling of EUR 000, exemption
         from the précomptes immobiliers (property taxes) on buildings owned by the centres, exemption from the précompte mobilier (withholding tax) on dividends, interest and royalties paid by the centres and on revenue which the centres receive from
         money deposits, and exemption from registration tax on subscriptions of capital and on increases in authorised capital.
      
 The action
The Commission puts forward four pleas in support of its action, alleging, respectively, the Council’s lack of competence,
         misuse of powers and abuse of process, breach of the Treaty and other general principles and, in the alternative, a manifest
         error of assessment.   
      
 The first plea
 Arguments of the parties
By its first plea, the Commission claims that the Council did not have the competence to adopt the contested decision. 
      
It submits, in the first place, that the provisions of the Treaty and Regulation No 659/grant it alone the competence
         to adopt a decision such as that contested. The power held by the Council in that sphere is of an exceptional character only,
         and its exercise must be subject to strict interpretation lest it generate a risk of conflict between the competences of the
         two institutions. Moreover, the Council’s competence in this instance has lapsed, since the conditions laid down in Article
         88(2) EC for operation of the time-bar were fulfilled. 
      
In the second place, the Commission states that the contested decision seeks to preserve the effects of the tax scheme, whose
         compatibility with the common market gave rise to doubts which it expressed in its letter of April 2003, and that that
         decision does not concern a new aid scheme or individual measures but aid considered to be existing aid within the meaning
         of the Treaty. 
      
The Council argues that the solution upheld in Case C‑110/Commission v Council [2004] ECR I‑cannot be applied in the instant case since the Council authorised a new aid, distinct from that declared
         incompatible with the common market by the Commission. 
      
To that end, it claims that the authorised aid, granted by new legal provisions, is allocated to a restricted number of undertakings,
         all identifiable, that is to say about coordination centres, authorisation for which was to expire between February
         and December 2005. In addition, that decision would have produced effects for a limited period, as it would not have
         extended beyond December 2005. According to the Council, that aid is less profitable for the undertakings than the previous
         scheme. 
      
In any event, it is of the view that the contested decision authorised the Kingdom of Belgium not to continue the scheme declared
         incompatible by the Commission, but to adopt a new legal measure. 
      
As regards the period which elapsed between the submission by the Kingdom of Belgium of an application under Article 88(2)
         EC and the adoption of the contested decision, the Council has argued that the letter of that Kingdom’s Permanent Representative
         of March is only a preparatory document, intended to facilitate translation, in order that discussions on the proposed
         measures might take place. The application of the Kingdom of Belgium was accordingly not submitted to it until May 2003.
      
 Findings of the Court
In Commission v Council, the Court defined the circumstances in which the Council can take a decision authorising State aid where the Commission
         has adopted a decision stating such aid to be incompatible with the common market.
      
Firstly, the Court interpreted in paragraph of that judgment the scope of the third subparagraph of Article 88(2) EC, holding
         that the power held by the Council was clearly exceptional in character. It inferred from that that if the Member State concerned
         has made no application to the Council under that provision before the Commission declares the aid incompatible with the common
         market, the Council is no longer authorised to exercise the exceptional power conferred upon it by that provision in order
         to declare such aid compatible with the common market (Commission v Council, paragraph 33).
      
The Court holds that such an interpretation, which makes it possible to avoid the same State aid being the subject of conflicting
         decisions taken successively by the Commission and the Council, contributes to legal certainty (Commission v Council, paragraph 35).
      
Secondly, the Court examined whether the fact that the Council lacks that power implies that it also lacks the power to decide
         on an aid measure whose aim is to allocate to beneficiaries of the illegal aid previously declared incompatible by a Commission
         decision a sum designed to compensate for the repayments which they are obliged to make pursuant to that decision.
      
It pointed out that, according to settled case-law, to hold that a Member State is able to grant to beneficiaries of such
         unlawful aid new aid in an amount equivalent to that of the unlawful aid, intended to neutralise the impact of the repayments
         which the beneficiaries are obliged to make pursuant to that decision, would clearly undermine the effectiveness of decisions
         taken by the Commission under Articles EC and EC (Commission v Council, paragraph 43).
      
The Court thus ruled that the Council can neither counter a Commission decision finding an aid incompatible with the common
         market by itself declaring that aid compatible with the market, nor undermine the effectiveness of such a decision by declaring
         compatible with the common market, in accordance with the third subparagraph of Article 88(2) EC, an aid designed to compensate
         the beneficiaries of the unlawful aid declared incompatible with the common market for the repayments they are required to
         make pursuant to that decision (Commission v Council, paragraphs and 45).
      
In the light of that case-law, it is necessary to conclude that the Council could not validly adopt the contested decision.
      
In the first place, it is common ground that the Kingdom of Belgium applied to the Council after the adoption of Decision
         2003/declaring incompatible with the common market the aid allocated by the Belgian State to the coordination centres.
         
      
Secondly, it is necessary to examine whether the aid described in Article of the contested decision is the same as that
         covered by Decision 2003/757.
      
In this respect, it is apparent from the documents in the file, and in particular from the note addressed by the Kingdom of
         Belgium to the Council on March 2003, that the aid scheme which the Council was to declare compatible with the common market
         was that covered by Decision 2003/757.
      
Furthermore, the note dated May 2003, in which the Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of Belgium to the European Union
         describes the content of the aid, leaves no doubt as to the fact that the measures concerned are the same. 
      
Lastly, the contested decision authorises measures which involve the application of the same methods for determining taxable
         profits and liability to tax on the basis of the number of employees as those laid down under the tax scheme applicable to
         the coordination centres. It also comprises the same exemptions from withholding and property taxes and from capital duty.
         
      
Thirdly, it is necessary to ascertain what the effects are of the contested decision. It is enough to state that the very
         terms of the statement of reasons on which that decision is based indicate that its object was to overcome the effects of
         Decision 2003/as regards the coordination centres having an authorisation which expired between February and December 2005.
      
Therefore, the contested decision was contrary to Decision 2003/757. The fact that it applies to only a restricted number
         of undertakings and is of limited duration has no bearing on the finding that it is inconsistent with Decision 2003/which,
         in Article 2, provides that, as of the date of its notification, the benefits of the scheme in question may not be maintained
         by the renewal of existing agreements and that, if the approval is to expire before December 2010, the benefits of the
         scheme may no longer be granted, even temporarily. 
      
It follows from all of the foregoing that the Council was not able to validly adopt the contested decision.
      
Therefore, the Commission’s first plea in support of its action, arguing that the Council lacked the competence to adopt the
         contested decision, is well founded, and that decision must, accordingly, be annulled.
      
 The other pleas 
Since the Commission’s first plea has been accepted and the contested decision must be annulled on that account, it is not
         necessary to examine the Commission’s other pleas in support of its action. 
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Council has been unsuccessful,
         the Council must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Annuls Council Decision 2003/531/EC of July on the granting of aid by the Belgian Government to certain coordination
            centres established in Belgium;
2.      Orders the Council of the European Union to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 