
ORDER OF THE COURT (Eighth Chamber)
February (*)
      
(Request for a preliminary ruling — ‘Court or tribunal’ for the purposes of Article TFEU — Tribunal Arbitral necessário — Admissibility — Regulation (EC) No 469/— Article — Supplementary protection certificate for medicinal products — Period of validity of a certificate — Maximum period of exclusivity)
In Case C‑555/13,
REQUEST for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Tribunal Arbitral necessário (Portugal), made by decision
         of October 2013, received at the Court on October 2013, in the proceedings
      
Merck Canada Inc.
v
Accord Healthcare Ltd,
Alter SA,
Labochem Ltd,
Synthon BV,
Ranbaxy Portugal — Comércio e Desenvolvimento de Produtos Farmacêuticos, Unipessoal Lda,
THE COURT (Eighth Chamber),
composed of C.G. Fernlund, President of the Chamber, C. Toader (Rapporteur) and E. Jarašiūnas, Judges,
Advocate General: N. Jääskinen,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to give a decision by reasoned order, pursuant to Article of the Rules
         of Procedure of the Court of Justice,
      
makes the following
Order
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article of Regulation (EC) No 469/of the European
         Parliament and of the Council of May concerning the supplementary protection certificate for medicinal products (OJ
         L 152, p. 1).
      
The request has been made in proceedings between Merck Canada Inc. (‘Merck Canada’) and Accord Healthcare Ltd, Alter SA, Labochem
         Ltd, Synthon BV and Ranbaxy Portugal — Comércio e Desenvolvimento de Produtos Farmacêuticos, Unipessoal Lda, concerning the
         maximum period of exclusivity granted by both the basic patent and the supplementary protection certificate (‘the certificate’)
         held by Merck Canada.
      
 Legal context
Recital to Regulation No 469/is worded as follows: 
      
‘The duration of the protection granted by the certificate should be such as to provide adequate effective protection. For
         this purpose, the holder of both a patent and a certificate should be able to enjoy an overall maximum of years of exclusivity
         from the time the medicinal product in question first obtains authorisation to be placed on the market [“MA”] in the [European
         Union].’
      
Article of the regulation provides:
      
‘Any product protected by a patent in the territory of a Member State and subject, prior to being placed on the market as
         a medicinal product, to an administrative authorisation procedure as laid down in Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament
         and of the Council of November on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use [OJ L 311, p. 67]
         … may, under the terms and conditions provided for in this Regulation, be the subject of a certificate.’
      
Article of the regulation states:
      
‘A certificate shall be granted if, in the Member State in which the application referred to in Article is submitted and
         at the date of that application:
      
(a)      the product is protected by a basic patent in force;
(b)      a valid [MA] as a medicinal product has been granted in accordance with Directive 2001/83/EC …;
(c)      the product has not already been the subject of a certificate;
(d)      the authorisation referred to in point (b) is the first [MA] as a medicinal product.’
With regard to the period of validity of the certificate, Article 13(1) to (3) of Regulation No 469/provides:
      
‘1.      The certificate shall take effect at the end of the lawful term of the basic patent for a period equal to the period which
         elapsed between the date on which the application for a basic patent was lodged and the date of the first [MA] in the [European
         Union], reduced by a period of five years.
      
2.      Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the duration of the certificate may not exceed five years from the date on which it takes effect.
3.      The periods laid down in paragraphs and shall be extended by six months in the case where Article of Regulation (EC)
         No 1901/applies. In that case, the duration of the period laid down in paragraph of this Article may be extended only
         once.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
According to the order for reference, on October 1991, Merck Canada lodged an application in Portugal for a patent for
         the active ingredient montelukast sodium, present in particular in the medicinal products Singulair and Singulair junior.
         Following that application, Patent No was granted to that company, on October 1998, in Portugal.
      
Within the European Union, the first MA for a medicinal product containing that active ingredient was obtained in Finland
         on August 1997.
      
On February 1999, Merck Canada applied for a certificate with the Instituto Nacional da Propriedade Industrial (National
         Institute of Intellectual Property) for a medicinal product relating to Patent No 213. Following that application, Certificate
         No was granted to that company on January for the active ingredient montelukast sodium.
      
According to the documents before the Court, on November 2012, Merck Canada brought an action before the Tribunal Arbitral
         necessário seeking to compel, inter alia, the defendants in the main proceedings to abstain from producing, importing and/or
         launching on the Portuguese market generic drugs containing the abovementioned active ingredient.
      
In support of its action, Merck Canada relies, pursuant to Article of Regulation No 469/2009, on the full period of validity
         of Certificate No 35, which is to run until August 2014. It bases its reasoning on the fact that, under Article 13, the
         certificate is to take effect at the end of the lawful term of the basic patent, which was to expire on October 2013, being
         years after the date on which that patent was granted in Portugal. According to Merck Canada, the certificate was to take
         effect on October 2013, for a period of months and days, until August 2014, even if, under such a period which
         falls to be added to that of the patent it holds, that company may enjoy a period of exclusivity over the abovementioned active
         ingredient for a period which is greater than years. As a result, the generic drugs produced by the defendants in the main
         proceedings should not be placed on the Portuguese market before the expiry date of that certificate.
      
By contrast, the defendants in the main proceedings claim that the aim of Regulation No 469/is to guarantee the holder
         of both a patent and a certificate a maximum period of years of exclusivity from the first MA, in the European Union, for
         the medicinal product in question.
      
Considering that the nature of the case required that it be processed within the shortest period possible, the Tribunal Arbitral
         necessário requests the application of the provision of Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court on the expedited
         procedure.
      
In those circumstances, the Tribunal Arbitral necessário decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question
         to the Court:
      
‘Is Article of Regulation No 469/to be interpreted as permitting, by means of a [certificate] for medicinal products,
         the period for exclusive exploitation of the patented invention to be more than years from the date of the first authorisation
         to place the medicinal product in question on the market within the Community (not including the extension provided for in
         Article 13(3) of that regulation)?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
 Admissibility
First, it is must be examined whether the Tribunal Arbitral necessário should be considered to be a court or tribunal for
         the purposes of Article TFEU.
      
In that regard, it should be noted that, according to settled case-law of the Court, in order to determine whether a body
         making a reference is a ‘court or tribunal’ within the meaning of Article TFEU, which is a question governed by EU law
         alone, the Court takes account of a number of factors, such as whether the body is established by law, whether it is permanent,
         whether its jurisdiction is compulsory, whether its procedure is inter partes, whether it applies rules of law and whether it is independent (see C‑394/Belov [2013] ECR, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
It should also be stated that a conventional arbitration tribunal is not a ‘court or tribunal of a Member State’ within the
         meaning of Article TFEU where the parties are under no obligation, in law or in fact, to refer their disputes to arbitration
         and the public authorities of the Member State concerned are not involved in the decision to opt for arbitration nor required
         to intervene of their own accord in the proceedings before the arbitrator (Case C‑125/Denuit and Cordenier [2005] ECR I‑923, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
However, the Court has held admissible preliminary questions referred to it by an arbitral tribunal, where that tribunal had
         been established by law, whose decisions were binding on the parties and whose jurisdiction did not depend on their agreement
         (see, to that effect, Case 109/Danfoss [1989] ECR 3199, paragraphs to 9).
      
In the main proceedings, it is clear from the order for reference that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal Arbitral necessário
         does not stem from the will of the parties, but from Law No 62/of December 2011. That law confers upon that tribunal
         compulsory jurisdiction to determine, at first instance, disputes involving industrial property rights pertaining to reference
         medicinal products and generic drugs. In addition, if the arbitral decision handed down by such a body is not subject to an
         appeal before the competent appellate court, it becomes definitive and has the same effects as a judgment handed down by an
         ordinary court.
      
The Member State at issue has therefore chosen, in the context of its procedure autonomy and with a view to implementing Regulation
         No 469/2009, to confer the jurisdiction for this type of dispute upon another body rather than an ordinary court (see, to
         that effect, Case 246/Broekmeulen v Huisarts Registratie Commissie [1981] ECR 2311, paragraph 16).
      
It is, moreover, apparent from the order for reference that the conditions laid down in the case-law of the Court referred
         to in paragraph of the present order, relating to whether the body is established by law, whether its procedure is inter partes, whether it applies rules of law and whether it is independent, are met.
      
It is clear from the order for reference that Article 209(2) of the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic lists the arbitral
         tribunals among those entities capable of exercising an adjudicative function and that the Tribunal Arbitral necessário was
         established by Law No 62/of December 2011.
      
Furthermore, according to the order for reference, the arbitrators are subject to the same obligations of independence and
         impartiality as judges belonging to the ordinary courts and the Tribunal Arbitral necessário observes the principle of equal
         treatment and the adversarial principle in the treatment of parties and gives its rulings on the basis of the Portuguese law
         on industrial property.
      
The Tribunal Arbitral necessário may vary in form, composition and rules of procedure, according to the choice of the parties.
         Moreover, it is dissolved after making its decision. It is true that, those factors may raise certain doubts as to its permanence.
         However, given that that tribunal was established on a legislative basis, that it has permanent compulsory jurisdiction and,
         in addition, that national legislation defines and frames the applicable procedural rules, it should be found that, in the
         present case, the requirement of permanence is also met.
      
Taking all of those considerations into account, it must be held that, in circumstances such as those of the main proceedings,
         the Tribunal Arbitral necessário fulfils all of the conditions laid down by the case-law of the Court, as set out in paragraphs to of the present order, and must be considered to be a court or tribunal for the purposes of Article TFEU.
      
 Substance
Pursuant to Article of its Rules of Procedure, where the reply to a question referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling
         may be clearly deduced from existing case-law or admits of no reasonable doubt, the Court may at any time, on a proposal from
         the Judge-Rapporteur and after hearing the Advocate General, decide to rule by reasoned order.
      
The Court considers that to be the case in the present proceedings and holds that, taking into account the making of the present
         order, it is not necessary to rule on the application for an expedited procedure made by the referring court (see, to that
         effect, order in C‑503/P Saint-Gobain Glass Deutschland v Commission [2008] ECR I‑2217, paragraph 45). The answer to the question referred by the Tribunal Arbitral necessário leaves no room
         for reasonable doubt and may, in addition, be clearly deduced from existing case-law, inter alia from the order in Case C‑617/Astrazeneca [2013] ECR.
      
By its question, the Tribunal Arbitral necessário essentially asks whether Article of Regulation No 469/2009, when read
         in conjunction with recital thereto, must be interpreted as meaning that it precludes the holder of both a patent and a
         certificate from relying on the entire period of validity of the certificate, calculated in accordance with Article 13, in
         a situation where, pursuant to such a period, it would enjoy a period of exclusivity as regards an active ingredient, of more
         than years from the first MA, in the European Union, of a medicinal product consisting of that active ingredient, or containing
         it.
      
An affirmative answer to that question follows from a literal interpretation of Article of Regulation No 469/2009, read
         in conjunction with recital thereto.
      
That interpretation was also confirmed most recently in the order in Astrazeneca, paragraph of which provides that the holder of both a patent and a supplementary protection certificate should not be
         able to enjoy more than years of exclusivity from the time the first MA, in the European Union, of the medicinal product
         concerned.
      
Furthermore, it should be recalled that the wording ‘first authorisation to place the product on the market in the [European
         Union]’, for the purposes of Article 13(1) of Regulation No 469/2009, make reference to the first MA granted in any Member
         State and not to the first authorisation granted in the Member State of the application. Only that interpretation ensures
         that the extension of protection of the product covered by the certificate will expire at the same time in all of the Member
         States in which the certificate was granted (see, to that effect, Case C‑127/Hässle [2003] ECR I‑14781, paragraphs 74, and 78).
      
In the main proceedings, it is not in dispute that the first MA, in the European Union, of medicinal products containing the
         active ingredient protected by the basic patent of which Merck Canada is the holder was granted on August in Finland.
      
As a result, irrespective of the date on which the basic patent was granted in Portugal and the theoretical validity period
         of the certificate resulting from the application of Article of Regulation No 469/2009, the maximum period of exclusivity
         conferred by both Patent No and Certificate No cannot exceed a total duration of years, calculated from August
         1997.
      
In the light of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the question referred is that Article of Regulation No 469/2009,
         when read in conjunction with recital thereto, must be interpreted as meaning that it precludes the holder of both a patent
         and a certificate from relying on the entire period of validity of the certificate, calculated in accordance with Article 13,
         in a situation where, pursuant to such a period, it would enjoy a period of exclusivity as regards an active ingredient, of
         more than years from the first MA, in the European Union, of a medicinal product consisting of that active ingredient,
         or containing it.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Eighth Chamber) hereby rules:
Article of Regulation (EC) No 469/of the European Parliament and of the Council of May concerning the supplementary
            protection certificate for medicinal products, read in conjunction with recital to the same regulation, must be interpreted
            as meaning that it precludes the holder of both a patent and a supplementary protection certificate from relying on the entire
            period of validity of such a certificate, calculated in accordance with Article 13, in a situation where, pursuant to such
            a period, it would enjoy a period of exclusivity as regards an active ingredient, of more than years from the first authorisation
            to be placed on the market, in the European Union, of a medicinal product consisting of that active ingredient, or containing
            it.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Portuguese.
      
Top  
 