
Case C-408/Commission of the European Communities
v
Kingdom of Belgium
(Failure to fulfil obligations – Breach of Community legislation on the right of residence of citizens of the Union – National legislation and administrative practice relating to the requirement of sufficient personal resources and the issuing
         of orders to leave the territory of the Member State concerned)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Citizens of the European Union – Right of freedom of movement and of residence – Directive 90/(Art. EC; Council Directive 90/364, Art. 1(1), first subpara.)
2.        Freedom of movement for persons – Right of entry and residence of nationals of Member States – Directives 68/360, 73/148,
            90/364, 90/and 93/(Council Directives 68/360, Art. 4, 73/148, Art. 4, 90/364, Art. 2, 90/365, Art. 2, and 93/96, Art. 2)
1.        A Member State fails to fulfil its obligations under Article EC and Directive 90/on the right of residence if, when
         applying that directive to nationals of a Member State who wish to rely on their rights under that directive and on Article
         EC, it excludes the income of a partner residing in the host Member State in the absence of an agreement concluded before
         a notary and containing an assistance clause in order to assess whether the person concerned has sufficient resources. 
      
According to the terms of the first subparagraph of Article 1(1) of Directive 90/364, it is sufficient for the nationals of
         Member States to ‘have’ the necessary resources, and that provision lays down no requirement whatsoever as to their origin.
         To add to the condition of sufficient resources a requirement as to the origin of the resources, particularly the requirement
         of a legal link between the provider and the recipient of the resources, not being necessary for the attainment of the objective
         pursued by Directive 90/364, namely the protection of the public finances of the host Member State, constitutes a disproportionate
         interference with the exercise of the fundamental right of freedom of movement and of residence upheld by Article EC. 
      
(see paras 40-42, 46, 51, operative part 1(a))
2.        By making provision for automatic service of an order to leave its territory on citizens of the Union who do not produce within
         the prescribed period the documents required to obtain a residence permit, a Member State fails to fulfil its obligations
         under Article of Directive 90/on the right of residence, Article of Directive 68/on the abolition of restrictions
         on movement and residence within the Community for workers of Member States and their families, Article of Directive 73/on the abolition of restrictions on movement and residence within the Community for nationals of Member States with regard
         to establishment and the provision of services, Article of Directive 93/on the right of residence for students and Article
         of Directive 90/on the right of residence for employees and self-employed persons who have ceased their occupational
         activity.
      
Such automatic deportation impairs the very substance of the right of residence directly conferred by Community law. Even
         if a Member State may, where necessary, decide to deport a national of another Member State where that person is unable to
         produce, within the required period, the documents proving that he fulfils the necessary financial conditions, where that
         deportation is automatic it is disproportionate.
      
(see paras 68, 72, operative part 1(b))
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
March (*)
      
(Failure to fulfil obligations – Breach of Community legislation on the right of residence of citizens of the Union – National legislation and administrative practice relating to the requirement of sufficient personal resources and the issuing
         of orders to leave the territory of the Member State concerned)
      
In Case C-408/03,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on September 2003,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by M. Condou-Durande and D. Martin, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Kingdom of Belgium, represented by E. Dominkovits, acting as Agent,
      
defendant,
supported by:
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, represented by C. Jackson, acting as Agent, and by E. Sharpston QC,
      
intervener,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas, K. Schiemann (Rapporteur) and J. Makarczyk, Presidents
         of Chambers, J.-P. Puissochet, R. Schintgen, P. Kūris, J. Klučka, U. Lõhmus, E. Levits and A. Ó Caoimh, Judges,
      
Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,
Registrar: K. Sztranc, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2005,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on October 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities asks the Court to declare that:
      
–        by making the right of residence of citizens of the European Union subject to the requirement that they have sufficient personal
         resources, the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC and Council Directive 90/364/EEC
         of June on the right of residence (OJ L 180, p. 26), 
      
–        by making provision for automatic service of an order to leave Belgian territory on citizens of the Union who do not produce
         within the prescribed period the documents required to obtain a residence permit, the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil
         its obligations under Article of Directive 90/364, Article of Council Directive 68/360/EEC of October on the abolition
         of restrictions on movement and residence within the Community for workers of Member States and their families (OJ, English
         Special Edition (II), p. 485), Article of Council Directive 73/148/EEC of May on the abolition of restrictions
         on movement and residence within the Community for nationals of Member States with regard to establishment and the provision
         of services (OJ L 172, p. 14), Article of Council Directive 93/96/EEC of October on the right of residence
         for students (OJ L 317, p. 59) and Article of Council Directive 90/365/EEC of June on the right of residence
         for employees and self-employed persons who have ceased their occupational activity (OJ L 180, p. 28). 
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
The first subparagraph of Article 1(1) of Directive 90/provides:
      
‘Member States shall grant the right of residence to nationals of Member States who do not enjoy this right under other provisions
         of Community law and to members of their families as defined in paragraph 2, provided that they themselves and the members
         of their families are covered by sickness insurance in respect of all risks in the host Member State and have sufficient resources
         to avoid becoming a burden on the social assistance system of the host Member State during their period of residence.’ 
      
Article 2(1) of that directive provides:
      
‘Exercise of the right of residence shall be evidenced by means of the issue of a document known as a “Residence permit for
         a national of a Member State of the EEC”, the validity of which may be limited to five years on a renewable basis. However,
         the Member States may, when they deem it to be necessary, require revalidation of the permit at the end of the first two years
         of residence. Where a member of the family does not hold the nationality of a Member State, he or she shall be issued with
         a residence document of the same validity as that issued to the national on whom he or she depends.
      
For the purposes of issuing the residence permit or document, the Member State may require only that the applicant present
         a valid identity card or passport and provide proof that he or she meets the conditions laid down in Article 1.’ 
      
Under Article of that directive, the right of residence is to remain for as long as the beneficiaries of that right fulfil
         the conditions laid down in Article of the directive.
      
Article of Directive 68/provides:
      
‘1.      Member States shall grant the right of residence in their territory to the persons referred to in Article who are able to
         produce the documents listed in paragraph 3.
      
2.      As proof of the right of residence, a document entitled “Residence Permit for a National of a Member State of the EEC” shall
         be issued. ...
      
3.      For the issue of a Residence Permit for a National of a Member State of the EEC, Member States may require only the production
         of the following documents: …’
      
The first and second subparagraphs of Article 4(1) of Directive 73/provide:
      
‘Each Member State shall grant the right of permanent residence to nationals of other Member States who establish themselves
         within its territory in order to pursue activities as self-employed persons, when the restrictions on these activities have
         been abolished pursuant to the Treaty.
      
As proof of the right of residence, a document entitled “Residence Permit for a National of a Member State of the European
         Communities” shall be issued. …’
      
Article of that directive provides:
      
‘An applicant for a residence permit or [certificate] shall not be required by a Member State to produce anything other than
         the following, namely:
      
(a)      the identity card or passport with which he or she entered its territory;
(b)      proof that he or she comes within one of the classes of person referred to in Articles and 4.’
Article of Directive 93/provides: 
      
‘In order to lay down conditions to facilitate the exercise of the right of residence and with a view to guaranteeing access
         to vocational training in a non-discriminatory manner for a national of a Member State who has been accepted to attend a vocational
         training course in another Member State, the Member States shall recognise the right of residence for any student who is a
         national of a Member State and who does not enjoy that right under other provisions of Community law, and for the student’s
         spouse and their dependent children, where the student assures the relevant national authority, by means of a declaration
         or by such alternative means as the student may choose that are at least equivalent, that he has sufficient resources to avoid
         becoming a burden on the social assistance system of the host Member State during their period of residence, provided that
         the student is enrolled in a recognised educational establishment for the principal purpose of following a vocational training
         course there and that he is covered by sickness insurance in respect of all risks in the host Member State.’
      
Under the second and third subparagraphs of Article 2(1) of that directive:
      
‘The right of residence shall be evidenced by means of the issue of a document known as a “Residence permit for a national
         of a Member State of the Community”, …
      
For the purpose of issuing the residence permit or document, the Member State may require only that the applicant present
         a valid identity card or passport and provide proof that he or she meets the conditions laid down in Article 1.’
      
The first subparagraph of Article 1(1) of Directive 90/provides:
      
‘Member States shall grant the right of residence to nationals of Member States who have pursued an activity as an employee
         or self-employed person and to members of their families as defined in paragraph 2, provided that they are recipients of an
         invalidity or early retirement pension, or old age benefits, or of a pension in respect of an industrial accident or disease
         of an amount sufficient to avoid becoming a burden on the social security system of the host Member State during their period
         of residence and provided they are covered by sickness insurance in respect of all risks in the host Member State.’
      
Article 2(1) of that directive provides:
      
‘Exercise of the right of residence shall be evidenced by means of the issue of a document known as a “Residence permit for
         a national of a Member State of the EEC” … 
      
For the purposes of issuing the residence permit or document, the Member State may require only that the applicant present
         a valid identity card or passport and provide proof that he or she meets the conditions laid down in Article 1.’
      
 National legislation
The conditions governing the residence of citizens of the Union in Belgium are laid down in the Royal Decree of October
         on foreigners’ entry into, residence and establishment in, and expulsion from Belgium (Moniteur belge of October 1981, p. 1), as amended by the Royal Decree of June (Moniteur belge of August 1998, p. 26854; ‘the Royal Decree’).
      
As regards the right of residence of nationals of Member States under Directive 90/364, Article of the Royal Decree provides:
      
‘1.      An EC foreign national … has a right to live in the Kingdom provided that he is covered by sickness insurance in respect of
         all risks in Belgium and provided that he has sufficient resources not to become a burden on the public authorities.
      
2.      …
Before the end of the fifth month after the application for establishment an EC foreign national must provide evidence that
         he meets the conditions laid down in paragraph 1.
      
…
4.      The Minister or his deputy shall refuse establishment where the conditions for establishment are not met. The mayor or his
         deputy shall refuse establishment where the documents required have not been produced within the prescribed period [of five
         months].
      
In both cases, the foreign national shall be notified of the decision by service of a document … where appropriate including
         an order to leave the territory.
      
…
6.      Where establishment is refused pursuant to paragraph 4, at the end of the fifth month following the application … the EC foreign
         national shall be given an order to leave the territory. The order to leave the territory is enforceable days after expiry
         of the validity of the registration certificate.’
      
Article 5(3)(b)(1) of the circular of July concerning the conditions of residence of EC foreign nationals and members
         of their families and foreign family members of Belgian nationals (Moniteur belge of August 1998, p. 27032) confirms that, if the necessary evidence is not produced within the prescribed period, the administration
         is bound not only to refuse residence but also to serve an order to leave Belgian territory.
      
As regards the right of residence of employed or self-employed persons, Article of the Royal Decree provides:
      
‘1.      An EC foreign national who comes to Belgium in order to pursue an activity as an employed or self-employed person … shall
         … be registered in the Foreigners’ Register and be issued with a registration certificate ... valid for five months from the
         date of its issue.
      
…
Before the end of the fifth month following the application, an EC foreign national must produce either an employer’s certificate
         ... if he is pursuing, or intends to pursue, an activity as an employed person, or the documents required for the exercise
         of a profession if he is pursuing, or intends to pursue, an activity as a self-employed person.
      
…
3.      The Minister or his deputy shall refuse to allow establishment if the conditions for establishment are not met. The mayor
         or his deputy shall refuse to allow establishment where the documents required are not produced within the period prescribed
         in paragraph 1(3).
      
In both cases, the foreign national will receive notification of the decision, … containing, where appropriate, an order to
         leave Belgian territory.
      
…
5.      … The order to leave the territory shall be enforceable days after expiry of the validity of the registration certificate.
…’
Similarly, as regards employed or self-employed persons who have ceased their professional activity, Article 51(4) of the
         Royal Decree provides that the foreign national is to be served with the decision refusing establishment together with an
         order to leave the territory where the required documents have not been produced before the end of the fifth month following
         the application for establishment. The order to leave the territory is enforceable days after expiry of the validity of
         the registration certificate.
      
As regards the right of residence of students, Article of the Royal Decree provides that where the Member State national
         provides no supporting documents to establish that he meets the conditions for residence within the period of three months
         following his application for residence, the local authority is to serve him with a decision terminating his residence and
         ordering him to leave the territory.
      
 The pre-litigation procedure 
According to the case-file, the Commission received various complaints about Belgian legislation and administrative practice
         concerning both the conditions for granting residence permits under Directive 90/and orders to leave Belgian territory
         issued to citizens of the Union.
      
It states that it was particularly struck by the situation of Mrs De Figueiredo, a Portuguese national who came to Belgium
         with her three daughters in August to live with her long-standing partner, a Belgian national. The declaration of entry
         drawn up on August indicates that residence was authorised until October 1999. At the same time, Mrs De Figueiredo’s
         partner gave an undertaking to support her.
      
On December 1999, an order to leave Belgian territory was served on Mrs De Figueiredo on the ground that she had remained
         in Belgium after the expiry date appearing on the declaration of entry. The Belgian authorities took the view that she did
         not fulfil the requirement of sufficient resources laid down in Article of Directive 90/364, stating that the undertaking
         to support her given by her partner did not constitute evidence that she had sufficient resources.
      
Following correspondence between the Belgian authorities and the Commission, the Commission sent a letter of formal notice
         on May informing the Kingdom of Belgium that it took the view that resources other than the personal resources of the
         person seeking a residence permit could be taken into account. Moreover, as regards the order to leave Belgian territory,
         the Commission took issue with the automatic nature under Belgian law of the administration’s decision to issue such an order
         once a failure to produce the supporting documents necessary to obtain a residence permit was recorded.
      
In their reply to the letter of formal notice, the Belgian authorities stated that, in their view, the first subparagraph
         of Article 1(1) of Directive 90/implied that a citizen of the Union who relied on the protection of the directive had
         to have sufficient personal resources. 
      
The authorities argued that the income of a third party could also be taken into account provided that it belonged to the
         spouse and/or children of the citizen of the Union relying on Directive 90/364. The connection between that citizen and the
         person he claims to be the source, even if only in part, of his income must be one regulated by law so that the host Member
         State can be sure that that person is bound by a legal obligation to support that citizen of the Union financially.
      
Moreover, the Belgian authorities stated that they considered themselves entitled to take steps to deport a citizen of the
         Union who resided in Belgium for more than three months without commencing the procedure for establishment or who did not
         produce the documents required to support the application for establishment made.
      
Taking the view that the arguments relied on by the Kingdom of Belgium in reply to the letter of formal notice were not satisfactory,
         the Commission sent a reasoned opinion to that Member State on April 2002, calling on it to take the measures necessary
         to comply with the opinion within two months of the date of its notification.
      
As it was not satisfied with the reply of the Kingdom of Belgium to that reasoned opinion, the Commission brought this action.
      
By order of the President of the Court of March 2004, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was granted
         leave to intervene in support of the form of order sought by the Kingdom of Belgium.
      
 The action
 The first plea, concerning the requirement that the citizen of the Union must have sufficient personal resources 
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission submits that the first subparagraph of Article 1(1) of Directive 90/in no way requires that a citizen of
         the Union must have sufficient personal resources for himself and his family.
      
That literal interpretation of that provision is borne out by the purpose of Directive 90/which is to prevent the holder
         of a right of residence or the members of his family becoming a burden on the social security system of the host Member State.
         The Commission submits that, to achieve that purpose, it is irrelevant whether the resources are the personal resources of
         the holder of the right of residence or come from another source.
      
For instance, such resources might be, or be supplemented by, those of a relative or a third party, such as a person living
         with the holder of the right of residence or offering himself as a guarantor for the holder, provided that appropriate supporting
         documents are supplied. The Commission considers that the distinction made by the Belgian authorities regarding the source
         of the income according to whether or not it comes from persons with whom the citizen of the Union has a legal connection
         is artificial and has no foundation in Community law.
      
The Commission concludes that, in requiring a citizen of the Union to have sufficient personal resources for himself and his
         family, the Belgian authorities are in breach of Article EC and fail to observe the principle of proportionality in applying
         the condition relating to the existence of sufficient resources laid down by Directive 90/364.
      
Having initially taken a firm position, the Kingdom of Belgium relaxed its position in its rejoinder, accepting that a partner’s
         resources could be taken into account, but only where that partner had undertaken by contract to make them available to the
         citizen of the Union by means of an agreement made before a notary and containing an assistance clause.
      
As regards the source of those resources, the United Kingdom submits that an applicant for a residence permit must have sufficient
         personal resources and may not rely on the resources of a member of his family in that regard.
      
 Findings of the Court
–       Preliminary observations 
The right to reside within the territory of the Member States under Article 18(1) EC is conferred directly on every citizen
         of the Union by a clear and precise provision of the EC Treaty subject to the limitations and conditions laid down by the
         EC Treaty and by the measures adopted to give it effect (Case C-413/Baumbast and R [2002] ECR I-7091, paragraphs and 85). 
      
For the purposes of the present case, those limitations and conditions derive from Directive 90/364.
      
According to the first subparagraph of Article 1(1) of that directive, Member States may require of nationals of another Member
         State who wish to enjoy a right of residence on their territory that they themselves and the members of their families are
         covered by sickness insurance in respect of all risks in the host Member State and have sufficient resources to avoid becoming
         a burden on the social assistance system of that State during their period of residence.
      
Those conditions, read in the light of the fourth recital in the preamble to that directive, according to which beneficiaries
         of the right of residence must not become an unreasonable burden on the public finances of the host Member State, are based
         on the idea that the exercise of the right of residence of citizens of the Union can be subordinated to the legitimate interests
         of the Member States (Baumbast and R, paragraph 90). 
      
–       Consideration of the first plea 
By its first plea, the Commission complains that the Kingdom of Belgium took into account, for the purposes of applying Directive
         90/364, only the personal resources of the citizen of the Union who is seeking a right of residence or those of the spouse
         or of a child of that citizen to the exclusion of resources of a third person, such as a partner with whom he has no legal
         link.
      
It must be borne in mind that it is settled case-law that the limitations and conditions laid down in the first subparagraph
         of Article 1(1) of Directive 90/must be applied in compliance with the limits imposed by Community law and in accordance
         with the general principles of that law, in particular the principle of proportionality. That means that national measures
         adopted on that subject must be necessary and appropriate to attain the objective pursued (see Baumbast and R, paragraph 91).
      
In paragraphs and of its judgment in Case C-200/Zhu and Chen [2004] ECR I-9925, the Court held that according to the very terms of the first subparagraph of Article 1(1) of Directive
         90/364, it is sufficient for the nationals of Member States to ‘have’ the necessary resources, and that provision lays down
         no requirement whatsoever as to their origin. The correctness of that interpretation is reinforced by the fact that provisions
         laying down a fundamental principle such as that of the free movement of persons must be interpreted broadly.
      
The Court therefore held that an interpretation of the condition concerning the sufficiency of resources within the meaning
         of Directive 90/to mean that the person concerned must himself have such resources and may not rely on the resources of
         a member of the family accompanying him would add to that condition, as formulated in that directive, a requirement as to
         the origin of the resources which, not being necessary for the attainment of the objective pursued, namely the protection
         of the public finances of the Member States, would constitute a disproportionate interference with the exercise of the fundamental
         right of freedom of movement and of residence upheld by Article EC (Zhu and Chen, paragraph 33). 
      
According to that case-law, the condition concerning the sufficiency of resources laid down in the first subparagraph of Article
         1(1) of Directive 90/is met where the financial resources are provided by a member of the family of the citizen of the Union. 
      
It must be examined whether the same conclusion is called for where a citizen of the Union intends to rely on the income of
         his partner who resides in the host Member State.
      
Consideration of that question essentially focuses on the source of such income, as the authorities of the host Member State
         are, in any event, entitled to undertake the necessary checks as to its existence, amount and availability.
      
The Kingdom of Belgium accepts that such income may be taken into account where it comes from a person connected with the
         beneficiary by a legal link which obliges him to provide for the beneficiary. It contends that such a requirement is justified
         by the fact that, if account were taken of the income of a person whose link with the citizen of the Union was not legally
         defined and could, therefore, be severed easily, the risk of that citizen becoming a burden for the social security system
         of the host Member State after a certain time would be all the greater.
      
Such a justification cannot be accepted, as the requirement of a legal link, as advocated by the Kingdom of Belgium, between
         the provider and the recipient of the resources is disproportionate in that it goes beyond what is necessary to achieve the
         purpose of Directive 90/364, which is the protection of the public finances in the host Member State.
      
The loss of sufficient resources is always an underlying risk, whether those resources are personal or come from a third party,
         even where that third party has undertaken to support the holder of the residence permit financially. The source of those
         resources thus has no automatic effect on the risk of such a loss arising, as the materialisation of such a risk is the result
         of a change of circumstances. 
      
It is for that reason that, in order to protect the legitimate interests of the host Member State, Directive 90/contains
         provisions allowing that State to act in the event of an actual loss of financial resources, to prevent the holder of the
         residence permit from becoming a burden on the public finances of that State.
      
Thus, Article of Directive 90/provides that the right of residence is to remain for as long as beneficiaries of that
         right fulfil the conditions laid down in Article of that directive. 
      
That provision enables the host Member State to monitor whether citizens of the Union who enjoy a right of residence continue
         to meet the conditions laid down for that purpose by Directive 90/throughout the period of their residence. In addition,
         the first subparagraph of Article 2(1) of that directive allows the Member States, when they deem it to be necessary, to require
         revalidation of the permit at the end of the first two years of residence.
      
It follows from all those considerations that, by excluding the income of a partner residing in the host Member State in the
         absence of an agreement concluded before a notary and containing an assistance clause, the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to
         fulfil its obligations under Article EC and Directive 90/when applying that directive to nationals of a Member State
         who wish to rely on their rights under that directive and on Article EC. 
      
Accordingly, it must be held that the first plea relied on by the Commission is well founded. 
      
 The second plea, concerning the order to leave the territory served on citizens of the Union who have not produced the documents
            required for the issue of a residence permit within the time specified 
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission submits that a citizen of the Union can only be deported, other than in the case of decisions on grounds of
         public policy, public security or public health, if the person concerned does not meet the conditions laid down by Community
         law for the grant of a right of residence or no longer meets those conditions.
      
The deportation order served by the Belgian authorities on the citizen of the Union in this case was actually a penalty imposed
         because the applicant had failed to produce within the prescribed period the documents required for the issue of a residence
         permit.
      
The Commission takes the view that the fact that the person concerned did not comply with the necessary administrative requirements
         for the issue of a residence permit does not necessarily mean that she does not in fact meet the conditions laid down by Community
         law for the recognition of the right of residence. The automatic service of an order to leave Belgian territory is thus contrary
         to Article of Directive 90/364, Article of Directive 68/360, Article of Directive 73/148, Article of Directive 93/and Article of Directive 90/365.
      
In its defence, the Kingdom of Belgium contends that a national of a Member State may reside for more than three months in
         another Member State only if he meets the conditions laid down by the various regulations and directives on freedom of movement.
         Provided that he meets those conditions, which can be established only by production of the documents required by those regulations
         and directives, he enjoys the protection granted by them and can be issued with a residence permit which certifies his right
         to freedom of movement.
      
Production of the supporting documents to prove that those conditions are met is, the Kingdom of Belgium argues, a condition
         sine qua non for the exercise of the right of residence.
      
Consequently, if the citizen of the Union has not produced, within the prescribed period, in this case, five months, the documents
         required to establish that he meets the conditions laid down for the recognition of his right of residence, he must be deemed
         to have resided for more than three months in Belgium without valid reason and, in those circumstances, a deportation order
         is justified.
      
However, the Kingdom of Belgium points out that the deportation order is qualified. It is not enforced by coercive measures
         and is intended, by bringing to a close the procedure for the application of a residence permit, to establish that the citizen
         of the Union concerned has no document authorising him to remain on Belgian territory for more than three months.
      
It points out, further, that there is nothing to prevent the person concerned from initiating a fresh procedure for establishment
         in the course of which he can adduce evidence that he meets the conditions for residence.
      
The United Kingdom contends that, where an applicant for a residence permit does not produce the necessary evidence within
         the prescribed period, the competent national authority must be entitled to take an unfavourable decision as regards that
         applicant.
      
 Findings of the Court
–       Preliminary observations 
The right of nationals of a Member State to enter the territory of another Member State and reside there for the purposes
         intended by the Treaty is a right conferred directly by the Treaty, or, as the case may be, by the provisions adopted for
         its implementation (see Case 48/Royer [1976] ECR 497, paragraph 31).
      
The grant of a residence permit to a national of a Member State is to be regarded not as a measure giving rise to rights but
         as a measure by a Member State serving to prove the individual position of a national of another Member State with regard
         to provisions of Community law (see Royer, paragraph 33, and Case C-459/MRAX [2002] ECR I-6591, paragraph 74).
      
However, as the right of residence under Article EC is not unconditional, it is for the citizens of the Union to adduce
         the necessary evidence that they meet the conditions laid down in that regard by the relevant Community provisions.
      
The conditions for the grant of a residence permit are governed, as regards employed persons, by Directive 68/360, as regards
         self-employed persons, by Directive 73/148, as regards students, by Directive 93/96, as regards employees and self-employed
         persons who have ceased their occupational activity, by Directive 90/365, and, as regards nationals of Member States who do
         not enjoy a right of residence under other provisions of Community law, by Directive 90/364. 
      
–       Consideration of the second plea
Only if a national of a Member State is not able to prove that those conditions are fulfilled may the host Member State undertake
         deportation subject to the limits imposed by Community law (see Case C-215/Oulane [2005] ECR I-1215, paragraph 55).
      
By its second plea, the Commission takes issue with the Belgian legislation because, under it, failure by the national of
         a Member State to produce, within a specified period, the supporting documents necessary for the grant of a residence permit
         automatically entails the service of an order for deportation.
      
Such automatic deportation impairs the very substance of the right of residence directly conferred by Community law. Even
         if a Member State may, where necessary, decide to deport a national of another Member State where that person is unable to
         produce, within the required period, the documents proving that he fulfils the necessary financial conditions, where that
         deportation is automatic, as it is under the Belgian legislation, it is disproportionate.
      
Since the order for deportation is automatic, that legislation does not allow account to be taken of the reasons why the person
         concerned did not take the necessary administrative measures or of whether he was able to establish that he fulfilled the
         conditions which Community law attached to his right of residence.
      
In that regard, it is of no relevance that there is in practice no immediate enforcement of orders for deportation. The Belgian
         legislation, notably Articles 45, and of the Royal Decree, provides for time-limits on expiry of which the orders for
         deportation issued are enforceable. In any event, the fact that the deportation orders are allegedly qualified does not alter
         the fact that those measures are disproportionate to the seriousness of the infringement and are liable to deter citizens
         of the Union from exercising their right to freedom of movement.
      
In view of the foregoing, the Court finds that the second plea relied on by the Commission is well founded.
      
Accordingly, it must be held that:
      
–        by excluding the income of a partner residing in the host Member State in the absence of an agreement concluded before a notary
         and containing an assistance clause, the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC and Directive
         90/when applying that directive to nationals of a Member State who wish to rely on their rights under that directive and
         on Article EC,
      
–        by making provision for automatic service of an order to leave Belgian territory on citizens of the Union who do not produce
         within the prescribed period the documents required to obtain a residence permit, the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil
         its obligations under Article of Directive 90/364, Article of Directive 68/360, Article of Directive 73/148, Article
         of Directive 93/and Article of Directive 90/365. 
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Kingdom of Belgium has
         been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs. Pursuant to the first subparagraph of Article 69(4) of the
         Rules of Procedure, the Member States which have intervened in the proceedings must bear their own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that 
(a)      by excluding the income of a partner residing in the host Member State in the absence of an agreement concluded before a notary
            and containing an assistance clause, the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC and Council
            Directive 90/364/EEC of June on the right of residence when applying that directive to nationals of a Member State
            who wish to rely on their rights under that directive and on Article EC,
(b)      by making provision for automatic service of an order to leave Belgian territory on citizens of the Union who do not produce
            within the prescribed period the documents required to obtain a residence permit, the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil
            its obligations under Article of Directive 90/364, Article of Council Directive 68/360/EEC of October on the abolition
            of restrictions on movement and residence within the Community for workers of Member States and their families, Article of Council Directive 73/148/EEC of May on the abolition of restrictions on movement and residence within the Community
            for nationals of Member States with regard to establishment and the provision of services, Article of Council Directive
            93/96/EEC of October on the right of residence for students and Article of Council Directive 90/365/EEC of June
            on the right of residence for employees and self-employed persons who have ceased their occupational activity;
2.      Orders the Kingdom of Belgium to pay the costs;
3.      Orders the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to bear its own costs. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 