
Order of the Court (Seventh Chamber) of September — Brighton Collectibles v OHIM
(Case C-624/P)
Appeal — Community trade mark — Regulations (EC) No 40/and (EC) No 207/— Article 8(4) — Community word mark BRIGHTON — Opposition proceedings — Interpretation of the provisions of national law on relative grounds for refusal of registration
1.                     Appeal — Grounds — Mere repetition of the pleas and arguments raised before the General Court — Failure to identify the error
            of law relied on –Not addmissible (Art. TFEU; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.; Rules of Procedure
            of the Court of Justice, Art. 112(1)(c)) (see paras 34, 35)
2.                     Appeal — Grounds — Review by the Court of the assessment made of the facts and evidence — Possible only where the clear sense
            of the evidence has been distorted (Art. TFEU; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.) (see paras 43-45)
            
3.                     Appeal — Grounds — Ground raised for the first time on appeal — Not admissible (Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58,
            first para.; Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, Art. 113(2)) (see para. 53)
Re:
Appeal brought against the judgment of the General Court (Second Chamber) of September in Case T-403/Brighton Collectibles
 v 
OHIM
 — 
Felmar
, by which the General Court dismissed the action brought against the decision of the Fourth Board of Appeal of OHIM of June
                  (Case R 408/2009-4) concerning opposition proceedings between Brighton Collectibles, Inc. and Felmar — Article 8(4) of
                  Council Regulation (EC) No 207/of February on the Community trade mark (OJ L 78, p. 1) — Community word
                  mark BRIGHTON — Opposition proceedings based on earlier national word and figurative marks — Failure to give sufficient reasons
                  with regard to the national laws relied upon
               
Operative part
1.
	The appeal is dismissed.
2.
	Brighton Collectibles, Inc. is ordered to pay the costs.
Top  
 