
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-285/Edeltraud Elsner-Lakeberg
v
Land Nordrhein-Westfalen
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Verwaltungsgericht Minden)
(Article EC – Directive 75/117/EEC – National measure providing that full-time and part-time teachers are obliged to work the same number of additional hours
         before being entitled to remuneration – Indirect discrimination against women employed part-time)
      
Summary of the Judgment
Social policy – Male and female workers – Equal pay – National legislation providing that full-time and part-time teachers
            are entitled to overtime remuneration only when they have worked the same number of additional hours – Not permissible – Conditions
            – Indirect discrimination against women employed part-time
(Art. EC; Council Directive 75/117, Art. 1)
Article EC and Article of Directive 75/on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the application
         of the principle of equal pay for men and women must be interpreted as precluding national legislation which provides that
         teachers, part-time as well as full-time, do not receive any remuneration for additional hours worked when the additional
         work does not exceed three hours per calendar month, if that different treatment affects considerably more women than men
         and if there is no objective unrelated to sex which justifies that different treatment or it is not necessary to achieve the
         objective pursued.
      
(see para. 19, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)May 2004(1)
(Article EC  –  Directive 75/117/EEC  –  National measure providing that full-time and part-time teachers are obliged to work the same number of additional hours
                  before being entitled to remuneration  –  Indirect discrimination against women teachers employed part-time)
               
 In Case C-285/02,
             REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Verwaltungsgericht Minden (Germany) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings
            pending before that court between
            
Edeltraud Elsner-Lakeberg
and
Land Nordrhein-Westfalen,
            
 on the interpretation of Article EC and Council Directive 75/117/EEC of February on the approximation of the laws
            of the Member States relating to the application of the principle of equal pay for men and women (OJ L 45, p. 19),
THE COURT (First Chamber),,
 composed of: P. Jann (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, A. La Pergola, S. von Bahr, R. Silva de Lapuerta and K. Lenaerts,
            Judges,
            
 Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs,Registrar: R. Grass,
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
–
 Ms Elsner-Lakeberg,  by H. Bubenzer, Rechtsanwalt,
               
–
 the Land Nordrhein-Westfalen, by  A. Machwirth, acting as Agent,
               
–
 the German Government, by M. Lumma, acting as Agent,
               
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by N. Yerrell and H. Kreppel, acting as Agents,
               
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on October 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By order of July 2002, received at the Court on August 2002, the Verwaltungsgericht (Administrative Court) Minden referred
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC a question on the interpretation of Article EC and Council
         Directive 75/117/EEC of February on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the application
         of the principle of equal pay for men and women (OJ L 45, p. 19).
         
            
 That question was raised in proceedings between Ms Elsner-Lakeberg and her employer, the Land Nordrhein-Westfalen, concerning
         Ms Elsner-Lakeberg’s request for remuneration for her additional hours of work. 
         
Legal framework
Community rules
            
 According to Article of Directive 75/117:
         ‘The principle of equal pay for men and women outlined in Article of the Treaty, hereinafter called “principle of equal
         pay”, means, for the same work or for work to which equal value is attributed, the elimination of all discrimination on grounds
         of sex with regard to all aspects and conditions of remuneration.
         …’
         
National legislation
            
 Paragraph 78a of the Beamtengesetz für das Land Nordrhein-Westfalen (Civil Service Code for North Rhine-Westphalia), as published
         on May (GV NRW S. 234), provides that civil servants are obliged to work additional hours where the job requires it.
         Where such additional work exceeds five hours per calendar month, extra leave corresponding to all additional hours worked
         must be granted. Where it is incompatible with the job for leave to be granted, certain civil servants are entitled instead
         to supplementary pay for such additional work. 
         
            
 Paragraph 5(2)(1) of the Verordnung über die Gewährung von Mehrarbeitsvergütung für Beamte (Regulation on the granting of
         remuneration for excess hours for civil servants) of March (BGBl. I, p. 528), as amended on December (BGBl.
         I, p. 3494), provides that, in the case of additional work in the teaching sector, three teaching hours is equivalent
         to five hours. 
         
The main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling 
            
 Ms Elsner-Lakeberg, who has the status of a civil servant, works part-time as a secondary school teacher for the Land Nordrhein-Westfalen.
         Full-time teachers there work for 24.hours per week, which corresponds to hours per month, based on an average of four
         weeks per month, whereas Ms Elsner-Lakeberg teaches for hours per week, corresponding to hours per month.
         
            
 In December she was required to teach 2.additional hours in that month. Her request for remuneration of those hours
         was refused on the basis that the relevant legislation provided that excess hours worked by a teacher who is a civil servant
         would be remunerated only when the additional work exceeded three hours in a month. She therefore received no pay at all for
         the additional 2.hours worked.
         
            
 Having unsuccessfully pursued the administrative appeal procedure, Ms Elsner-Lakeberg brought proceedings before the Verwaltungsgericht
         Minden.
         
            
 Considering that the dispute before it called for an interpretation of Community law, the Verwaltungsgericht Minden decided
         to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
         ‘Is it compatible with Article EC in conjunction with … Directive 75/… that men and women teachers, part-time as well
         as full-time, who are officials in the Land Nordrhein-Westfalen are not granted remuneration for excess hours worked if that
         additional work does not exceed three teaching hours in the calendar month?’ 
         
The question referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 By its question, the national court essentially asks whether Article EC and Article of Directive 75/must be interpreted
         as precluding national legislation which provides that teachers, part-time as well as full-time, do not receive any remuneration
         for additional hours worked when the additional work does not exceed three hours per calendar month.
         
            
 The Land Nordrhein-Westfalen and the German Government submit that part-time teachers are treated in exactly the same manner
         as full-time teachers. All teachers are entitled to remuneration if more than three additional hours are worked. In that case
         the additional hours are remunerated in exactly the same manner. Equality of remuneration is ensured for both regular working
         hours and additional hours.
         
            
 The Court notes that, according to settled case-law, the principle of equal pay, as enshrined in Article EC and Article
         of Directive 75/117, means that, for the same work or for work to which equal value is attributed, all discrimination on
         grounds of sex with regard to the aspects and conditions of remuneration is prohibited in so far as that different treatment
         cannot be justified by  an objective unrelated to sex or is not necessary to achieve the objective pursued (see to that effect,
         inter alia, Case C-236/JämO [2000] ECR I-2189, paragraph 36; and Case C-381/Brunnhofer [2001] ECR I-4961, paragraphs and 28). 
         
            
 The Court has held, with respect to part-time workers, that the members of the class of persons placed at a disadvantage,
         be they men or women, are entitled to have the same scheme applied to them as that applied to the other workers, on a basis
         proportional to their working time (Case C-33/Kowalska [1990] ECR I-2591, paragraph 19).
         
            
 According to equally settled case-law, the term ‘pay’ referred to in Article EC and Article of Directive 75/comprises
         any other consideration, in cash or in kind, present or future, provided that the worker receives it, even indirectly, in
         respect of his employment from his employer (see in particular Case C-262/Barber [1990] ECR I-1889, paragraph 12; and Brunnhofer, cited above, paragraph 33).
         
            
 As regards the method to be used for comparing the pay of the workers concerned in order to determine whether the principle
         of equal pay is being complied with, again according to the case-law, genuine transparency permitting an effective review
         is assured only if that principle applies to each aspect of remuneration granted to men and women, excluding any general overall
         assessment of all the consideration paid to workers (see Barber, cited above, paragraphs and 35; and Brunnhofer, cited above, paragraph 35). Accordingly, it is necessary for a separate comparison in respect of the pay for regular hours
         and the pay for additional hours.
         
            
 In the main proceedings, the pay for additional hours constitutes consideration paid by the Land Nordrhein-Westfalen to the
         teachers concerned in respect of their employment.
         
            
 Although that pay may appear to be equal inasmuch as the entitlement to remuneration for additional hours is triggered only
         after three additional hours have been worked by part-time and full-time teachers, three additional hours is in fact a greater
         burden for part-time teachers than it is for full-time teachers. A full-time teacher must work an additional three hours over
         his regular monthly schedule of hours, which is approximately 3% extra, in order to be paid for his additional hours, whilst
         a part-time teacher must work three hours more than his monthly hours, which is 5% extra. Since the number of additional
         teaching hours giving entitlement to pay is not reduced for part-time teachers in a manner proportionate to their working
         hours, they receive different treatment compared with full-time teachers as regards pay for additional teaching hours. 
         
            
 It is for the national court to determine, first, whether the different treatment established by the legislation in question
         affects considerably more women than men and, second, whether there is an objective unrelated to sex which justifies such
         different treatment and whether it is necessary to achieve the objective pursued (see, to that effect, Case C-278/Freers and Speckmann [1996] ECR I-1165, paragraph 28).
         
            
 In those circumstances, the question referred for a preliminary ruling should be answered as follows: Article EC and Article
         of Directive 75/must be interpreted as precluding national legislation which provides that teachers, part-time as well
         as full-time, do not receive any remuneration for additional hours worked when the additional work does not exceed three hours
         per calendar month, if that different treatment affects considerably more women than men and if there is no objective unrelated
         to sex which justifies that different treatment or it is not necessary to achieve the objective pursued.
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the German Government and by the Commission, which have submitted observations to the Court, are not
         recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the
         national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court.
         
On those grounds,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
 in answer to the questions referred to it by the Verwaltungsgericht Minden by order of July 2002, hereby rules:
         
Article EC and Article of Council Directive 75/117/EEC of February on the approximation of the laws of the Member
                     States relating to the application of the principle of equal pay for men and women, must be interpreted as precluding national
                     legislation which provides that teachers, part-time as well as full-time, do not receive any remuneration for additional hours
                     worked when the additional work does not exceed three hours per calendar month, if that different treatment affects considerably
                     more women than men and if there is no objective unrelated to sex which justifies that different treatment or it is not necessary
                     to achieve the objective pursued.
                  
Jann
La Pergola
von Bahr
Silva de Lapuerta
Lenaerts
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on May 2004.
         
R. Grass
P. Jann
Registrar
President of the First Chamber
 –
            
Language of the case: German.
Top  
 