
         				Ordonnance de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-320/R Commission of the European CommunitiesvRepublic of Austria
«(Interlocutory proceedings – Application for interim measures – Transport – Sectoral ban on driving)»
Order of the President of the Court, October I - Summary of the Order
Applications for interim measures – Suspension of operation – Interim measures – Conditions for granting – Urgency – Serious and irreparable harm – Balancing of all of the interests in issue – Operation and economic and financial stability of Community undertakings (Arts EC and EC; Rules of Procedure of the Court, Art. 83(2)) In order to establish the need to adopt interim measures and to determine their scope, it is necessary to balance the interests
         in issue, since the threat of serious and irreparable harm, which is the criterion for the alleged urgency, is one of the
         terms of the comparison made in this connection.In this regard, harm caused to the protection of the environment and to health is generally irreversible since, more often
         than not, damage to such interests cannot, by reason of its nature, be eliminated retroactively.However, in the case of a national regulation introducing a sectoral ban on motorway driving, with a view to reducing emissions
         linked to human activities and thus improving air quality, a structural approach over the medium term in regard to ambient
         air quality would not be jeopardised by the temporary non-application of that regulation.By contrast, such a ban on driving could affect significantly the operation and economic and financial stability of many Community
         undertakings. Such harm would not be limited to the aggregation of adverse financial consequences for the various undertakings.
         As there is evidence of a significant risk that the ban on driving could force many undertakings to close permanently and
         that a structural and, to a certain extent, irreversible change in conditions of transport and trade flows of goods within
         and across the area in question could occur, the risk of serious and irreparable damage is in those circumstances sufficiently
         established.see paras 90-92, 97, 101-ORDER OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE COURTOctober (1)
((Interlocutory proceedings – Application for interim measures – Transport – Sectoral ban on driving))
In Case C-320/R, 
         
 Commission of the European Communities,  represented by C. Schmidt, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
         
applicant, supported by Federal Republic of Germany,  represented by W.-D. Plessing and A. Tiemann, acting as Agents, and T. Lübbig, Rechtsanwalt,and by Italian Republic,  represented by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and G. De Bellis, avvocato dello Stato, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
         
         
interveners, 
v
 Republic of Austria,  represented by E. Riedl, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
         
defendant, 
APPLICATION for the suspension of operation of the sectoral ban on driving provided for in the Verordnung des Landeshauptmanns
         von Tirol, mit der auf der A Inntalautobahn verkehrsbeschränkende Maßnahmen erlassen werden (sektorales Fahrverbot) (Regulation
         adopted by the First Minister of the  
          Land  of Tyrol limiting use of the A motorway in the Inn valley (sectoral ban on driving)) of May (BGBl. II, 2003/279),
         
THE PRESIDENT OF THE COURT
makes the following 
Order
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on July 2003, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         under Article EC for a declaration that, by imposing the ban on the driving of lorries carrying certain types of goods
         provided for in the Verordnung des Landeshauptmanns von Tirol, mit der auf der A Inntalautobahn verkehrsbeschränkende Maßnahmen
         erlassen werden (sektorales Fahrverbot) (Regulation adopted by the First Minister of the Tyrol limiting use of the A motorway
         in the Inn valley (sectoral ban on driving)) of May (BGBl. II, 2003/279, hereinafter  
         the contested regulation), the Republic of Austria has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles and of Council Regulation (EEC) No 881/of March on access to the market in the carriage of goods by road within the Community to or from the territory of
         a Member State or passing across the territory of one or more Member States (OJ L 95, p. 1), as amended by Regulation
         (EC) No 484/of the European Parliament and of the Council of March (OJ L 76, p. 1) (hereinafter  
         Regulation No 881/92), Articles and of Council Regulation (EEC) No 3118/of October laying down the conditions under which non-resident
         carriers may operate national road haulage services within a Member State (OJ L 279, p. 1), as amended by Regulation
         No 484/(hereinafter  
         Regulation No 3118/93), and Articles EC to EC. 
         
            
By separate document lodged at the Court Registry on July 2003, the Commission made an application for interim relief pursuant
         to Articles EC and EC, seeking an order enjoining the Republic of Austria to adopt the measures necessary to suspend
         enforcement of the ban on driving introduced by the contested regulation until such time as the Court has ruled in the main
         action.  
         
            
The Commission also asked the President of the Court, pursuant to Article 84(2) of the Rules of Procedure, to grant its application
         for interim relief before the other party had presented its observations, pending the order terminating the interlocutory
         proceedings.  
         
            
On July 2003, as an interim measure, the Republic of Austria was ordered to suspend application of the ban on driving provided
         for in the contested regulation pending delivery of the order terminating the interlocutory proceedings.  
         
            
By applications lodged at the Court Registry on July and August respectively, the Federal Republic of Germany
         and the Italian Republic applied for leave to intervene in these proceedings for interim relief in support of the form of
         order sought by the Commission. 
         
            
The applications to intervene in the proceedings for interim relief are granted pursuant to the first and fourth paragraphs
         of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice and Article 93(1) and (2) of the Rules of Procedure. 
         
            
The Republic of Austria submitted its written observations on the application for interim relief by fax dated August 2003.
         By faxes dated the same day, the Federal Republic of Germany and the Italian Republic submitted their statements in intervention.
         
         
            
The parties presented oral argument on August 2003. 
         
Legal framework and facts
Community legislation concerning the internal market in the road haulage sector
         
            
Regulations No 881/and No 3118/93, on which the Commission bases its application, form the legal framework for the internal
         road haulage market and govern the freedom to provide services in that sector within the Community. 
         Community directives on the protection of ambient air quality
         
            
The Community legislation concerning the protection of ambient air quality consists in particular of Council Directive 96/62/EC
         of September on ambient air quality assessment and management (OJ L 296, p. 55) and Council Directive 1999/30/EC
         of April relating to limit values for sulphur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide and oxides of nitrogen, particulate matter
         and lead in ambient air (OJ L 163, p. 41), as amended by Commission Decision 2001/744/EC of October (OJ L 278, p. 35) (
         Directive 1999/30).  
         
            
The general aim of Directive 96/62, as stated in Article thereof, is to define the basic principles of a common strategy
         to: 
         
─
define and establish objectives for ambient air quality in the Community designed to avoid, prevent or reduce harmful effects
            on human health and the environment as a whole, 
         
─
assess the ambient air quality in Member States on the basis of common methods and criteria, 
         
─
obtain adequate information on ambient air quality and ensure that it is made available to the public, inter alia by means
            of alert thresholds, 
         
─
maintain ambient air quality where it is good and improve it in other cases. 
         
            
Article of Directive 96/provides: Improvement of ambient air quality General requirements 
         
1.
 Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure compliance with the limit values. 
         
2.
 Measures taken in order to achieve the aims of this Directive shall: 
         
(a)
take into account an integrated approach to the protection of air, water and soil;  
         
(b)
not contravene Community legislation on the protection of safety and health of workers at work;  
         
(c)
have no significant negative effects on the environment in the other Member States. 
         
3.
 Member States shall draw up action plans indicating the measures to be taken in the short term where there is a risk of the
         limit values and/or alert thresholds being exceeded, in order to reduce that risk and to limit the duration of such an occurrence.
         Such plans may, depending on the individual case, provide for measures to control and, where necessary, suspend activities,
         including motor-vehicle traffic, which contribute to the limit values being exceeded.
         
            
In addition, Article 8(3) of Directive 96/provides: In the zones and agglomerations [in which the levels of one or more pollutants are higher than the limit value plus the margin
         of tolerance], Member States shall take measures to ensure that a plan or programme is prepared or implemented for attaining
         the limit value within the specific time-limit.The said plan or programme, which must be made available to the public, shall incorporate at least the information listed
         in Annex IV.
         
            
Limit values for nitrogen dioxide are set in Directive 1999/30. 
         
            
Article of Directive 1999/provides: Nitrogen dioxide and oxides of nitrogen
         
1.
 Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that concentrations of nitrogen dioxide and, where applicable, of
         oxides of nitrogen, in ambient air, as assessed in accordance with Article 7, do not exceed the limit values laid down in
         Section I of Annex II as from the dates specified therein.
         The margins of tolerance laid down in Section I of Annex II shall apply in accordance with Article of Directive 96/62/EC.
         
2.
 The alert threshold for concentrations of nitrogen dioxide in ambient air shall be that laid down in Section II of Annex II.
         
            
It is clear from Annex II to Directive 1999/that, in the case of nitrogen dioxide, the annual limit value plus the margin
         of tolerance allowed is set at µg/m
           for the year 2002. 
         
            
According to the fourth recital in the preamble to Directive 1999/30, the limit values laid down in that directive are minimum
         requirements and, in accordance with Article 130t of the EC Treaty (now Article EC), Member States may maintain or introduce
         more stringent protective measures and, in particular, introduce stricter limit values. 
         National law and the facts of the dispute
         
            
Directives 96/and 1999/were transposed into Austrian law by means of amendments to the Immissionsschutzgesetz-Luft (Austrian
         Emission Control Act-Air, BGBl., 1997/115). 
         
            
After the limit value for nitrogen dioxide was first exceeded in 1999, a ban prohibiting heavy goods vehicles from travelling
         at night along a section of the A motorway in the Inn valley, Austria, came into force on October 2002. 
         
            
For the year 2002, the annual limit value set at µg/m
           by the Immissionsschutzgesetz-Luft was exceeded at the measurement point at the Vomp service station on that section of motorway;
         the annual average there recorded was µg/m
           . 
         
            
The ban on night driving, originally imposed for a limited period, was extended and then replaced, from June 2003, by a
         permanent ban on night driving, applicable throughout the year, on the transport of goods by heavy goods vehicles weighing
         more than 7.tonnes. 
         
            
On May 2003, the Landeshauptmann von Tirol (First Minister of the Land of Tyrol), acting pursuant to the Immissionsschutzgesetz-Luft,
         adopted the contested regulation prohibiting, from August and for an indefinite period, the use of a section, approximately
         kilometres long, of the A motorway in the Inn valley by a category of heavy goods vehicles carrying certain types of
         goods.  
         
            
Paragraph of the contested regulation states that the regulation is designed to reduce emissions linked to human activity
         and thus to improve air quality so as to ensure lasting protection for human health and for fauna and flora. 
         
            
Paragraph of the contest regulation delimits a  
         clean zone consisting of a 46-kilometre section of the A motorway in the Inn valley between the communes of Kundl and Ampass (Austria).
         Paragraph of the contested regulation prohibits use of this section by heavy goods vehicles or articulated lorries with
         a maximum authorised weight in excess of 7.tonnes and heavy goods vehicles with trailers with a combined maximum authorised
         weight exceeding 7.tonnes carrying the following goods: all of the wastes listed in the European Waste Catalogue (referred
         to in Commission Decision 2000/532/EC of May replacing Decision 94/3/EC establishing a list of wastes pursuant to Article
         1(a) of Council Directive 75/442/EEC on waste and Council Decision 94/904/EC establishing a list of hazardous waste pursuant
         to Article 1(4) of Council Directive 91/689/EEC on hazardous waste (OJ L 226, p. 3), as amended by Council Decision 2001/573/EC
         of July amending Decision 2000/532/EC as regards the list of wastes (OJ L 203, p. 18)), cereals, logs, bark and
         cork, ferrous and non-ferrous ores, stones, soil, rubble, motor vehicles and trailers, or structural steel. It is not necessary
         for any authority to intervene by adopting a decision to bring the ban into force; it takes direct effect.  
         
            
Paragraph of the contested regulation exempts from the ban laid down in Paragraph thereof heavy goods vehicles whose journeys
         start from or terminate in the territory of the City of Innsbruck or in the districts of Kufstein, Schwaz or Innsbruck-Land
         (Austria). The Immissionsschutzgesetz-Luft itself contains other exemptions. It directly excludes various categories of vehicle
         from the ban on driving, including inter alia motorway maintenance vehicles, refuse vehicles and agricultural and forestry
         vehicles. An individual exemption may be requested for other vehicles on grounds of public interest or significant individual
         interest.  
         Pre-litigation procedure
            
On June 2003, following an initial exchange of correspondence with the Republic of Austria, the Commission sent that Member
         State a letter of formal notice and asked it to reply to it within a week. The Republic of Austria replied by letter of July 2003. 
         
            
By letter of July 2003, the Commission sent the Republic of Austria a reasoned opinion under Article EC, to which the
         Republic of Austria replied by letter of July 2003. 
         Conditions for granting interim measures
            
Under Article EC, the Court may lay down any necessary interim measures in cases brought before it. 
         
            
Article 83(2) of the Rules of Procedure requires an application for such measures to state the subject-matter of the proceedings,
         the circumstances giving rise to urgency and the pleas of fact and law establishing a prima facie case for the interim measures
         applied for.  
         
            
According to settled case-law, the judge hearing the application may grant the interim measures if it is established that
         such an order is justified prima facie in fact and in law and that such measures are urgent in that, in order to avoid serious
         and irreparable damage to the applicant's interests, they must be made and produce their effects before the decision is given
         in the main proceedings. The judge hearing the application may also, where appropriate, weigh up the competing interests (see
         the order in Case C-440/P(R)  
          Commission   v  
          Artegodan  [2002] ECR I-1489, paragraphs and 59). 
         Prima facie caseArguments of the parties
         
            
The Commission claims that the ban on driving manifestly hinders the freedom to provide services in the road haulage sector,
         which is guaranteed by the Treaty and enshrined in secondary legislation in Regulations No 881/and No 3118/93, and the
         free movement of goods within the meaning of Article EC. 
         
            
As a matter of fact the measure impacts, if not exclusively at least predominantly, on the international transit of the goods
         in question. It discriminates, at the very least indirectly, in a manner that is incompatible with Regulations No 881/and
         No 3118/93, and with Article EC et seq. Such a measure, since it is discriminatory, cannot be justified on grounds of environmental
         protection and is, in any event, disproportionate.  
         
            
The Federal Republic of Germany supports these pleas, adding that the contested regulation cannot be justified on the basis
         of Directives 96/and 1999/and that it infringes the principle of cooperation in good faith established in Article EC and the principle of proportionality.  
         
            
The Republic of Austria, it submits, cannot rely on Article of Directive 96/62, since that provision requires that action
         plans be drawn up, permits the adoption only of interim measures and provides that the measures taken must have no significant
         negative effects on the environment in the other Member States, all of which are conditions that are not satisfied in the
         present case.  
         
            
Furthermore, the contested regulation is inconsistent with Article of Directive 96/62.  
         
            
The Federal Republic of Germany also takes the view that the exceeding of the limit value for nitrogen dioxide on which the
         contested regulation is based was not established in accordance with the requirements of Annexes V and VI to Directive 1999/30.
         
         
            
Article EC also required the Republic of Austria to liaise with others parties in good time before adopting such a radical
         measure as the sectoral ban on driving here in issue. 
         
            
Furthermore, the measure imposed by the contested regulation is disproportionate, since there is no reason for it to target
         the transport of merchandise by heavy goods vehicles or certain goods in particular. 
         
            
At the hearing, the Italian Republic, for its part, stressed the need to adopt this type of measure exclusively at Community
         level. 
         
            
The Republic of Austria, by contrast, takes the view that the contested regulation is consistent with Community law. 
         
            
The ban on driving was adopted in compliance with the rules of national law and the provisions of the Community directives
         on the protection of ambient air quality, in particular Articles and of Directive 96/62. 
         
            
Furthermore, the contested regulation does not infringe Regulations No 881/and No 3118/93. Those regulations, it is submitted,
         do not grant the holder of a Community licence an unconditional right and do not release him from his obligation to observe
         the general transport requirements. 
         
            
Moreover, the ban on driving in question is a necessary, non-discriminatory and proportionate measure.  
         
            
The need for the measure is demonstrated merely by the finding that the limit values set for nitrogen dioxide for the year
         both in the Austrian legislation and in Directive 1999/were exceeded. 
         
            
With regard to the lack of discrimination, the Republic of Austria points out that the ban on driving also affects national
         traffic. There are only few exceptions, which are justified by compelling reasons of public interest and also benefit foreign
         carriers. 
         
            
In any event, even if it were considered to be indirectly discriminatory, the ban on driving is justifiable on grounds of
         the protection of human health and the environment. 
         
            
The Commission's concerns regarding the catastrophic effects of this measure are groundless because, the Republic of Austria
         maintains, rail transport is an alternative method ─ feasible from both a technical and a financial point of view ─ for transporting
         the goods covered by the ban on driving. 
         Findings
         
            
Under Article 83(2) of the Rules of Procedure, an application for interim measures must state inter alia the pleas of fact
         and law establishing a prima facie case for the interim measures applied for.  
         
            
In that regard, it is apparent from an initial examination of the information submitted by the parties that the contested
         regulation creates restrictions on the freedoms of movement provided for by the Treaty and secondary legislation, and there
         is no need at this stage to establish which specific Community provisions are involved. 
         
            
The contested regulation imposes a total driving ban on a large category of carriers along a major road on one of the principal
         land transport links for trade between northern Europe and northern Italy. 
         
            
After first examination, it cannot be ruled out that this obstacle may be indirectly discriminatory.  
         
            
It is true that the contested regulation applies to all carriers, irrespective of their nationality, and that it therefore
         also penalises Austrian carriers who transport the goods referred to along the section of motorway concerned. 
         
            
However, because of the type of transport referred to and the scope of the derogations provided for, the contested regulation
         may conceivably make carriers from Member States other than the Republic of Austria bear the greater part of the burden, without
         justification for that imbalance. Nevertheless, in order to assess that question it is necessary to examine in detail the
         impact of the contested regulation on the various categories of carrier, which is not possible at the stage of the present
         interlocutory proceedings. At the hearing, the various parties also presented figures in this connection which appear prima
         facie to be contradictory, and it has not been possible to determine whether they are relevant.  
         
            
In addition to the issue of possible discrimination, the assessment of whether the Republic of Austria has infringed Community
         law also requires a detailed examination of the obstacle represented by the ban on driving.  
         
            
Such an examination should take account of the aims of protecting health and/or the environment invoked by the Republic of
         Austria and, in particular, the extent to which the contested regulation forms part of the Community provisions on ambient
         air quality. That examination should also consider whether the obstacle created is proportionate in relation to those aims.
         
         
            
In that regard, it appears on first analysis that, as the Republic of Austria has argued, the contested regulation forms part
         of the national legislation adopted in order to meet the obligations under the Community directives on ambient air quality.
          
         
            
Furthermore, the fact that the limit value for nitrogen dioxide emissions was exceeded in 2002, which it is claimed was the
         reason for the adoption of the contesed regulation, has not been disputed by the various parties to the dispute. 
         
            
It is not necessary, at this stage, to establish whether the contested regulation reflects considerations based on the protection
         of the environment and/or the protection of health; however, it appears that it must, as a rule, be acknowledged that requirements
         linked to considerations of such a kind prevail over economic considerations. 
         
            
The stress placed by the Commission, in its application for interim relief, on the purely economic aspects of the situation
         cannot therefore be endorsed as such. 
         
            
That being so, the ban on driving resulting from the contested regulation none the less raises serious questions concerning
         its compatibility with Community law.  
         
            
First of all, as the Italian Republic points out, the contested regulation was adopted only a few months after the ban on
         night driving came into force, that is, before the effects of that measure on the concentration of nitrogen dioxide could
         be fully evaluated. Since the ban on night driving did not come into force until October 2002, it was not possible to assess
         the measure's actual impact on the basis of the annual average of nitrogen dioxide for 2002. 
         
            
Second, the short period between adoption and entry into force of the contested regulation may significantly reinforce its
         negative effects on the activity and organisation of the carriers concerned. A two-month period appears very short for putting
         in place structural adaptations, in terms of methods of transport or journeys, which the ban on driving makes necessary. In
         particular, even though the Republic of Austria has been able to submit some evidence to show that an increase in the availability
         of rail transport over the route concerned is feasible, it is apparent from all the information presented by the parties that
         such an adjustment could be achieved only in the medium term and in stages. 
         
            
Lastly, as the Commission and the interveners have pointed out, measures directly affecting the transport of goods between
         Member States appear to call for a degree of prior coordination at Community level, which does not seem to have taken place
         in this case.  
         
            
A definitive assessment of all these arguments, which raises the delicate question of the balance to be established between
         the requirements of the internal market and the protection of health and/or the environment, requires a more thorough examination,
         which cannot be carried out at the stage of the present interlocutory proceedings.  
         
            
In those circumstances, and without its being necessary, at this stage, to rule any further on the various pleas raised in
         the main proceedings, it cannot directly be held that the main action is not well founded, even though, on the other hand,
         the arguments put forward by the Republic of Austria in its defence cannot be disregarded. 
         
            
It is therefore necessary to examine further the application for interim relief by ascertaining whether the requested measure
         is urgent in that it is necessary, in order to avoid serious and irreparable harm to the interests invoked by the Commission,
         that it should be granted and produce its effects before the decision is given in the main proceedings and, if so, to weigh
         up the interests at stake.  
         Urgency and balancing of interestsArguments of the parties
         
            
With regard to urgency, the Commission, supported by the interveners, argues that the contested regulation, which was to come
         into force on August 2003, would have direct and significant effects on the activity of haulage undertakings operating in
         the market concerned and, more generally, on the proper working of the internal market. 
         
            
According to the Commission, the case serves as an example with regard to public policy, because other Austrian  
          Länder  which have heavy transit traffic have already indicated that they intend to follow the Tyrol's example and were considering
         the adoption of similar provisions. It is also conceivable that Member States other than the Republic of Austria may contemplate
         measures of this kind.  
         
            
Furthermore, the ban on driving in this case would directly affect the logistical network of the traders dealing with the
         goods concerned. Having been adopted unilaterally and without advance notice, it would cause a sudden and fundamental change
         in the existing conditions of the Community market in the carriage of goods which, according to the Commission, could not
         be fully restored. The first to suffer would be the weakest links in the production chain, namely, the road haulage undertakings,
         especially small undertakings which, owing to the size of their fleets of vehicles, have specialised in the transportation
         of a single type of goods. More than half the haulage undertakings have only between one and three lorries and 31% only between
         four and ten lorries.  
         
            
For undertakings specialising in the transport of certain goods (for example, the transport of new cars or of waste), and
         using special vehicles for that purpose, the sectoral ban on driving would be tantamount to a general ban because they could
         not very easily switch in the short term to transporting other types of goods. 
         
            
In most of the Member States, above all in Germany, the road transport sector suffers from overcapacity, which explains the
         keen competition between undertakings and the low profit margins. Only undertakings which manage to keep their fleets in constant
         use are competitive. It is therefore essential for haulage undertakings not to lose orders in progress and existing customers.
         A few days' wait might even mean financial ruin for undertakings with a limited number of vehicles. 
         
            
According to the Federal Republic of Germany, every year about trips between Germany and Italy would be affected by
         the ban on driving here in issue. It would therefore have serious consequences for the undertakings concerned, as is demonstrated
         by the declarations made by a number of them. Those consequences would be all the greater because they would also affect the
         organisation of the round trips made by heavy goods vehicles in order not to travel empty.  
         
            
Moreover, according to the Commission and the interveners, there is no adequate alternative solution. 
         
            
The haulage undertakings concerned would, in fact, have only two possible ways of avoiding the ban on driving, namely, to
         choose a bypass route or use rail transport. 
         
            
However, bypass routes would involve a considerable increase in the length and duration of journeys and therefore a significant
         additional cost as well as higher fuel consumption and worse pollution. 
         
            
As for switching to rail transport, the road haulage companies could only use the  
         rolling highway (
         Rollende Strasse). Transportation by goods wagons is not one of their activities and the combined transportation of unaccompanied goods is
         ruled out for most small and medium-sized undertakings, which do not have the means of recovering the container or trailer
         at the point of destination. The present availability of trains on the rolling highway is insufficient, which means a costly
         loss of time. The Federal Republic of Germany dwells in particular on the fact that it is possible to achieve an adequate
         increase in the availability of rail transport only in the medium term. It also points out that the rolling highway is often
         too inflexible because there is a provisional 48-hour booking period which is not financially interesting for regional transportation
         over short distances. In addition to these aspects, the Italian Republic stresses the markedly higher cost of rail transport.
          
         
            
Whatever approach they took, the undertakings concerned would face additional costs and lose time if they are not to be forced
         to cease their activities altogether. In view of the low value of the goods affected by the ban on driving and the keen competition
         in the road haulage sector, those additional costs could not be passed directly on to those placing orders or the customers
         but would have to be borne by the carriers, at least initially. However, the Commission maintains that only large undertakings
         would be able to offset additional costs on a route, in this case the Brenner route through Austria. Small undertakings specialising
         in the transport of the goods covered by the ban on driving would not be able to bear those additional costs immediately and
         would lose their orders and clients. The Commission submits that since, as has already been stated, most small undertakings
         specialise, it is to be feared that many of them would not be able to receive replacement orders in the short term and would
         be forced to leave their vehicles idle.  
         
            
In conclusion, in the light of the small profit margins of road haulage undertakings, the small and medium-sized undertakings
         affected might be forced to cease operating. This harm would weigh heavily on the European economy and might be irreparable.
         
         
            
The Federal Republic of Germany refers to evidence indicating that the annual loss in turnover for the undertakings concerned
         would be about EUR million, without counting the relocations of undertakings. That would involve the loss of hundreds of
         jobs and the winding-up of dozens of undertakings. 
         
            
Furthermore, the Commission and the Italian Republic argue that the ban on driving would affect not only the transport sector
         but also production industries, especially the timber industry and the quarries in northern Italy.  According to the Federal
         Republic of Germany, the loaders' regular financial relations would also be jeopardised and the ban on driving might finally
         lead to a cessation of trade between Italy and Germany for certain goods affected by the ban. 
         
            
The balance of interests leans in favour of the application, since less restrictive measures are possible, such as a ban on
         the driving of those lorries which create the most pollution. 
         
            
So far as concerns the environmental interests invoked by the Republic of Austria, the Commission points out that, unlike
         the tangible financial repercussions of the ban on driving, the potential harm to the environment in the Inn valley if the
         ban on driving is applied is not quantifiable. The Federal Republic of Germany points out, for its part, that the contested
         regulation, far from resolving the problem of nitrogen dioxide emissions, only moves it towards other areas in Austria or
         towards other Member States and Switzerland. Furthermore, the Italian Republic maintains that, in order to assess the scope
         of the environmental problems invoked, it is necessary first to assess the beneficial effects on the ban on night driving
         introduced in October 2002, something which would not be possible until the end of 2003.  
         
            
In its observations, the Republic of Austria refutes the argument that application of the contested regulation will cause
         serious and irreparable damage. 
         
            
First of all, the Republic of Austria formally denies that Austrian  
          Länder  other than the Tyrol intend following the example of this regulation. As far as it knows, no other Member State has that
         intention either, so that the contagious effect referred to by the Commission does not exist.  
         
            
Also, in view of the period between the adoption of the contested regulation in May and its entry into force on August
         2003, the persons concerned had a sufficiently long transitional period.  
         
            
The Republic of Austria further argues that the disadvantages of a ban on driving for carriers form part of the risks connected
         with any market economy and that, for the rest, the change to rail is possible both technically and financially.  With regard
         to the technical aspects, the Republic of Austria complains that the Commission has failed to consider the opportunities for
         changing to transport by full goods wagons and combined transport of unaccompanied goods. For the rest, rail capacity is already
         adequate, while, if it were technically impossible, an application could be made for exemption on a case-by-case basis under
         the Austrian legislation. Financially, the cost and duration of rail transport are comparable to those of road transport.
         
         
            
Contrary to the Commission's claims, routes other than those passing along the section of the motorway in question could also
         be used by road carriers. In that connection, the Republic of Austria stresses the fact that, at present, much of the flow
         of heavy goods vehicles traveling along this section is the result of the choice made by the carriers concerned not to follow
         the shortest route, which would take them through Switzerland. 
         
            
The Republic of Austria also claims that the impact of the ban on driving would be relatively limited for the road haulage
         undertakings. In view of the significant financial resources which they ought to have under the Community legislation, the
         risk of cessation of activities is slight. Similarly, the Commission has not adduced persuasive evidence of actual damage
         to production industries, notably the Italian timber industry. 
         
            
Finally, with regard to the balancing of interests, the Republic of Austria stresses the extent of the damage to health and
         the environment which is demonstrated by the exceeding of the limit values laid down by Directive 96/and by numerous international
         studies. These fundamental interests prevail over economic interests, which concern only the protection of the road haulage
         sector.  
         Findings
         
            
In order to establish the need to adopt interim measures and to determine their scope, it is necessary to balance the interests
         at stake, since the threat of serious and irreparable harm ─ the criterion for the alleged urgency ─ is one of the terms of
         the comparison made in this connection. 
         
            
The interests invoked by the Republic of Austria are linked to considerations based on the protection of the environment and
         of health. 
         
            
Harm caused to such interests is generally irreversible since, more often than not, damage to the environment or to health
         cannot, by reason of its nature, be eliminated retroactively.  
         
            
Moreover, factual evidence apparently confirming that damage has been presented in these interlocutory proceedings. 
         
            
That being so, it is apparent from the Community legislation on the protection of air quality, in particular the European
         Community programme of policy and action in relation to the environment and sustainable development (OJ C 138, p. 5),
         that the policy on ambient air quality is determined at Community level on the basis of long-term objectives. 
         
            
In the present case, the current situation as regards ambient air pollution in the area in question is the outcome of a gradual
         process and can only, it appears on first analysis, be satisfactorily addressed in stages over the medium term. 
         
            
In that connection, structural measures will probably be necessary and all parties to the present proceedings for interim
         measures have a duty, in varying degrees, to contribute to the search for the most appropriate solutions. The solutions which
         may emerge will necessarily represent a compromise between conflicting interests, and it cannot  
          a priori  be ruled out that they may give rise to certain disadvantages both for the functioning of the internal market and for the
         interests of some groups of Community traders. 
         
            
In those circumstances, while recognising that the contested regulation may in the short term help improve ambient air quality
         in the area in question, the President of the Court finds that a structural approach over the medium term, which is essential,
         would not be jeopardised by the temporary non-application of the regulation. 
         
            
In other words, it does not appear that, if the Court were to dismiss the application brought by the Commission, the non-application
         of the contested regulation during a limited period preceding the decision in the main proceedings would endanger in the longer
         term the protection of ambient air quality in the area concerned. 
         
            
On the other hand, the seriousness of the damage which would be caused by the immediate entry into force on the ban on driving,
         and the difficulty in repairing that damage, cannot be underestimated. It appears that, owing to its scope and unilateral
         nature, that ban would significantly affect the operation and economic and financial stability of many Community undertakings.
          
         
            
The material submitted, in particular by the interveners, shows that the ban on driving would indeed have a significant economic
         effect on many haulage undertakings, in particular small undertakings specialising in the transport of the goods covered by
         the driving ban. 
         
            
That harm is not limited to the aggregation of adverse financial consequences for the various undertakings. There is conclusive
         evidence of a significant risk that the ban on driving would force many undertakings to close permanently and that a structural
         and, to a certain extent, irreversible change in conditions of transport and trade flows of goods within and across the area
         in question would occur. 
         
            
In those circumstances, the risk of serious and irreparable damage following the immediate application of the contested regulation
         must be regarded as having been sufficiently established. 
         
            
In the light of the appraisal criteria which have been brought to the attention of the President of the Court, it therefore
         appears necessary to adopt such interim measures as will make it possible to preserve the interests at stake as far as possible
         in the short term. During that period, greater weight must be given to the interests facing the most immediate and irreversible
         threat, namely those invoked by the Commission. 
         
            
It therefore appears appropriate to extend for a limited period the instruction issued to the Republic of Austria to suspend
         enforcement of the sectoral ban on driving provided for in the contested regulation. 
         
            
Nevertheless, given the significant ambient air quality problems in the area concerned, the parties are invited to consult
         each other for the purpose of drawing up measures which may reconcile their conflicting interests, even if only temporarily,
         and to notify the Court of any compromise reached. 
         
            
Failing that, the parties are requested to gather all the relevant information, inter alia on changes in ambient air quality
         in the area concerned, the estimated impact of the ban on night driving during and the prospects for developing rail
         transport or transport by other routes, and to submit that information to the Court, together with any observations they consider
         relevant, by February at the latest.  
         
            
On the basis of that new information and observations, the measure decided by the present order may be extended, revoked or
         amended. 
         
            
In the light of these considerations, the interim measure laid down in the aforementioned order of July should be
         extended until April 2004. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE PRESIDENT OF THE COURT
hereby orders:
         
1.
 The Republic of Austria shall suspend until April enforcement of the sectoral ban on driving provided for in the Verordnung
            des Landeshauptmanns von Tirol, mit der auf der A Inntalautobahn verkehrsbeschränkende Maßnahmen erlassen werden (sektorales
            Fahrverbot) (Regulation adopted by the First Minister of the  
             Land  of Tyrol limiting use of the A motorway in the Inn valley (sectoral ban on driving)) of May 2003.  
            
2.
 Costs are reserved.
            
Luxembourg, October 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: German.
Top  
 