
ORDER OF THE COURT (Ninth Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Appeal — Rules of Procedure of the Court — Article — Article TFEU — Situation of a person not directly affected by the decision under appeal — Customs union — Subsequent entry in the accounts and remission of import duties — Reception apparatus for colour television sets from Turkey)
In Joined Cases C‑264/P and C‑265/P,
Two APPEALS under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on June 2015,
Makro autoservicio mayorista SA, established in Madrid (Spain) (C‑264/P),
      
Vestel Iberia SL, established in Madrid (C‑265/P),
      
represented by P. De Baere, avocat, and P. Muñiz, advogado,
appellants,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
European Commission, represented by R. Lyal and A. Caeiros, acting as Agents,
      
defendant at first instance,
Kingdom of Spain, represented by A. Rubio González, acting as Agent,
      
intervener at first instance,
THE COURT (Ninth Chamber),
composed of C. Lycourgos, President of the Chamber, E. Juhász and C. Vajda (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: N. Wahl,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the decision taken, after hearing the Advocate General, to give a decision on the action by reasoned order,
         pursuant to Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court,
      
makes the following
Order
By their appeals, Makro autoservicio mayorista SA and Vestel Iberia SL ask the Court to set aside the judgment of the General
         Court of the European Union of March in Vestel Iberia and Makro autoservicio mayorista v Commission (T‑249/and T‑269/12, EU:T:2015:150, ‘the judgment under appeal’), whereby the General Court dismissed as inadmissible
         their actions for annulment of Commission Decision C(2010) final of January (Case REM 02/08) (‘the decision at
         issue’) finding that post-clearance entry in the accounts of import duties is justified and that remission of those duties
         is not justified in a particular case.
      
 Legal context
 The Customs Code
Article 220(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/of October establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L 302, p. 1), as amended by Regulation (EC) No 2700/of the European Parliament and of the Council of November (OJ L 311, p. 17; ‘the Customs Code’), states:
      
‘…, subsequent entry in the accounts shall not occur where:
…
(b)      the amount of duty legally owed failed to be entered in the accounts as a result of an error on the part of the customs authorities
         which could not reasonably have been detected by the person liable for payment, the latter for his part having acted in good
         faith and complied with all the provisions laid down by the legislation in force as regards the customs declaration;
      
…’
Article of the Customs Code provides:
      
‘1.      Import duties … may be repaid or remitted in situations …:
–        to be determined in accordance with the procedure of the committee;
–        resulting from circumstances in which no deception or obvious negligence may be attributed to the person concerned. The situations
         in which this provision may be applied and the procedures to be followed to that end shall be defined in accordance with the
         Committee procedure. Repayment or remission may be made subject to special conditions.
      
2.      Duties shall be repaid or remitted for the reasons set out in paragraph upon submission of an application to the appropriate
         customs office within months from the date on which the amount of the duties was communicated to the debtor.
      
…’
 The Implementing Regulation
The provisions governing the application of the Customs Code were themselves codified in Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2454/of July (OJ L 253, p. 1), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1335/of July (OJ L 187,
         p. 16; ‘the Implementing Regulation’). 
      
 The provisions governing the application of Article 220(2)(b) of the Customs Code
Title III, Part IV, relating to customs debt, of the Implementing Regulation is entitled ‘Recovery of the amount of the customs
         debt’ and contains a number of articles relating to the application of Article 220(2)(b) of the Customs Code.
      
Thus, Article of the Implementing Regulation is worded as follows:
      
‘The customs authorities shall themselves decide not to enter uncollected duties in the accounts:
…
(b)      in cases in which they consider that the conditions laid down in Article 220(2)(b) of the [Customs] Code are fulfilled, except
         those in which the dossier must be transmitted to the Commission pursuant to Article 871. However, where Article 871(2), second
         indent, is applicable, the customs authorities may not adopt a decision waiving entry in the accounts of the duties in question
         until the end of a procedure initiated in accordance with Articles to 876.
      
…’
Article of the Implementing Regulation sets out the cases in which the national authorities, when reaching a decision
         on an application for remission or repayment under Article 220(2)(b) and Article of the Customs Code, are required to
         refer the matter to the Commission. That article provides:
      
‘1.      The customs authority shall transmit the case to the Commission to be settled under the procedure laid down in Articles to where it considers that the conditions laid down in Article 220(2)(b) of the [Customs] Code are fulfilled and:
      
–        it considers that the Commission has committed an error within the meaning of Article 220(2)(b) of the [Customs] Code,
–        the circumstances of the case are related to the findings of a Community investigation carried out under Council Regulation
         (EC) No 515/of March on mutual assistance between the administrative authorities of the Member States and cooperation
         between the latter and the Commission to ensure the correct application of the law on customs and agricultural matters or
         under any other Community legislation or any agreement concluded by the Community with a country or group of countries in
         which provision is made for carrying out such Community investigations, or
      
–        the amount not collected from the operator concerned in respect of one or more import … operations but in consequence of a
         single error is EUR or more.
      
2.      However, the cases referred to in paragraph shall not be transmitted where:
–        the Commission has already adopted a decision under the procedure provided for in Articles to on a case involving
         comparable issues of fact and of law,
      
–        the Commission is already considering a case involving comparable issues of fact and of law.
…
6.      Where one of the following situations occurs the Commission shall return the dossier to the customs authority and the procedure
         referred to in Articles to shall be deemed never to have been initiated:
      
…
–        under paragraphs and 2, the dossier should not be transmitted;
…’
The second paragraph of Article of the Implementing Regulation provides that:
      
‘The Commission shall notify the Member States of the decisions it has adopted in order to help customs authorities to reach
         decisions in situations involving comparable issues of fact and law.’
      
 The provisions governing the application of Article of the Customs Code
Chapter of Title IV, on the repayment or remission of import or export duties, of Part IV of the Implementing Regulation
         is entitled ‘Specific provisions relating to the application of Article of the Code’. It includes a Section 1, on the
         decisions to be taken by the customs authorities of the Member States, and a Section 2, on the decisions to be taken by the
         Commission.
      
–       The decisions to be taken by the authorities of the Member States, referred to in Articles to 904a of the Implementing
         Regulation
      
Article 899(2) of the Implementing Regulation is worded as follows:
      
‘In [cases other than those referred to in Articles to 904], except those in which the dossier must be submitted to the
         Commission pursuant to Article 905, the decision-making customs authority shall itself decide to grant repayment or remission
         of the import … duties where there is a special situation resulting from circumstances in which no deception or obvious negligence
         may be attributed to the person concerned.
      
Where Article 905(2), second indent, is applicable, the customs authorities may not decide to authorise repayment or remission
         of the duties in question until the end of a procedure initiated in accordance with Articles to 909.’
      
–       The decisions to be taken by the Commission, referred to in Articles to of the Implementing Regulation
Article of the Implementing Regulation provides:
      
‘1.      Where the application for repayment or remission submitted under Article 239(2) of the [Customs] Code is supported by evidence
         which might constitute a special situation resulting from circumstances in which no deception or obvious negligence may be
         attributed to the person concerned, the Member State to which the decision-making customs authority belongs shall transmit
         the case to the Commission to be settled under the procedure laid down in Articles to where:
      
–        the authority considers that a special situation is the result of the Commission failing in its obligations,
–        the circumstances of the case are related to the findings of a Community investigation carried out under Regulation (EC) No 515/97,
         or under any other Community legislation or any agreement concluded by the Community with countries or groups of countries
         in which provision is made for carrying out such Community investigations, or
      
–        the amount for which the person concerned may be liable in respect of one or more import … operations but in consequence of
         a single special situation is EUR or more.
      
The term “the person concerned” shall be interpreted in the same way as in Article 899.
2.      However, the cases referred to in paragraph shall not be transmitted where:
–        the Commission has already adopted a decision under the procedure provided for in Articles to on a case involving
         comparable issues of fact and of law,
      
–        the Commission is already considering a case involving comparable issues of fact and of law.
3.      The case sent to the Commission shall include all the facts necessary for a full examination of the case presented. It shall
         include detailed information on the behaviour of the operator concerned, and in particular on his professional experience,
         good faith and diligence. This assessment shall be accompanied by all information that may demonstrate that the operator acted
         in good faith. The dossier shall also include a statement, signed by the applicant for repayment or remission, certifying
         that he has read the dossier and either stating that he has nothing to add or listing all the additional information that
         he considers should be included.
      
…
6.      Where one of the following situations occurs the Commission shall return the dossier to the customs authority and the procedure
         referred to in Articles to shall be deemed never to have been initiated:
      
…
–        under paragraphs and 2, the dossier should not be transmitted;
…’
Article 908(1) of the Implementing Regulation provides:
      
‘The Member State concerned shall be notified of the decision referred to in Article as soon as possible and in any event
         within one month of the expiry of the period specified in that Article.
      
The Commission shall notify the Member States of the decisions it has adopted in order to help customs authorities to reach
         decisions on cases involving comparable issues of fact and law.’
      
 Background to the disputes
For the purpose of the present appeals, the background to the disputes, as derived from paragraphs to of the judgment
         under appeal, can be summarised as follows.
      
 The appellants
The applicant in Case T‑249/12, Vestel Iberia SL, is a Spanish company, whose main activity is importing, distributing, manufacturing
         and providing after-sales services for electronic devices intended for the general public, including white and brown goods.
      
The applicant in Case T‑269/12, Makro autoservicio mayorista SA, is also a Spanish company, whose main activity is importing
         and distributing food and non-food products, such as electronic devices.
      
 The assessment procedures initiated by the Spanish customs authorities and applications for remission of import duties submitted
            by the appellants
In May 2002, the Spanish customs authorities undertook a post-clearance verification of the imports of colour television sets
         by the appellants. In April and May 2004, the Spanish authorities gave a preliminary assessment in which they took the view
         that the colour television sets imported by the appellants were of Chinese origin and proposed applying the anti-dumping duties
         provided for by Council Regulation (EC) No 2584/of November amending Regulation (EC) No 710/imposing a definitive
         anti-dumping duty on imports of colour television receivers originating in Malaysia, the People’s Republic of China, the Republic
         of Korea, Singapore and Thailand and collecting definitively the provisional duty imposed (OJ L 324, p. 1).
      
On May and June 2004, the Spanish customs authorities notified the appellants of a customs debt in respect of their
         imports of colour television sets from Turkey in and 2001.
      
By letters of May 2005, the appellants each sent the Spanish customs authorities an application for remission of their
         customs debt pursuant to Article of the Customs Code.
      
In early 2007, the Spanish customs authorities informed the appellants that they were forwarding their applications for the
         remission of import duties to the Commission pursuant to Article 905(3) of the Implementing Regulation.
      
By letters of July 2008, the Commission informed the appellants that their applications for the remission of import duties
         would be returned to the Spanish customs authorities on the basis of Article 905(2), second indent, and (6) of the Implementing
         Regulation, on the ground that it was already examining the application submitted by Schneider España de Informática SA (‘Schneider’),
         registered under the reference REM 02/08, whose case-file was comparable in terms of fact and of law. It also informed the
         Spanish authorities that, under Article 899(2) of the Implementing Regulation, they were required, before reaching a decision
         on the applications for the remission of import duties submitted by the appellants, to wait until the Commission had adopted
         a decision in Case REM 02/08.
      
 The decision at issue
On January 2010, the Commission adopted the decision at issue finding that post-clearance entry in the accounts of import
         duties is justified and that remission of those duties is not justified in a particular case.
      
In the decision at issue, first, the Commission took the view that the customs authorities had not made any error within the
         meaning of Article 220(2)(b) of the Customs Code and that Schneider had not proved that it acted diligently, as required by
         that provision. Secondly, the Commission considered that there was no special situation within the meaning of Article of the Customs Code.
      
By application lodged with the Court Registry on April (Case T‑153/10), Schneider sought annulment of the decision
         at issue.
      
By order of February in Schneider España de Informática v Commission (T‑153/10, EU:T:2012:94), the General Court found that there was no longer any need to adjudicate on the action.
      
 The decisions adopted by the Spanish customs authorities with regard to the appellants
In April 2012, the Spanish customs authorities notified the appellants of their decision rejecting the application for the
         remission of import duties submitted by each of them. In order to reject that application, the Spanish authorities relied
         on the decision at issue.
      
 The procedure before the General Court and the judgment under appeal
By applications registered at the Registry of the General Court on and June 2012, the appellants brought an action for
         annulment of the decision at issue.
      
By separate documents lodged at the Registry of the General Court on and September 2012, the Commission raised a plea
         of inadmissibility pursuant to Article 114(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the General Court.
      
The Kingdom of Spain was granted leave to intervene in support of the appellants. 
      
By order of the President of the Sixth Chamber of the General Court of October 2014, after hearing the parties, Cases T‑249/and T‑269/were joined for the purposes of the oral procedure pursuant to Article of the Rules of Procedure of the General
         Court.
      
By the judgment under appeal, the General Court held that the appellants are not directly affected by the decision at issue
         and, consequently, dismissed the actions as inadmissible.
      
 Forms of order sought by the parties before the Court of Justice
By decision of the President of the Court of July 2015, Cases C‑264/P and C‑265/P were joined for the purposes of
         the written and oral part of the procedure and the judgment.
      
The appellants claim that the Court should:
      
–        set aside the judgment under appeal;
–        declare the actions admissible;
–        return the cases to the General Court for a ruling on the substance of the actions; and
–        order the Commission to pay the costs.
The Commission contends that the Court should:
      
–        dismiss the appeals; and
–        order the appellants to pay the costs.
 The appeals
Under Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, where an appeal is, in whole or in part, manifestly inadmissible
         or manifestly unfounded, the Court may at any time, acting on a proposal from the Judge-Rapporteur and after hearing the Advocate
         General, decide by reasoned order to dismiss the appeal in whole or in part without opening the oral procedure.
      
That provision should be applied in the present cases.
      
 The first ground of appeal
 Arguments of the parties
By their first ground of appeal, the appellants submit that the General Court erred in law when it held that the Spanish authorities
         had a margin of discretion in the implementation of the decision at issue with regard to them. This ground of appeal is divided
         into two branches.
      
By the first branch of the first ground of appeal, the appellants complain that the General Court did not correctly interpret,
         in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, paragraphs and of the judgment in Heuschen & Schrouff Oriëntal Foods Trading (C‑375/07, EU:C:2008:645).
      
By the second branch of the first ground of appeal, the appellants submit that the General Court’s interpretation and application
         of the provisions of the Implementing Regulation were incorrect. The appellants state that, according to those provisions,
         the national authorities are lacking any discretion in the implementation of the decision at issue with regard to them.
      
According to the appellants, Articles 869(b), 871(2), the second paragraph of Article 874, Articles 899(2), 905(2) and 908(1)
         of the Implementing Regulation codify the principle of the primacy of EU law. Those articles ensure that the Commission’s
         assessment of EU law and of the facts in the decision at issue is applied in a uniform manner in all of the European Union
         to all other economic operators who are in a comparable factual and legal situation. Consequently, neither the national authorities
         nor the national courts can adopt measures which are incompatible with the decision at issue.
      
The appellants submit that that finding is confirmed by paragraphs and of the judgment in Heuschen & Schrouff Oriëntal Foods Trading (C‑375/07, EU:C:2008:645).
      
In addition, the appellants contend that, in accordance with Article 871(1) of the Implementing Regulation, their dossier
         falls within the exclusive competence of the Commission. That exclusive competence would be ended if the national authorities
         were able to adopt a decision different from that which the Commission has already taken.
      
The Kingdom of Spain contends that, pursuant to Article 905(1) and (2) of the Implementing Regulation, in the case of a remission
         of import duties, the national authorities do not have any margin of discretion enabling them to depart from the Commission’s
         position. The only ‘margin’ available to those authorities is the power to choose to send a new dossier to the Commission
         for decision.
      
In addition, the Kingdom of Spain submits that Article of the Implementing Regulation expressly provides that decisions
         granting the repayment or remission of import duties are to have effect in cases involving comparable issues of fact and of
         law.
      
The Commission disputes the appellants’ arguments.
      
 Findings of the Court
It should be recalled at the outset that the condition that a natural or legal person must be directly concerned by the decision
         being challenged, as provided for in the fourth paragraph of Article TFEU, requires two conditions to be satisfied, namely
         (i) the contested measure must directly affect the legal situation of the individual and (ii) it must leave no discretion
         to its addressees who are entrusted with the task of implementing it, such implementation being purely automatic and resulting
         from EU rules alone without the application of other intermediate rules (see, to that effect, order in Northern Ireland Department of Agriculture and Rural Development v Commission, C‑248/P, EU:C:2014:137, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Concerning the second branch of the first ground of appeal, it should be borne in mind that, in accordance with the case-law
         cited in the preceding paragraph, the appellants can be considered to be directly affected by the decision at issue only if
         that decision, even on the assumption that it directly affects their legal situation, leaves no discretion to the Spanish
         authorities for the purpose of its implementation in their regard.
      
Contrary to the appellants’ submission, Articles 869(b), 871(2), the second paragraph of Article 874, Articles 899(2), 905(2)
         and 908(1) of the Implementing Regulation do not preclude any measure of discretion enjoyed by the Spanish authorities. As
         is apparent from paragraphs 78, and of the judgment under appeal, the only obligation incumbent on those authorities,
         pursuant to those provisions, was to await the outcome of the proceedings concerning the application for remission submitted
         by Schneider, so as to be able to take into account the decision adopted by the Commission when they decided on the applications
         submitted by the appellants.
      
However, that obligation does not preclude an assessment by the Spanish authorities. It was for them to judge the degree of
         similarity between the application submitted by Schneider and the applications submitted by the appellants. In that context,
         the Spanish authorities had, in particular, to take into account any particularity, of fact or of law, that characterises
         the specific situation of the appellants, as the General Court noted in paragraph of the judgment under appeal. As the
         Commission maintains in its observations, those authorities could, in such a case, arrive at the conclusion that the specific
         situation of the appellants was sufficiently dissimilar from that of Schneider to justify a different outcome. In that regard,
         it is important to note that the fact that the Commission sent the appellants’ dossier back to the Spanish authorities, on
         the ground that it had already examined the application submitted by Schneider whose dossier was comparable in terms of fact
         and of law, does not mean that their situation is so similar to that of Schneider that the result at the end of the assessment
         of their applications must necessarily be the same.
      
The finding that the national authorities exercise discretion in a case such as that in the present case is confirmed by the
         second paragraph of Article and Article 908(1) of the Implementing Regulation which oblige the Commission to notify the
         Member States of the decisions it has adopted ‘in order to help customs authorities to reach decisions’ in such cases.
      
In addition, contrary to what the appellants assert, it is not apparent from paragraphs and of the judgment in Heuschen & Schrouff Oriëntal Foods Trading (C‑375/07, EU:C:2008:645) that the Court interpreted the provisions of the Implementing Regulation in such a way as to deprive
         the authorities or the national courts of any measure of discretion in a case such as that in the present case.
      
It follows from the foregoing that the second part of the first ground of appeal must be dismissed as being manifestly unfounded.
      
Concerning the first part of the first ground of appeal, it must be pointed out that, in accordance with settled case-law,
         where one of the grounds adopted by the General Court is sufficient to sustain the operative part of its judgment, any defects
         that might vitiate other grounds given in the judgment concerned in any event have no bearing on that operative part and,
         accordingly, a plea relying on such defects is ineffective and must be dismissed (see, inter alia, judgments in Commission v CAS Succhi di Frutta, C‑496/P, EU:C:2004:236, paragraph 68, and United Kingdom v Commission, C‑416/P, EU:C:2012:761, paragraph 45).
      
It follows from paragraphs to of the present order that the General Court was right to find, in the judgment under appeal,
         that the decision at issue did not directly affect the appellants’ legal situation, and that finding has not been properly
         called into question by the appellants.
      
Accordingly, any error of law made by the General Court in the interpretation of paragraphs and of the judgment in Heuschen & Schrouff Oriëntal Foods Trading (C‑375/07, EU:C:2008:645) would, in any event, have had no effect on the outcome of the actions at first instance and thus
         would have had no bearing on the operative part of the judgment under appeal.
      
Consequently, the first part of the first ground of appeal must be rejected and, accordingly, that ground of appeal must be
         rejected in its entirety as manifestly unfounded.
      
 The second ground of appeal
 Arguments of the parties
By their second ground of appeal, the appellants argue that, even if the Spanish authorities had discretion in the implementation
         of the decision at issue, the General Court erred in law because the mere existence of discretion is insufficient to prevent that decision from being of direct concern to the appellants. That ground of appeal is divided into
         two parts.
      
By the first part of the second ground of appeal, the appellants claim that it is apparent from the judgment in Land Oberösterreich v Commission (T‑366/and T‑235/04, EU:T:2005:347, paragraph 29) that, if the addressee of a Commission decision does not exercise any
         discretion when it implements and notifies that decision to a third party, that party is directly concerned by that decision.
         According to the appellants, the General Court erred in law because it failed to consider that legal principle or erred in its application.
      
By the second part of the second ground of appeal, the appellants assert that, even if the Spanish authorities had discretion,
         such discretion was purely theoretical. According to the appellants, it is clear from the case-law of the Court that, when
         the possibility for addresses not to give effect to the measure of EU law is purely theoretical, such measure is of direct
         concern to that third party (judgments in Piraiki-Patraiki and Others v Commission, 11/82, EU:C:1985:18, paragraphs to 10, and Dreyfus v Commission, C‑386/P, EU:C:1998:193, paragraph 44). The appellants submit that the General Court erred in law because it failed to
         consider that legal principle or erred in its application.
      
According to the Kingdom of Spain, it is apparent from Article 905(2) and (6) of the Implementing Regulation that the Spanish
         authorities do not have any margin of discretion enabling them to move away from the Commission’s position. The only margin
         available to those authorities is the power to choose to send a new dossier to the Commission for decision.
      
The Kingdom of Spain recalls in this context that the Commission services expressly stated, after a concrete and individual
         examination, that the situation of the appellants and that of Schneider had characteristics which presented comparable issues
         of fact and of law.
      
The Commission disputes the appellants’ arguments.
      
 Findings of the Court
So far as concerns the first part of the second ground of appeal, it should be borne in mind that it is apparent from the
         case-law cited in paragraph of the present order that the condition that a natural or legal person must be directly concerned
         by the decision being challenged, as provided for in the fourth paragraph of Article TFEU, requires two conditions to
         be satisfied. The second of those conditions requires that the contested measure does not leave any discretion to its addressees
         who are entrusted with the task of implementing it. Contrary to the appellants’ submission, the failure to exercise discretion
         is not therefore a relevant criterion for determining whether a natural or legal person is directly concerned by such a measure,
         as provided for in the fourth paragraph of Article TFEU.
      
In addition, as the Commission notes in its observations, the judgment in Land Oberösterreich v Commission (T‑366/and T‑235/04, EU:T:2005:347) concerned a situation in which the addressee of the decision, the Republic of Austria,
         did not have any discretion, since its role was limited to communicating the Commission’s decision to the region concerned.
         That is how the words ‘did not exercise any discretion’, found in paragraph of that judgment, must be construed. That judgment
         is not therefore capable of supporting the appellants’ assertions.
      
It follows from the foregoing that the first part of the second ground of appeal must be dismissed as being manifestly unfounded.
      
So far as concerns the second part of the second ground of appeal, it should be borne in mind that the Court has consistently
         held that a submission made for the first time in an appeal before the Court must be rejected as inadmissible. In an appeal,
         the Court’s jurisdiction is confined to a review of the assessment by the General Court of the pleas argued before it. To
         allow a party to put forward, in an appeal, a plea which it has not raised before the General Court would mean allowing that
         party to bring before the Court of Justice, whose jurisdiction in appeals is limited, a case of wider scope than the one heard
         by the General Court.
      
It must be stated, however, that the appellants did not claim before the General Court that, even if the Spanish authorities
         had discretion, such discretion was purely theoretical. Consequently, the second part of the second ground of appeal must
         be rejected as manifestly inadmissible.
      
The second ground of appeal must therefore be rejected in its entirety as being, in part, manifestly unfounded and, in part,
         manifestly inadmissible. 
      
 The third ground of appeal
 Arguments of the parties
According to the appellants, the General Court erred, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, in the legal characterisation
         of the evidence, or distorted the evidence. The appellants consider that the General Court incorrectly described the decision
         of the Spanish authorities rejecting their application for the remission of import duties. According to them, the Spanish
         authorities did not ‘take care’ in establishing that the conclusions contained in the contested decision applied equally to the appellants. In actual fact, their decision represents only a ‘notification’ or a ‘mere reproduction’
         of the decision at issue.
      
The Kingdom of Spain states that it has nothing to add to what is set out in the appellants’ appeals. 
      
The Commission disputes the appellants’ arguments.
      
 Findings of the Court
The arguments put forward by the appellants in support of the third ground of appeal cannot succeed.
      
That ground of appeal is ineffective. Even if it were correct to consider, like the appellants, that the General Court erred,
         in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, in its description of the actions of the Spanish authorities, that would not
         mean that those authorities did not have a discretion, which constitutes the relevant criterion. As is apparent from paragraphs and of the present order, the Spanish authorities had a discretion.
      
The third ground of appeal must therefore be dismissed.
      
In the light of all the foregoing observations, the appeal must be dismissed in its entirety.
      
 Costs
Under Article 138(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, which applies to appeal proceedings by virtue of Article 184(1)
         thereof, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s
         pleadings. Since the appellants have been unsuccessful, they must be ordered to pay the costs, as applied for by the Commission.
      
In accordance with Article 140(1) of the Rules of Procedure, which also applies to appeal proceedings by virtue of Article 184(1)
         of those rules, the Member States which have intervened in the proceedings are to bear their own costs. The Kingdom of Spain
         must be ordered to bear its own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Ninth Chamber) hereby orders:
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
2.      Makro autoservicio mayorista SA and Vestel Iberia SL shall pay the costs.
3.      The Kingdom of Spain shall bear its own costs. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 