
ORDER OF THE COURT (Eighth Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Appeals – Order for removal from the Register – Discontinuance – Costs)
In Case C‑122/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, lodged on February 2007,
Eurostrategies SPRL, established in Brussels (Belgium), represented by R. Lang and S. Crosby, solicitors,
      
appellant,
the other party to the proceedings being:
Commission of the European Communities, represented by P. Costa de Oliveira and I. Hadjiyiannis, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Eighth Chamber),
composed of G. Arestis, President of the Chamber, R. Silva de Lapuerta (Rapporteur) and E. Juhász, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: R. Grass,
after hearing the Advocate General,
makes the following
Order
In its appeal, Eurostrategies SPRL (‘Eurostrategies’) requests the Court of Justice to set aside the order of the Court of
         First Instance of the European Communities of December in Case T‑203/Eurostrategies v Commission (not published in ECR, ‘the order under appeal’), by which it removed Case T‑203/from the Register of the Court of First
         Instance.
      
 The facts of the dispute and the order under appeal
Following a tendering procedure for a Community financing project in the field of Justice and Home Affairs, three undertakings,
         including Eurostrategies, submitted tenders. As the procedure did not produce the desired results, the Commission of the European
         Communities abandoned the project.
      
In order to find out why the contract had not been awarded and the tendering procedure had been cancelled, Eurostrategies
         made a request on June for access to a certain number of documents concerning the procedure. The Commission replied
         to that request on June 2006, referring that undertaking to the national authorities concerned.
      
On June 2006, Eurostrategies made a new request for access to the documents. The Commission received that request on July 2006,
         and announced that it would reply by July at the latest. On that date, the Commission sent Eurostrategies an official
         note extending that time‑limit to August 2006.
      
On August 2006, Eurostrategies brought an action before the Court of First Instance seeking annulment of the implied decision
         by which the Commission had refused it access to the documents requested.
      
On August 2006, the Commission sent Eurostrategies a letter referring, in particular, to the holding reply of July 2006.
         It also stated that it was doing its utmost to reply to the undertaking’s request. Thus, on October 2006, the Commission
         forwarded three documents to Eurostrategies. Following that letter, further documents were sent on October 2006.
      
In those circumstances, on October 2006, Eurostrategies lodged at the Court of First Instance an application to discontinue
         its action, seeking an order that the Commission pay the costs on the ground that it was the latter’s inactivity which had
         caused the application to be brought.
      
In its application for discontinuance, Eurostrategies claimed that it had not received a reply from the Commission within
         the time‑limit indicated in the communication of July 2006, namely July 2006, and that, consequently, it had been obliged
         to bring an action before the Court of First Instance.
      
On November 2006, the Commission informed the Court of First Instance that it did not oppose the request for removal from
         the register, but that it sought an order that Eurostrategies pay the costs. In that statement of its position, the Commission
         contended that it had sent Eurostrategies a ‘holding reply’ on July 2006.
      
On December 2006, Eurostrategies’ lawyers received from the Registrar of the Court of First Instance a copy of the Commission’s
         observations on the application for discontinuance along with a certified copy of the order under appeal.
      
The Court of First Instance stated, at paragraph of the order under appeal, that it was clear from Article 87(5) of its
         Rules of Procedure that the onus lay on Eurostrategies to establish that there had been conduct on the part of the Commission
         which justified derogation from the general rule in the first subparagraph of that provision so that that institution should
         be ordered to pay the costs of the proceedings.
      
At paragraphs and of the order under appeal, the Court of First Instance found that the Commission had established that
         it sent a holding reply to Eurostrategies on July 2006. In those circumstances, the Court of First Instance was unable
         to find that the Commission’s conduct justified that it be ordered to pay the costs.
      
The Court of First Instance therefore applied the first sentence of the first subparagraph of Article 87(5) of its Rules of
         Procedure and, consequently, ordered Eurostrategies to pay the costs.
      
 Forms of order sought
Eurostrategies claims that the Court should:
      
–        annul the order under appeal quo ad its reasoning only; and
–        order the Commission to pay the costs.
The Commission contends that the Court should:
      
–        dismiss the appeal as manifestly inadmissible;
–        in the alternative, dismiss the appeal as unfounded; and
–        order Eurostrategies to pay the costs.
 Arguments of the parties
In support of its submissions, Eurostrategies relies, essentially, on pleas in law alleging, respectively, a breach of the
         right to a fair trial, in particular of the principle that both parties should be heard, a breach of Regulation (EC) No 1049/of the European Parliament and of the Council of May regarding public access to European Parliament, Council and Commission
         documents (OJ L 145, p. 43), and a manifest error of assessment and, in the alternative, an infringement of Community
         law concerning the legal effects of an email.
      
Eurostrategies states that it seeks annulment of the order under appeal solely in respect of its grounds. As drafted, the
         grounds imply that Eurostrategies attempted to mislead the Court of First Instance, calling into question the reputation of
         both the appellant and its lawyers.
      
The Commission contends that the appeal is inadmissible. It submits that Eurostrategies cannot appeal the order under appeal,
         since it discontinued its own action by seeking the removal of Case T‑203/from the register. Eurostrategies was unsuccessful
         only as to costs.
      
 The appeal
Under Article of the Rules of Procedure, where an appeal is, in whole or in part, clearly inadmissible or clearly unfounded,
         the Court may at any time, acting on a report from the Judge-Rapporteur and after hearing the Advocate General, dismiss the
         appeal by reasoned order.
      
A ruling must be made under that provision.
      
In accordance with the second paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, no appeal lies regarding only
         the amount of the costs or the party ordered to pay them.
      
With regard to this appeal, it is necessary to point out that the operative part of the order under appeal contains two points:
         the removal of Case T-203/from the Register of the Court of First Instance and an order for Eurostrategies to pay the costs.
      
Eurostrategies, however, challenges only those grounds of the order under appeal which have a direct bearing on point of
         its operative part, relating to costs.
      
It is apparent from the abovementioned provision of the Statute of the Court of Justice that review of liability to pay the
         costs falls outside the Court’s jurisdiction.
      
As a consequence, in application of Article of the Rules of Procedure, the appeal must be dismissed as manifestly inadmissible.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, which applies to appeal proceedings by virtue of Article thereof, the unsuccessful
         party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission
         applied for costs against Eurostrategies and the latter has been unsuccessful, Eurostrategies must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Eighth Chamber) hereby orders:
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
2.      Eurostrategies SPRL is ordered to pay the costs.
Luxembourg, November 2007.
R. Grass
 
      G. Arestis
Registrar
 
      President of the Eighth Chamber
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 