
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-243/Alejandro Rincón MorenovBundesanstalt für Arbeit(Reference for a preliminary rulingfrom the Sozialgericht Stuttgart)
         
«(Social security for migrant workers – Family benefits – Article of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71)»
Opinion of Advocate General Elmer delivered on December Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), March Summary of the Judgment
Social security for migrant workers – Family benefits – Unemployed persons – Entitlement to family benefits subject to the drawing of unemployment benefits – Person drawing unemployment benefits – Concept(Council Regulation No 1408/71, Arts 4(1) and 74)Article of Regulation No 1408/71, which makes an unemployed person's entitlement to family benefits subject to the condition
         that he is drawing unemployment benefits, must be interpreted as meaning that the expression  
         unemployed person ... who draws unemployment benefits under the legislation of a Member State also covers unemployed persons registered with the competent national authority whose entitlement to unemployment benefit
         has been suspended because compensation was paid to them by their employer by reason of the fact that the employment relationship
         was terminated without observance of a period of notice, or because payment of unemployment benefits in cash was temporarily
         excluded, in cases where, during that period of exclusion, they are covered against the risks of sickness and accidents under
         the legislation of the competent State.With regard to the suspension of unemployment benefit, the compensation received may, inasmuch as it relates directly to the
         risk of unemployment referred to in Article 4(1) of Regulation No 1408/71, be treated as an unemployment benefit, while, in
         the case of temporary exclusion from entitlement to cash benefits, Article uses the term  
         unemployment benefits without drawing any distinction between cash benefits and other benefits, and does not require that the person concerned
         draws all of the benefits provided for under the legislation of the competent State during the period of unemployment.
      
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)March (1)
((Social security for migrant workers – Family benefits – Article of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71))
In Case C-243/94, 
REFERENCE to the Court under Article of the EC Treaty by the Sozialgericht Stuttgart (Germany) for a preliminary ruling
            in the proceedings pending before that court between 
            
 Alejandro Rincón Moreno
and
 Bundesanstalt für Arbeit
on the interpretation of Article of Council Regulation (EEC) No 1408/of June on the application of social security
            schemes to employed persons, to self-employed persons and to members of their families moving within the Community (OJ, English
            Special Edition (II), p. 416), as amended and updated by Council Regulation (EEC) No 2001/of June (OJ L 230, p. 6) and subsequently by Council Regulation (EEC) No 3427/of October (OJ L 331, p. 1),
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
composed of: C.N. Kakouris (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, F.A. Schockweiler, P.J.G. Kapteyn, J.L. Murray and H. Ragnemalm, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: M.B. Elmer, Registrar: H.A. Rühl, Principal Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of: 
               
─
Mr Moreno, by Angel González Maeztu, Head of the Social Affairs Service in the Spanish Consulate-General, 
               
─
the German Government, by Ernst Röder, Ministerialrat in the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs, and Gereon Thiele, Assessor
               in that ministry, acting as Agents, 
               
─
the Spanish Government, by Alberto José Navarro González, Director-General for Community Legal and Institutional Coordination,
               and Gloria Calvo Díaz, Abogado del Estado, of the State Legal Service, acting as Agents, 
               
─
the Commission of the European Communities, by Maria Patakia, of its Legal Service, and Horstpeter Kreppel, a national civil
               servant on secondment to the Commission's Legal Service, acting as Agents, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of Mr Moreno, represented by Angel González Maeztu; the German Government, represented
               by Ernst Röder; the Spanish Government, represented by Gloria Calvo Díaz; the United Kingdom, represented by Philippa Watson,
               Barrister, and the Commission, represented by Maria Patakia and Horstpeter Kreppel, at the hearing on October 1995,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on December 1995, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By order of August 1994, received at the Court on September 1994, the Sozialgericht (Social Court) Stuttgart referred
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article of the EC Treaty a question on the interpretation of Article of
         Council Regulation (EEC) No 1408/of June on the application of social security schemes to employed persons, to
         self-employed persons and to members of their families moving within the Community (OJ, English Special Edition (II),
         p. 416), as amended and updated by Council Regulation (EEC) No 2001/of June (OJ L 230, p. 6) and subsequently
         by Council Regulation (EEC) No 3427/of October (OJ L 331, p. 1, hereinafter  
         Regulation No 1408/71). 
         
            
That question has arisen in a dispute between Mr Moreno and the Bundesanstalt für Arbeit (Federal Labour Office) concerning
         the latter's refusal to pay family benefits to Mr Moreno for the months of January and February 1993. 
         
            
Mr Moreno, who is a Spanish national, was employed in Germany from to December and on that basis received family
         benefits from the Bundesanstalt für Arbeit for his two sons, who were studying in Spain. 
         
            
Mr Moreno was dismissed from his employment on December 1992.  In view of the length of his employment contract, its termination
         was subject under German legislation to expiry of a period of notice.  With Mr Moreno's agreement, however, that notice was
         waived and his employer paid him compensation on account of dismissal. 
         
            
In the light of that fact, the Bundesanstalt für Arbeit adopted two decisions in respect of Mr Moreno under the Arbeitsförderungsgesetz
         (Law on Employment Promotion) of June (hereinafter the  
         AFG) (
          Bundesgesetzblatt  I, p. 582), as amended. 
         
            
The Bundesanstalt für Arbeit first decided to suspend Mr Moreno's entitlement to unemployment benefit for the period from
         December to February 1993, pursuant to Paragraph 117(2) and (3) of the AFG.  Under those provisions, an unemployed
         person whose employment contract has been terminated without observance of a period of notice and who receives compensation
         from his employer is subject to suspension of his entitlement to unemployment benefit for a period the duration of which depends
         on the amount of compensation paid. 
         
            
Secondly, the Bundesanstalt für Arbeit decided that benefit should be withheld from Mr Moreno for the period from December
         to March pursuant to the combined provisions of Paragraphs and 119a of the AFG.  Those provisions state that
         if an unemployed person has terminated the employment relationship or if his conduct in breach of the employment contract
         has given rise to termination of the employment relationship and thus brought about his unemployment either intentionally
         or through gross negligence, that person is to be excluded from unemployment benefit for a specified period. 
         
            
However, during the suspension or temporary exclusion, the unemployed person is covered by sickness insurance under the combined
         provisions of Paragraph 19(2) of the Sozialgesetzbuch V (Social Security Code, Book V) and Paragraphs and 155a of the
         AFG, as well as by the guarantee of accident insurance provided for by Paragraph of the AFG. 
         
            
By decision of April 1993, the Bundesanstalt für Arbeit refused to pay family benefits to Mr Moreno for the months of January
         and February on the ground that Article of Regulation No 1408/required, for the granting of family benefits, that
         the recipient should in fact be drawing unemployment benefit.  Since Mr Moreno had not been drawing any unemployment benefit
         during the disputed period by reason of the measures which it had adopted in his regard, the Bundesanstalt für Arbeit took
         the view that there was no reason to pay family benefits to him either. 
         
            
Following rejection of his complaint, Mr Moreno brought proceedings before the Sozialgericht Stuttgart in which he submits
         essentially that during both the suspension and exclusion periods his entitlement to family benefits ought to have been maintained,
         since those periods are deducted from the total period during which he is entitled to unemployment benefits, with the result
         that he must be regarded as a person drawing such benefits within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 1408/71.  This,
         he submits, must  
          a fortiori  be the case during the temporary exclusion inasmuch as he remains compulsorily insured against sickness under the above provisions
         of the Sozialgesetzbuch and the AFG. 
         
            
Since it took the view that the outcome of the dispute depended on how Article of Regulation No 1408/was to be interpreted,
         the Sozialgericht Stuttgart decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following question to the Court for a preliminary
         ruling: Must Article of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/be interpreted as meaning that unemployed persons who were formerly employed
         and who draw unemployment benefits under the legislation of a Member State include unemployed persons registered with the
         Arbeitsamt (Labour Office) whose entitlement to unemployment benefit is suspended because compensation was paid to them by
         their employer on termination of their employment, under Paragraph of the Arbeitsförderungsgesetz (Law on employment promotion,
         AFG), or because of a temporary exclusion under Paragraph of the AFG?
         
            
Article of Regulation No 1408/provides that  
         an unemployed person who was formerly employed ... and who draws unemployment benefits under the legislation of a Member State
         shall be entitled, in respect of the members of his family residing in another Member State, to the family benefits provided
         for by the legislation of the former State, as if they were residing in that State ... . 
         
            
It follows from that provision that, in order to be entitled to family benefits in respect of the members of his family residing
         in another Member State, the unemployed person must be drawing unemployment benefits under the legislation of a Member State,
         in this case under German legislation. 
         
            
It is necessary here to ask whether, although the Bundesanstalt für Arbeit did not, during the disputed period, pay to Mr Moreno
         any unemployment benefit in cash by reason of the suspension and exclusion measures, he must be regarded as having drawn unemployment
         benefits within the meaning of that provision. 
         
Suspension
            
Regarding the period of suspension, it should be pointed out that although Mr Moreno did not draw any unemployment benefit
         in cash from the competent authority, he did receive compensation from his employer when his contract of employment was terminated.
          The question therefore arises as to whether that compensation should be treated as an unemployment benefit for the purposes
         of Article of Regulation No 1408/71. 
         
            
The Court has stated on numerous occasions that a benefit may be regarded as a social security benefit in so far as it is
         granted, without any individual and discretionary assessment of personal needs, to recipients on the basis of a legally defined
         position and provided that it concerns one of the risks expressly listed in Article 4(1) of Regulation No 1408/(see,  
          inter alia , Case C-66/Acciardi  v  
          Commissie Beroepszaken Administratieve Geschillen in de Provincie Noord-Holland  [1993] ECR I-4567, paragraph 14; Case C-111/Commission  v  
          Luxembourg  [1993] ECR I-817, paragraph 29; Case C-78/Hughes  v  
          Chief Adjudication Officer  [1992] ECR I-4839, paragraph 15, and Joined Cases 379/85, 380/85, 381/and 93/Caisse Régionale d'Assurance Maladie Rhône-Alpes and Others  v  
          Giletti and Others  [1987] ECR 955, paragraph 11). 
         
            
It appears in this connection from the case-file that, within the German legal system, a worker who loses his job is in principle
         entitled to unemployment benefit.  Paragraph of the AFG, however, provides for suspension of this right where the employer
         has terminated the employment relationship without observing a period of notice and the unemployed worker has consequently
         received compensation or is required to enforce his right to compensation. 
         
            
Next, it must be pointed out, on the one hand, that the amount of this compensation is, under Paragraph of the AFG, to
         be taken into consideration in determining the period of suspension and, on the other, that the very concept of suspension
         of benefits implies that the entitlement to such benefits remains but that payment of them by the competent body can resume
         only on expiry of the period of suspension. 
         
            
Finally, as the German Government has argued, the compensation referred to in Paragraph of the AFG partially replaces
         the unemployment benefit to which the unemployed worker is in principle entitled.  It follows that it relates directly to
         the risk of unemployment referred to in Article 4(1) of Regulation No 1408/and that consequently it can be treated as an
         unemployment benefit within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 1408/71. 
         
            
It follows that compensation paid by reason of dismissal, such as that referred to in Paragraph of the AFG, must be regarded
         as an unemployment benefit within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 1408/71. 
         Temporary exclusion
            
With regard to the temporary exclusion of Mr Moreno, it is necessary to consider whether that measure prevents him from drawing
         any unemployment benefit. 
         
            
It should be noted that Article of Regulation No 1408/uses the term  
         unemployment benefits without drawing any distinction between cash benefits and other benefits and without requiring, as a condition of its application,
         that the person concerned draws all of the benefits provided for under the legislation of the competent State during the period
         of unemployment.  It follows that this provision does not impose any condition with regard to the nature of the unemployment
         benefits. 
         
            
Consequently, in so far as the unemployed worker excluded from unemployment benefits in cash continues, under the legislation
         of the competent State, to be covered against the risks of sickness and accidents, the expression  
         unemployment benefits under the legislation of a Member State used in Article of Regulation No 1408/must be understood as covering these types of benefit as well. 
         
            
It follows that an unemployed person who continues, during a period of temporary exclusion, to be covered, pursuant to national
         legislation, in respect of sickness and accidents must be regarded as drawing unemployment benefits within the meaning of
         Article of Regulation No 1408/71. 
         
            
In the light of all the foregoing, the answer to the question submitted by the national court should be that Article of
         Regulation No 1408/must be interpreted as meaning that the expression  
         unemployed person ... who draws unemployment benefits under the legislation of a Member State also covers unemployed persons registered with the competent national authority whose entitlement to unemployment benefit
         has been suspended because compensation was paid to them by their employer by reason of the fact that the employment relationship
         was terminated without observance of a period of notice, or because payment of unemployment benefits in cash was temporarily
         excluded, in cases where, during that period of exclusion, they are covered against the risks of sickness and accidents under
         the legislation of the competent State. 
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the German and Spanish Governments, the United Kingdom and the Commission of the European Communities,
         which have submitted observations to the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main
         proceedings, a step in the proceedings pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court.
         
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
in answer to the question referred to it by the Sozialgericht Stuttgart by order of August 1994, hereby rules: 
         
Kakouris
Schockweiler
Kapteyn
Murray 
Ragnemalm 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on March 1996. 
         
R. Grass 
C.N. Kakouris  
Registrar
President of the Sixth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: German.
Top  
 