
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-200/Kunqian Catherine Zhu and Man Lavette Chen
v
Secretary of State for the Home Department
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Immigration Appellate Authority)
(Right of residence – Child with the nationality of one Member State but residing in another Member State – Parents nationals of a non-member country – Mother’s right to reside in the other Member State)
Summary of the Judgment
Citizenship of the European Union – Right to move and reside freely in the territory of the Member States – Directive 90/– Minor who is a national of a Member State, is covered by sickness insurance and is in the care of a parent who is a third-country
            national having sufficient resources for that minor and who is that minor’s primary carer – Right of residence, both for the
            minor and for the parent, in another Member State – Conditions for the minor to gain nationality – Not relevant
(Art. EC; Council Directive 90/364)
Article EC and Council Directive 90/on the right of residence confer on a young minor who is a national of a Member
         State, is covered by appropriate sickness insurance and is in the care of a parent who is a third-country national having
         sufficient resources for that minor not to become a burden on the public finances of the host Member State, a right to reside
         for an indefinite period in that State. In such circumstances, those same provisions allow a parent who is that minor’s primary
         carer to reside with the child in the host Member State.
      
In that respect, the condition concerning the sufficiency of resources laid down in Directive 90/cannot be interpreted
         as meaning that the minor must possess those resources personally and may not use for that purpose those of a family member.
         Such an interpretation would add to that condition a requirement as to the origin of the resources which, not being necessary
         for the attainment of the objective pursued, namely the protection of the public finances of the Member States, would constitute
         a disproportionate interference with the exercise of the fundamental right of freedom of movement and of residence upheld
         by Article EC.
      
In addition, the application of the Community provisions at issue cannot be refused to the persons concerned on the ground
         that the parent who is the primary carer has created, by means of a stay in a Member State, a situation in which the child
         expected would be able to acquire the nationality of another Member State in order thereafter to secure for the child and
         for him or herself a long-term right to reside. Under international law, it is for each Member State, having due regard to
         Community law, to lay down the conditions for the acquisition and loss of nationality and it is not permissible for a Member
         State to restrict the effects of the grant of the nationality of another Member State by imposing an additional condition
         for recognition of that nationality with a view to the exercise of the fundamental freedoms provided for in the Treaty.
      
(see paras 33, 36-37, 39, 47, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (sitting as a full Court )October 2004(1)
(Right of residence  –  Child with the nationality of one Member State but residing in another Member State  –  Parents nationals of a non-member country  –  Mother's right to reside in the other Member State)
 In Case C-200/02,
             REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC
             from the Immigration Appellate Authority (United Kingdom), made by decision of May 2002, received at the Court on May 2002, in the proceedings 
            
Kunqian Catherine Zhu,Man Lavette Chen,
            
v
Secretary of State for the Home Department,
            
THE COURT (sitting as a full Court ),,
 composed of: V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas, R. Silva de Lapuerta and K. Lenaerts, Presidents
            of Chambers, C. Gulmann, R. Schintgen,  N. Colneric, S. von Bahr and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur), Judges,
            
 Advocate General: A. Tizzano,Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
             having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on November 2003,after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
            
–
 Man Lavette Chen, by R. de Mello and A. Berry, barristers, assisted by M. Barry, solicitor,
            
–
 the Irish Government, by D.J. O'Hagan, acting as Agent, assisted by P. Callagher SC, and P. McGarry, BL,
            
–
 the United Kingdom Government, by J.E. Collins, R. Plender QC, and R. Caudwell, acting as Agents,
            
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by C. O'Reilly, acting as Agent,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Council Directive 73/148/EEC of May on the
         abolition of restrictions on movement and residence within the Community for nationals of Member States with regard to establishment
         and the provision of services (OJ L 172, p. 14), of Council Directive 90/364/EEC of June on the right of residence
         (OJ L 180, p. 26) and of Article EC.
         
            
 The reference was made in the course of proceedings brought by Kunqian Catherine Zhu (hereinafter ‘Catherine’), of Irish nationality,
         and her mother, Man Lavette Chen (hereinafter ‘Mrs Chen’), a Chinese national, against the Secretary of State for the Home
         Department concerning the latter’s rejection of applications by Catherine and Mrs Chen for a long-term permit to reside in
         the United Kingdom.
         
Legal background
Community legislation
            
 Article of Directive 73/provides:
         
‘1.
The Member States shall, acting as provided in this Directive, abolish restrictions on the movement and residence of:
(a)
nationals of a Member State who are established or who wish to establish themselves in another Member State in order to pursue
                     activities as self-employed persons, or who wish to provide services in that State; 
                  
(b)
nationals of Member States wishing to go to another Member State as recipients of services; 
(c)
the spouse and the children under years of age of such nationals, irrespective of their nationality; 
(d)
the relatives in the ascending and descending lines of such nationals and of the spouse of such nationals, which relatives
                     are dependent on them, irrespective of their nationality.
                  
2.
Member States shall favour the admission of any other member of the family of a national referred to in paragraph 1(a) or
               (b) or of the spouse of that national, which member is dependent on that national or spouse of that national or who in the
               country of origin was living under the same roof.’
            
            
 Article 4(2) of the same directive states:
         ‘The right of residence for persons providing and receiving services shall be of equal duration with the period during which
         the services are provided. 
          Where such period exceeds three months, the Member State in the territory of which the services are performed shall issue
         a right of abode as proof of the right of residence. 
          Where the period does not exceed three months, the identity card or passport with which the person concerned entered the territory
         shall be sufficient to cover his stay. The Member State may, however, require the person concerned to report his presence
         in the territory.’
         
            
 Under Article of Directive 90/364:
         ‘1.     Member States shall grant the right of residence to nationals of Member States who do not enjoy this right under other provisions
         of Community law and to members of their families as defined in paragraph 2, provided that they themselves and the members
         of their families are covered by sickness insurance in respect of all risks in the host Member State and have sufficient resources
         to avoid becoming a burden on the social assistance system of the host Member State during their period of residence.
          The resources referred to in the first subparagraph shall be deemed sufficient where they are higher than the level of resources
         below which the host Member State may grant social assistance to its nationals, taking into account the personal circumstances
         of the applicant and, where appropriate, the personal circumstances of persons admitted pursuant to paragraph 2.
          Where the second subparagraph cannot be applied in a Member State, the resources of the applicant shall be deemed sufficient
         if they are higher than the level of the minimum social security pension paid by the host Member State.
          2.       The following shall, irrespective of their nationality, have the right to install themselves in another Member State with
         the holder of the right of residence:
         
(a)
his or her spouse and their descendants who are dependants;
(b)
dependent relatives in the ascending line of the holder of the right of residence and his or her spouse.’
The United Kingdom legislation
            
 Under Regulation of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations (the ‘EEA Regulations’):
         ‘1.     In these Regulations, “qualified person” means a person who is an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as (a) a worker;
         (b) a self employed person; (c) a provider of services; (d) a recipient of services; (e) a self sufficient person; (f) a retired
         person; (g) a student; or (h) a self employed person who has ceased activity; or who is a person to whom paragraph (4) applies.
         …’
         
The main proceedings and the questions referred to the Court of Justice
            
 The order for reference states that Mrs Chen and her husband, both of Chinese nationality, work for a Chinese undertaking
         established in China. Mrs Chen’s husband is a director and the majority shareholder of that company. For the purposes of his
         work, he travels frequently to various Member States, in particular the United Kingdom.
         
            
 The couple’s first child was born in the People’s Republic of China in 1998. Mrs Chen, who wished to give birth to a second
         child, entered the United Kingdom in May when she was about six months pregnant. She went to Belfast in July of the same
         year and Catherine was born there on September 2000. The mother and her child live at present in Cardiff, Wales (United
         Kingdom). 
         
            
 Under section 6(1) of the Irish Nationality and Citizenship Act of 1956, which was amended in and applies retroactively
         as from December 1999, Ireland allows any person born on the island of Ireland to acquire Irish nationality. Under section
         6(3), a person born in the island of Ireland is an Irish citizen from birth if he or she is not entitled to citizenship of
         any other country. 
         
            
 Under those rules, Catherine was issued with an Irish passport in September 2000. According to the order for reference, Catherine
         is not entitled, on the other hand, to acquire United Kingdom nationality since, in enacting the British Nationality Act 1981,
         the United Kingdom departed from the jus soli, so that birth in the territory of that Member State no longer automatically confers United Kingdom nationality.
         
            
 It is common ground that Mrs Chen took up residence in the island of Ireland in order to enable the child she was expecting
         to acquire Irish nationality and, consequently, to enable her to acquire the right to reside, should the occasion arise, with
         her child in the United Kingdom.
         
            
 The referring court also observes that Ireland forms part of the Common Travel Area within the meaning of the Immigration
         Acts, so that, because Irish nationals do not as a general rule have to obtain a permit to enter and reside in the United
         Kingdom, Catherine, in contrast to Mrs Chen, may move freely within the United Kingdom and within Ireland. Aside from Catherine’s
         right of free movement limited to those two Member States, neither of the appellants in the main proceedings is entitled to
         reside in the United Kingdom under its domestic legislation.
         
            
 The order for reference also makes it clear that Catherine is dependent both emotionally and financially on her mother, that
         her mother is her primary carer, that Catherine receives private medical services and child-care services in return for payment
         in the United Kingdom, that she lost the right to acquire Chinese nationality by virtue of having been born in Northern Ireland
         and her subsequent acquisition of Irish nationality and, as a result, that she only has the right to enter Chinese territory
         under a visa allowing residence for a maximum of days per visit; that the two appellants in the main proceedings provide
         for their needs by reason of Mrs Chen’s employment, that the appellants do not rely upon public funds in the United Kingdom
         and there is no realistic possibility of their becoming so reliant, and, finally, that the appellants are insured against
         ill health. 
         
            
 The Secretary of State for the Home Department’s refusal to grant a long-term residence permit to the two appellants in the
         main proceedings was based on the fact that Catherine, a child of eight months of age, was not exercising any rights arising
         from the EC Treaty such as those laid down by Regulation 5(1) of the EEA Regulations and the fact that Mrs Chen was not entitled
         to reside in the United Kingdom under those regulations.
         
            
 The decision not to grant a permit was the subject of an appeal to the Immigration Appellate Authority, which stayed the proceedings
         pending a preliminary ruling from the Court of Justice on the following questions:
         ‘1.     On the facts of the present case, does Article of Council Directive 73/148/EEC or in the alternative Article of Council
         Directive 90/364/EEC: 
         
(a)
confer the right on the First Appellant, who is a minor and a citizen of the Union, to enter and reside in the host Member
               State?
            
(b)
and if so, does it consequently confer the right on the Second Appellant, a third country national who is the First Appellant’s
               mother and primary carer, to reside with the First Appellant (i) as her dependent relative, or (ii) because she lived with
               the First Appellant in her country of origin, or (iii) on any other special basis?
            
 2.       If and to the extent that the First Appellant is not a ‘national of a Member State’ for purposes of exercising Community rights
         pursuant to Council Directive 73/148/EEC or Article of Council Directive 90/364/EEC, what then are the relevant criteria
         for identifying whether a child, who is a citizen of the Union, is a national of a Member State for purposes of exercising
         Community rights?
          3.       In the circumstances of the present case, does the receipt of child care by the First Appellant constitute services for purposes
         of Council Directive 73/148/EEC?
          4.       In the circumstances of the present case, is the First Appellant precluded from residing in the host State pursuant to Article
         of Council Directive 90/364/EEC because her resources are provided exclusively by her third country national parent who
         accompanies her?
          5.       On the special facts of this case does Article 18(1) EC give the First Appellant the right to enter and reside in the host
         Member State even when she does not qualify for residence in the host State under any other provision of EU law?
          6.       If so, does the Second Appellant consequently enjoy the right to remain with the First Appellant, during that time in the
         host State?
          7.       In this context, what is the effect of the principle of respect for fundamental human rights under Community law claimed by
         the Appellants, in particular where the Appellants rely on Article ECHR that everyone has the right to respect for his private
         and family life and his home in conjunction with Article ECHR given that the First Appellant cannot live in China with
         the Second Appellant and her father and brother?’
         
The questions referred to the Court of Justice
            
 By those questions, the national court seeks in essence to ascertain whether Directive 73/148, Directive 90/or Article
         EC, if appropriate, read in conjunction with Articles and of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights
         and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR), confer, in circumstances such as those of the main proceedings, upon a young minor who is
         a national of a Member State, and is in the care of a parent who is a national of a non-member country, the right to reside
         in another Member State where the minor receives child-care services. If such right be conferred, the national court wishes
         to ascertain whether those same provisions consequently confer a right of residence on the parent concerned.
         
            
 It is therefore necessary to examine the provisions of Community law concerning the right of residence in the light of the
         situation of a national not of legal age such as Catherine, and then that of a parent who is a national of a non-member country
         and looks after the child.
         
The right of residence of a person in Catherine’s situation Preliminary considerations
         
            
 The Irish and United Kingdom Governments’ contention that a person in Catherine’s situation cannot claim the benefit of the
         provisions of Community law on free movement of persons and residence simply because that person has never moved from one
         Member State to another Member State must be rejected at the outset.
         
            
 The situation of a national of a Member State who was born in the host Member State and has not made use of the right to freedom
         of movement cannot, for that reason alone, be assimilated to a purely internal situation, thereby depriving that national
         of the benefit in the host Member State of the provisions of Community law on freedom of movement and of residence (to that
         effect, see, in particular, Case C-148/Garcia Avello [2003] ECR I-11613, paragraphs and 27).
         
            
 Moreover, contrary to the Irish Government’s contention, a young child can take advantage of the rights of free movement and
         residence guaranteed by Community law. The capacity of a national of a Member State to be the holder of rights guaranteed
         by the Treaty and by secondary law on the free movement of persons cannot be made conditional upon the attainment by the person
         concerned of the age prescribed for the acquisition of legal capacity to exercise those rights personally (to that effect,
         see, in particular, in the context of Regulation (EEC) No 1612/of the Council of October on freedom of movement
         for workers within the Community (OJ, English Special Edition, Series I, (II), p. 475), Joined Cases 389/and 390/Echternach and Moritz [1989] ECR 723, paragraph 21, and Case C-413/Baumbastand R [2002] ECR I-7091, paragraphs to 63, and, in relation to Article EC, Garcia Avello, paragraph 21). Moreover, as the Advocate General made clear in points to of his Opinion, it does not follow either
         from the terms of, or from the aims pursued by, Articles EC and EC and Directives 73/and 90/that the enjoyment
         of the rights with which those provisions are concerned should be made conditional upon the attainment of a minimum age.
         
 Directive 73/The national court wishes to ascertain whether a person in Catherine’s situation may rely on the provisions of Directive 73/with a view to residing on a long-term basis in the United Kingdom as a recipient of child-care services provided in return
         for payment.
         
            
 According to the case-law of the Court, the provisions on freedom to provide services do not cover the situation of a national
         of a Member State who establishes his principal residence in the territory of another Member State with a view to receiving
         services there for an indefinite period (to that effect, see, in particular, Case 196/Steymann [1988] ECR 6159). The child-care services to which the national court refers fall precisely within that case.
         
            
 As regards the medical services that Catherine is receiving on a temporary basis, it must be observed that, under the first
         subparagraph of Article 4(2) of Directive 73/148, the right of residence of persons receiving services by virtue of the freedom
         to provide services is co-terminous with the duration of the period for which they are provided. Consequently, that directive
         cannot in any event serve as a basis for a right of residence of indefinite duration of the kind with which the main proceedings
         are concerned.
         
 Article EC and Directive 90/Since Catherine cannot rely on Directive 73/for a right of long-term residence in the United Kingdom, the national court
         would like to know whether Catherine might have a right to long-term residence under Article EC and under Directive 90/364,
         which, subject to certain conditions, guarantees such a right for nationals of Member States to whom it is not available under
         other provisions of Community law, and for members of their families.
         
            
 By virtue of Article 17(1) EC, every person holding the nationality of a Member State is a citizen of the Union. Union citizenship
         is destined to be the fundamental status of nationals of the Member States (see, in particular, Baumbast and R, paragraph 82).
         
            
 As regards the right to reside in the territory of the Member States provided for in Article 18(1) EC, it must be observed
         that that right is granted directly to every citizen of the Union by a clear and precise provision of the Treaty. Purely as
         a national of a Member State, and therefore as a citizen of the Union, Catherine is entitled to rely on Article 18(1) EC.
         That right of citizens of the Union to reside in another Member State is recognised subject to the limitations and conditions
         imposed by the Treaty and by the measures adopted to give it effect (see, in particular, Baumbast and R, paragraphs and 85).
         
            
 With regard to those limitations and conditions, Article 1(1) of Directive 90/provides that the Member States may require
         that the nationals of a Member State who wish to benefit from the right to reside in their territory and the members of their
         families be covered by sickness insurance in respect of all risks in the host Member State and have sufficient resources to
         avoid becoming a burden on the social assistance system of the host Member State during their period of residence.
         
            
 It is clear from the order for reference that Catherine has both sickness insurance and sufficient resources, provided by
         her mother, for her not to become a burden on the social assistance system of the host Member State.
         
            
 The objection raised by the Irish and United Kingdom Governments that the condition concerning the availability of sufficient
         resources means that the person concerned must, in contrast to Catherine’s case, possess those resources personally and may
         not use for that purpose those of an accompanying family member, such as Mrs Chen, is unfounded.
         
            
 According to the very terms of Article 1(1) of Directive 90/364, it is sufficient for the nationals of Member States to ‘have’
         the necessary resources, and that provision lays down no requirement whatsoever as to their origin.
         
            
 The correctness of that interpretation is reinforced by the fact that provisions laying down a fundamental principle such
         as that of the free movement of persons must be interpreted broadly.
         
            
 Moreover, the limitations and conditions referred to in Article EC and laid down by Directive 90/are based on the idea
         that the exercise of the right of residence of citizens of the Union can be subordinated to the legitimate interests of the
         Member States. Thus, although, according to the fourth recital in the preamble to Directive 90/364, beneficiaries of the right
         of residence must not become an ‘unreasonable’ burden on the public finances of the host Member State, the Court nevertheless
         observed that those limitations and conditions must be applied in compliance with the limits imposed by Community law and
         in accordance with the principle of proportionality (see, in particular, Baumbast and R, paragraphs and 91).
         
            
 An interpretation of the condition concerning the sufficiency of resources within the meaning of Directive 90/364, in the
         terms suggested by the Irish and United Kingdom Governments would add to that condition, as formulated in that directive,
         a requirement as to the origin of the resources which, not being necessary for the attainment of the objective pursued, namely
         the protection of the public finances of the Member States, would constitute a disproportionate interference with the exercise
         of the fundamental right of freedom of movement and of residence upheld by Article EC.
         
            
 The United Kingdom Government contends, finally, that the appellants in the main proceedings are not entitled to rely on the
         Community provisions in question because Mrs Chen’s move to Northern Ireland with the aim of having her child acquire the
         nationality of another Member State constitutes an attempt improperly to exploit the provisions of Community law. The aims
         pursued by those Community provisions are not, in its view, served where a national of a non-member country wishing to reside
         in a Member State, without however moving or wishing to move from one Member State to another, arranges matters in such a
         way as to give birth to a child in a part of the host Member State to which another Member State applies its rules governing
         acquisition of nationality jure soli. It is, in their view, settled case-law that Member States are entitled to take measures to prevent individuals from improperly
         taking advantage of provisions of Community law or from attempting, under cover of the rights created by the Treaty, illegally
         to circumvent national legislation. That rule, which is in conformity with the principle that rights must not be abused, was
         in their view reaffirmed by the Court in its judgment in Case C-212/Centros [1999] ECR I‑1459.
         
            
 That argument must also be rejected.
         
            
 It is true that Mrs Chen admits that the purpose of her stay in the United Kingdom was to create a situation in which the
         child she was expecting would be able to acquire the nationality of another Member State in order thereafter to secure for
         her child and for herself a long-term right to reside in the United Kingdom.
         
            
 Nevertheless, under international law, it is for each Member State, having due regard to Community law, to lay down the conditions
         for the acquisition and loss of nationality (see, in particular, Case C-369/Micheletti and Others [1992] ECR I-4329, paragraph 10, and Case C-192/Kaur [2001] ECR I-1237, paragraph 19).
         
            
 None of the parties that submitted observations to the Court has questioned either the legality, or the fact, of Catherine’s
         acquisition of Irish nationality.
         
            
 Moreover, it is not permissible for a Member State to restrict the effects of the grant of the nationality of another Member
         State by imposing an additional condition for recognition of that nationality with a view to the exercise of the fundamental
         freedoms provided for in the Treaty (see, in particular, Micheletti, paragraph 10, and Garcia Avello, paragraph 28).
         
            
 However, that would be precisely what would happen if the United Kingdom were entitled to refuse nationals of other Member
         States, such as Catherine, the benefit of a fundamental freedom upheld by Community law merely because their nationality of
         a Member State was in fact acquired solely in order to secure a right of residence under Community law for a national of a
         non-member country.
         
            
 Accordingly, in circumstances like those of the main proceedings, Article EC and Directive 90/confer on a young minor
         who is a national of a Member State, is covered by appropriate sickness insurance and is in the care of a parent who is a
         third-country national having sufficient resources for that minor not to become a burden on the public finances of the host
         Member State, a right to reside for an indefinite period in that State.
         
The right of residence of a person in Mrs Chen’s situation
            
 Article 1(2)(b) of Directive 90/364, which guarantees ‘dependent’ relatives in the ascending line of the holder of the right
         of residence the right to install themselves with the holder of the right of residence, regardless of their nationality, cannot
         confer a right of residence on a national of a non-member country in Mrs Chen’s situation either by reason of the emotional
         bonds between mother and child or on the ground that the mother’s right to enter and reside in the United Kingdom is dependent
         on her child’s right of residence.
         
            
 According to the case-law of the Court, the status of ‘dependent’ member of the family of a holder of a right of residence
         is the result of a factual situation characterised by the fact that material support for the family member is provided by
         the holder of the right of residence (see, to that effect, in relation to Article of Regulation No 1612/68, Case 316/Lebon [1987] ECR 2811, paragraphs to 22).
         
            
 In circumstances such as those of the main proceedings, the position is exactly the opposite in that the holder of the right
         of residence is dependent on the national of a non-member country who is her carer and wishes to accompany her. In those circumstances,
         Mrs Chen cannot claim to be a ‘dependent’ relative of Catherine in the ascending line within the meaning of Directive 90/with a view to having the benefit of a right of residence in the United Kingdom.
         
            
 On the other hand, a refusal to allow the parent, whether a national of a Member State or a national of a non-member country,
         who is the carer of a child to whom Article EC and Directive 90/grant a right of residence, to reside with that child
         in the host Member State would deprive the child’s right of residence of any useful effect. It is clear that enjoyment by
         a young child of a right of residence necessarily implies that the child is entitled to be accompanied by the person who is
         his or her primary carer and accordingly that the carer must be in a position to reside with the child in the host Member
         State for the duration of such residence (see, mutatis mutandis, in relation to Article of Regulation No 1612/68, Baumbast and R, paragraphs to 75).
         
            
 For that reason alone, where, as in the main proceedings, Article EC and Directive 90/grant a right to reside for an
         indefinite period in the host Member State to a young minor who is a national of another Member State, those same provisions
         allow a parent who is that minor’s primary carer to reside with the child in the host Member State.
         
            
 The answer to be given to the national court must therefore be that, in circumstances like those of the main proceedings,
         Article EC and Directive 90/confer on a young minor who is a national of a Member State, is covered by appropriate
         sickness insurance and is in the care of a parent who is a third-country national having sufficient resources for that minor
         not to become a burden on the public finances of the host Member State, a right to reside for an indefinite period in that
         State. In such circumstances, those same provisions allow a parent who is that minor’s primary carer to reside with the child
         in the host Member State.
         
Costs
            
 Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
         
 On those grounds, the Court (sitting as a full Court) hereby rules:
         
 
1.
In circumstances like those of the main proceedings, Article EC and Council Directive 90/364/EEC of June on the
                     right of residence confer on a young minor who is a national of a Member State, is covered by appropriate sickness insurance
                     and is in the care of a parent who is a third-country national having sufficient resources for that minor not to become a
                     burden on the public finances of the host Member State, a right to reside for an indefinite period in that State. In such
                     circumstances, those same provisions allow a parent who is that minor’s primary carer to reside with the child in the host
                     Member State.
                  
Skouris
Jann
Timmermans
Rosas
Silva de Lapuerta
Lenaerts
Gulmann
Schintgen
Colneric
von Bahr
Cunha Rodrigues
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on October 2004.
         
Registrar
President
R. Grass
V. Skouris
 –
            
Language of the case: English.
Top  
 