
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Appeal — Competition — Regulation (EC) No 1/— Agreements, decisions and concerted practices — Calculation of the amount of the fine — Total turnover in the preceding business year)
In Case C‑90/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on February 2013,
1. garantovaná a.s., established in Bratislava (Slovakia), represented by K. Lasok QC, J. Holmes and B. Hartnett, Barristers, and by O.H. Geiss,
         Rechtsanwalt,
      
appellant,
the other party to the proceedings being:
European Commission, represented by T. Vecchi and N. Khan, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of R. Silva de Lapuerta (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, J.L. da Cruz Vilaça, G. Arestis, J.-C. Bonichot and
         A. Arabadjiev, Judges,
      
Advocate General: N. Wahl,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the written procedure,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By its appeal, 1. garantovaná a.s. seeks to have set aside the judgment of the General Court of the European Union in Case
         T‑392/1. garantovaná v Commission EU:T:2012:(‘the judgment under appeal’), by which that court dismissed its action for annulment of Commission Decision
         C(2009) final of July relating to a proceeding under Article [TFEU] and Article of the EEA Agreement (Case
         COMP/39.− Calcium carbide and magnesium based reagents for the steel and gas industries) (‘the contested decision’).
      
 Legal context
Article 23(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1/of December on the implementation of the rules on competition laid
         down in Articles [TFEU] and [TFEU] (OJ L 1, p. 1) (‘the regulation’) provides:
      
‘The Commission may by decision impose fines on undertakings and associations of undertakings where, either intentionally
         or negligently:
      
(a)      they infringe Article [TFEU] or Article [TFEU]; or
(b)      they contravene a decision ordering interim measures under Article 8; or
(c)      they fail to comply with a commitment made binding by a decision pursuant to Article 9.
For each undertaking and association of undertakings participating in the infringement, the fine shall not exceed 10% of its
         total turnover in the preceding business year.
      
Where the infringement of an association relates to the activities of its members, the fine shall not exceed 10% of the sum
         of the total turnover of each member active on the market affected by the infringement of the association.’
      
 Background to the dispute
In the judgment under appeal, the General Court summarised the factual background to the dispute before it as follows:
      
‘By [the contested decision], the Commission … found that the main suppliers of calcium carbide and magnesium for the steel
         and gas industries had infringed Article [101(1) TFEU] and Article of the Agreement on the European Economic Area (EEA)[,
         of May (OJ L 1, p. 3),] by participating in a single and continuous infringement from April until January
         2007. That infringement consisted of market-sharing, quota-fixing, customer-allocation, price-fixing and the exchange of sensitive
         commercial information relating to prices, customers and sales volumes in the EEA, with the exception of Ireland, Spain, Portugal
         and the United Kingdom.
      
The procedure was initiated following an application for immunity, within the meaning of the Commission notice on immunity
         from fines and reduction of fines in cartel cases (OJ C 45, p. 3), submitted by Akzo Nobel NV.
      
Novácke chemické závody, a.s. (“NCHZ”), established in Novaky (Slovakia), produces, inter alia, calcium carbide. During the
         period of the infringement, more than 70% of NCHZ was owned, directly or indirectly, by [1. garantovaná].
      
In Article 1(e) of the contested decision, the Commission found that NCHZ and [1. garantovaná] had participated in the infringement
         throughout its duration. Furthermore, in subparagraph (e) of the first paragraph of Article of that decision, the Commission
         imposed on [1. garantovaná] and NCHZ, jointly and severally, a fine of EUR 19.million.
      
For the reasons set out in recitals to to the contested decision, the Commission took the view that, during the period
         of the infringement, [1. garantovaná] exercised decisive influence over NCHZ’s business policy and that therefore [1. garantovaná]
         could be held liable for NCHZ’s illegal conduct.
      
In recitals and to the contested decision, the Commission set out the reasons why it had decided to use [1. garantovaná’s]
         turnover for instead of that for in order to determine the ceiling of 10% of turnover provided for in Article 23(2)
         of [the regulation].
      
Lastly, in recital to the contested decision, the Commission set out the reasons why it had decided to reject [1. garantovaná’s]
         request for account to be taken of its inability to pay …’
      
 Procedure before the General Court and the judgment under appeal
In its action for annulment of the contested decision before the General Court, 1. garantovaná had raised six pleas in law.
         By the judgment under appeal, the General Court rejected all those pleas in law.
      
 Forms of order sought by the parties before the Court of Justice
1. garantovaná claims that the Court should:
      
–        set aside the judgment under appeal in so far as it rejects the second plea in law relied on by 1. garantovaná in the action
         brought before the General Court;
      
–        declare that plea well founded;
–        reduce the amount of the fine to EUR 2.million, representing 10% of 1. garantovaná’s turnover in 2008, as stated in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, and
      
–        order the Commission to pay the costs.
The Commission contends that the Court should:
      
–        dismiss the appeal, and
–        order 1. garantovaná to pay the costs.
 The appeal
 Arguments of the parties
1. garantovaná argues that if the Commission has the data establishing total turnover in the business year preceding the contested
         decision, the Commission may not depart from the rule set out in the second subparagraph of Article 23(2) of the regulation,
         which is of a mandatory nature.
      
1. garantovaná observes that the Commission used turnover instead of that in 2008. It maintains that the considerations
         set out by the General Court in this connection, in paragraphs to and in paragraphs to of the judgment under
         appeal, are vitiated by errors and defects in reasoning.
      
In this connection, 1. garantovaná submits that the finding, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that an investment
         company is not a ‘pure financial investor’ and that it forms part of the same economic unit as another entity is irrelevant
         to the question whether or not a sale of assets is part of the normal economic activities of an investment company.
      
1. garantovaná also raises the point that the General Court, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, was wrong to hold
         that it was ‘difficult to understand’ why a special mandate was given to the board of directors by the general meeting. It
         submits that nothing in the judgment under appeal makes it possible to identify the reasons why the General Court came to
         that conclusion. In that respect, therefore, 1. garantovaná argues that the judgment under appeal is vitiated by a failure
         to state reasons.
      
1. garantovaná submits in addition that the General Court was not entitled to hold, in paragraph of the judgment under
         appeal, that it was not apparent from 1. garantovaná’s assertions or from the documents in the case that 1. garantovaná had
         acquired any shares in another company in 2008.
      
Finally, 1. garantovaná takes the view that paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal are confusing and that the
         General Court, particularly in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, misinterpreted the purport of certain decisions
         relating to the organisation of the company, thereby erring in its reasoning.
      
The Commission contends that none of the arguments put forward by 1. garantovaná in support of its ground of appeal can be
         accepted.
      
 Findings of the Court 
First of all, it must be pointed out that, under Article 23(2) of the regulation, for each undertaking and association of
         undertakings participating in the infringement, the fine must not exceed 10% of its total turnover in the preceding business
         year.
      
In determining the preceding business year, the Commission must assess, in each specific case and in the light of both its
         context and the objectives pursued by the scheme of penalties created by the regulation, the intended impact on the undertaking
         in question, taking into account in particular a turnover which reflects the undertaking’s real economic situation during
         the period in which the infringement was committed (see Case C‑76/P Britannia Alloys & Chemicals v Commission EU:C:2007:326, paragraph 25).
      
The Court has observed in relation to the concept of the preceding business year, in paragraph of Britannia Alloys & Chemicals v Commission (EU:C:2007:326), that, in certain situations, the turnover in question does not provide any useful indication as to the actual
         economic situation of the undertaking concerned and the appropriate level of fine to impose on that undertaking.
      
In such a situation, and as the Court made clear in paragraph of Britannia Alloys & Chemicals v Commission (EU:C:2007:326), the Commission is entitled to refer to another business year in order to be able to make a correct assessment
         of the financial resources of that undertaking and to ensure that the fine has a sufficient and proportionate deterrent effect.
      
1. garantovaná’s argument as to the ‘mandatory nature’ of Article 23(2) of the regulation must be dismissed at the outset,
         since the Court has by no means treated that provision as having such a nature. The argument that the Commission may not ‘derogate’
         from that provision must likewise be dismissed. The issue is not that of a power to derogate, but the determination of the
         relevant business year in the light of the factual circumstances of the case (see, to that effect, Britannia Alloys & Chemicals v Commission EU:C:2007:326, paragraphs 25, and 30).
      
So far as concerns paragraph of the judgment under appeal, first, the General Court could, without erring, take the view
         that the type of activity pursued by a company is relevant for the purposes of assessing whether specific conduct falls within
         that company’s normal commercial activity.
      
Secondly, it must be pointed out that in that paragraph, and contrary to what 1. garantovaná claims, the General Court made
         a finding of fact.
      
Such assessments, based on facts, cannot be called in question in an appeal. The argument put forward by 1. garantovaná must,
         therefore, be rejected as being inadmissible.
      
As regards paragraph of the judgment under appeal, it must be pointed out that, by its argument, 1. garantovaná merely
         calls in question the expression used by the General Court that it was ‘difficult to understand’ why a special mandate was
         given to the board of directors by the general meeting for the sale of assets, if such a sale was part of its ordinary commercial
         activity.
      
As 1. garantovaná infers from that observation a failure to state reasons, it should be pointed out that, by that statement,
         the General Court was seeking to draw attention to the fact that if the sale of assets by 1. garantovaná was part of its ordinary
         commercial activity, the grant of a special mandate to that effect to the board of directors would not have been necessary.
      
In so doing, the General Court came to an appropriate conclusion that is in no way vitiated by a failure to state reasons,
         and accordingly, the argument made must be rejected as being unfounded.
      
As regards paragraph of the judgment under appeal, it must be pointed out that the General Court made a finding based on
         the applicant’s own statements and the documents in the case concerning the activities carried on by 1. garantovaná in 2008.
      
Clearly, by its argument on that paragraph, 1. garantovaná is seeking to call in question findings of fact made by the General
         Court. Such an argument must be rejected as being inadmissible.
      
So far as concerns paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, the argument made by 1. garantovaná calls in question
         the General Court’s finding, in paragraph of the judgment, that the distribution of the funds obtained as a consequence
         of the sale of assets was an option that was ‘seriously contemplated’.
      
However, it has not been established in what way that observation by the General Court can be called ‘confusing’. In particular,
         there is no contradiction between that finding and that in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that the fate of 1. garantovaná
         was not going to be decided until the end of April 2009. That argument must therefore be rejected as being unfounded.
      
As regards paragraph of the judgment under appeal, it must be pointed out that the argument submitted derives from an
         incorrect reading of that paragraph. Contrary to what 1. garantovaná maintains, the General Court by no means held that 1. garantovaná’s
         conduct was not part of normal economic activities merely because of the significant drop in its turnover.
      
On the contrary, referring to the considerations set out in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, the General
         Court placed the sale of 1. garantovaná’s assets and the ‘very significant drop’ in its turnover in the context of its strategy
         and its commercial decisions.
      
It should be added in that regard that, as can be seen from paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, it was 1. garantovaná
         itself which indicated, in the course of the administrative procedure, that it was contemplating terminating its activities,
         in the form of a disposal of ‘all its assets’.
      
It is stated in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that, pursuant to the decision taken at its general meeting on
         June 2007, 1. garantovaná sold assets in and converted their value into cash. The General Court observed, in this
         connection, that that transaction enabled 1. garantovaná to give consideration to its dissolution and the distribution of
         its remaining assets to its shareholders, concluding that such conduct, which prompted a very significant drop in 1. garantovaná’s
         turnover between the year and the year 2008, did not form part of the normal economic activities of a commercial company.
         
      
1. garantovaná’s argument concerning paragraph of the judgment under appeal cannot, therefore, be accepted.
      
Lastly, 1. garantovaná raises the allegedly contradictory nature of paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, the
         General Court having assessed incorrectly the conduct of a company ‘in the process of terminating its activities’.
      
That argument is in fact directed at the General Court’s factual assessments, which cannot be called in question in an appeal.
         In any event, none of the considerations set out in those paragraphs supports the proposition that there was any contradiction
         in reasoning.
      
It follows that that last argument must be dismissed.
      
None of the arguments put forward by 1. garantovaná is capable, therefore, of supporting the ground of appeal raised.
      
It follows from all the foregoing considerations that the appeal must be dismissed as being in part inadmissible and in part
         unfounded.
      
 Costs
Under Article 184(2) of its Rules of Procedure, where an appeal is unfounded, the Court is to make a decision as to the costs.
         Under Article 138(1) of those rules, which apply to the procedure on appeal by virtue of Article 184(1) of those rules, the
         unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since
         1. garantovaná has been unsuccessful and the Commission has applied for costs, 1. garantovaná must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Dismisses the appeal;
2.      Orders 1. garantovaná a.s. to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 