
Case C-53/European Commission
v
Republic of Austria
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Article EC – Freedom of establishment – Civil-law notaries – Nationality condition – Article EC – Connection with the exercise of official authority – Directives 89/48/EEC and 2005/36/EC)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Freedom to provide services – Exceptions – Activities connected
            with the exercise of official authority – Activities of civil-law notaries – Not included – Nationality condition for access
            to the profession of civil-law notary – Not permissible
(Arts EC and 45, first para., EC)
2.        Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Subject-matter of the dispute – Determination during the procedure prior to the
            action – Adaptation following a change in European Union law – Lawfulness – Conditions
(Art. EC)
3.        Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Examination of the merits by the Court – Situation to be taken into consideration
            – Situation on expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion – Situation of uncertainty as a result of particular
            circumstances during the legislative procedure – No failure to fulfil obligations
(Arts EC, 45, first para., EC and EC; European Parliament and Council Directive 2005/36)
1.        A Member State fails to fulfil its obligations under Article EC if its legislation imposes a nationality condition for
         access to the profession of civil-law notary, where the activities entrusted to notaries in that Member State’s legal system
         are not connected with the exercise of official authority within the meaning of the first paragraph of Article EC. The
         first paragraph of Article EC is an exception to the fundamental rule of freedom of establishment which must be interpreted
         in a manner which limits its scope to what is strictly necessary to safeguard the interests it allows the Member States to
         protect. Moreover, the exception must be restricted to activities which in themselves are directly and specifically connected
         with the exercise of official authority.
      
To ascertain whether the activities entrusted to notaries involve a direct and specific connection with the exercise of official
         authority, account must be taken of the nature of the activities carried out by notaries. In this respect, the various activities
         performed by notaries do not involve a direct and specific connection with the exercise of official authority within the meaning
         of the first paragraph of Article EC, despite the significant legal effects of their acts, in so far as either the wishes
         of the parties or the supervision or decision of the court are of particular importance.
      
First, as regards authentic instruments, the only documents and agreements that are authenticated are those which the parties
         have freely entered into, whereas the notary cannot unilaterally alter the agreement he is called on to authenticate without
         first obtaining the consent of the parties. Furthermore, while the notary’s obligation of verification indeed pursues an objective
         in the public interest, the mere pursuit of that objective, however, can neither justify the powers necessary for that purpose
         being reserved exclusively to notaries who are nationals of the Member State concerned, nor be sufficient for an activity
         to be regarded as directly and specifically connected with the exercise of official authority.
      
Secondly, as regards enforceability, while the notary’s endorsement of the authority to enforce on the authentic instrument
         does give it enforceable status, that status is based on the intention of the parties to enter into a document or agreement,
         after its conformity with the law has been checked by the notary, and to make it enforceable. Similarly, the probative force
         of a notarial act derives from the rules on evidence and has no direct effect on whether the activity which includes the drawing
         up of the document is in itself directly and specifically connected with the exercise of official authority, especially as
         a notarial act does not unconditionally bind a court exercising its power of assessment, since the judge decides in accordance
         with his own firm conviction.
      
Nor is it possible to regard as directly and specifically connected with the exercise of official authority other activities
         entrusted to notaries, such as drawing up certain private documents and representing the parties in certain clearly defined
         cases, certain tasks in connection with the law of succession, such as recording the death, drawing up the inventory of the
         estate, identifying the heirs, conserving the estate, and taking measures for that purpose, those being tasks which are carried
         out under the supervision of the court. The same applies to other tasks entrusted to notaries, such as the valuation and sale
         of movable and immovable property, the drawing up of inventories, and the regulation of agreed divisions of property, as those
         tasks are also performed under the supervision of the court.
      
Finally, as regards the particular status of notaries, it follows, first, from the fact that the quality of the services provided
         may vary from one notary to another, depending in particular on their professional capabilities, that, within the geographical
         limits of their office, notaries practise their profession in conditions of competition, which is not characteristic of the
         exercise of official authority. Secondly, outside one particular case, the notary is solely liable for the actions carried
         out in his professional activity.
      
(see paras 81, 83-84, 86-87, 89-90, 93-95, 98-99, 101-106, 108, 110-113, 119)
2.        In an action for failure to fulfil obligations, although the claims as stated in the application cannot in principle be extended
         beyond the infringements alleged in the operative part of the reasoned opinion and in the letter of formal notice, the fact
         nevertheless remains that the Commission has standing to seek a declaration that a Member State has failed to fulfil obligations
         which were created in the original version of a European Union measure, subsequently amended or repealed, and which were maintained
         in force under the provisions of a new European Union measure. Conversely, the subject-matter of the dispute cannot be extended
         to obligations arising under new provisions which have no equivalent in the original version of the measure concerned, for
         otherwise it would constitute a breach of the essential procedural requirements of infringement proceedings.
      
(see para. 131)
3.        Where, during the legislative procedure, particular circumstances, such as the absence of a clear position on the part of
         the legislature or the lack of precision in the determination of the scope of a provision of European Union law, give rise
         to a situation of uncertainty, it is not possible to conclude that, at the close of the period prescribed in the reasoned
         opinion, there existed a sufficiently clear obligation for the Member States to transpose a directive.
      
(see paras 143-145)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Article EC – Freedom of establishment – Civil-law notaries – Nationality condition – Article EC – Connection with the exercise of official authority – Directives 89/48/EEC and 2005/36/EC)
In Case C‑53/08,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on February 2008,
European Commission, represented by G. Braun and H. Støvlbæk, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
supported by:
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, represented by S. Behzadi-Spencer, acting as Agent,
      
intervener,
v
Republic of Austria, represented by E. Riedl, M. Aufner and G. Holley, acting as Agents,
      
defendant,
supported by:
Czech Republic, represented by M. Smolek, acting as Agent,
      
Federal Republic of Germany, represented by M. Lumma and J. Kemper, acting as Agents,
      
French Republic, represented by G. de Bergues and B. Messmer, acting as Agents,
      
Republic of Latvia, represented by L. Ostrovska, K. Drēviņa and J. Barbale, acting as Agents,
      
Republic of Lithuania, represented by D. Kriaučiūnas and E. Matulionytė, acting as Agents,
      
Republic of Hungary, represented by R. Somssich, K. Veres and M. Fehér, acting as Agents,
      
Republic of Poland, represented by M. Dowgielewicz, C. Herma and D. Lutostańska, acting as Agents,
      
Republic of Slovenia, represented by V. Klemenc and Ž. Cilenšek Bončina, acting as Agents,
      
Slovak Republic, represented by J. Čorba, acting as Agent,
      
interveners,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, A. Tizzano, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, K. Lenaerts, J.‑C. Bonichot, A. Arabadjiev (Rapporteur)
         and J.‑J. Kasel, Presidents of Chambers, R. Silva de Lapuerta, E. Juhász, G. Arestis, M. Ilešič, C. Toader and M. Safjan,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Cruz Villalón,
Registrar: M.-A. Gaudissart, head of unit,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on April 2010,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application the Commission of the European Communities asks the Court to declare that, by imposing a nationality condition
         for access to the profession of civil-law notary and by failing to transpose for that profession Council Directive 89/48/EEC
         of December on a general system for the recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of professional
         education and training of at least three years’ duration (OJ L 19, p. 16), as amended by Directive 2001/19/EC of the
         European Parliament and of the Council of May (OJ L 206, p. 1) (‘Directive 89/48’), and/or Directive 2005/36/EC
         of the European Parliament and of the Council of September on the recognition of professional qualifications (OJ L 255, p. 22), the Republic of Austria has failed to fulfil its obligations under those directives and Articles EC and
         EC.
      
 Legal context
 European Union law
The 12th recital in the preamble to Directive 89/stated that ‘the general system for the recognition of higher-education
         diplomas is entirely without prejudice to the application of … Article [EC]’.
      
Article of Directive 89/read as follows:
      
‘This Directive shall apply to any national of a Member State wishing to pursue a regulated profession in a host Member State
         in a self-employed capacity or as an employed person.
      
This Directive shall not apply to professions which are the subject of a separate Directive establishing arrangements for
         the mutual recognition of diplomas by Member States.’
      
The profession of notary was not the subject of any legislation of the kind referred to in the second paragraph of Article
         2.
      
Directive 89/laid down a period for its transposition, which, in accordance with Article 12, expired on January 1991.
      
Directive 2005/repealed Directive 89/with effect from October 2007, pursuant to Article of Directive 2005/36.
      
Recital in the preamble to Directive 2005/reads as follows:
      
‘While maintaining, for the freedom of establishment, the principles and safeguards underlying the different systems for recognition
         in force, the rules of such systems should be improved in the light of experience. Moreover, the relevant directives have
         been amended on several occasions, and their provisions should be reorganised and rationalised by standardising the principles
         applicable. It is therefore necessary to replace [Directive 89/48].’
      
Recital in the preamble to that directive states :
      
‘The mechanism of recognition established by [Directive 89/48] remains unchanged. …’
According to recital in the preamble to the directive, the directive ‘is without prejudice to the application of Articles
         39(4) [EC] and [EC] concerning notably notaries.’
      
 National legislation
 General organisation of the profession of notary
In the Austrian legal system notaries practise as a liberal profession. The organisation of the profession of notary is governed
         by the Code of Notaries (Notariatsordnung) of July (RGBl. 75/1871), in the version of BGBl. I, 164/(‘the NO’).
      
Under Paragraph 1(1) of the NO, notaries are ‘appointed and accredited by the State to receive and issue … authentic instruments
         concerning legal declarations and legal transactions and facts from which rights may be derived [and] to keep safe the documents
         entrusted to them by the parties’.
      
Under Paragraph of the NO, notaries may exercise their powers throughout the Republic of Austria.
      
The number of notaries and their posts and official seats are determined by order of the Minister of Justice, as follows from
         Paragraph of the NO.
      
The fees of notaries are fixed in accordance with the Federal Law on notaries’ fees (Bundesgesetz über den Notariatstarif
         (Notariatstarifgesetz)) of November (BGBl. 576/1973), as amended, and the Federal Law on the fees of notaries as commissioners
         of the courts (Bundesgesetz über die Gebühren der Notare als Beauftragte des Gerichtes (Gerichtskommissionstarifgesetz)) of
         March (BGBl. 108/1971), as amended.
      
In accordance with Paragraph 6(1)(a), the office of notary may be held only by an Austrian national.
      
 Activities of notaries
The activities of notaries in the Austrian legal system may be divided into three categories.
      
In the first place, a notary has authority under Paragraph 1(1) of the NO to authenticate instruments and agreements. The
         intervention of the notary may be mandatory or optional, depending on the document he is to authenticate. By his intervention
         the notary confirms that all the conditions required by law for the drawing up of the document are satisfied, and that the
         parties have legal personality and capacity to enter into legal transactions.
      
A notarial act has probative force under Paragraph 292(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Gesetz über das gerichtliche Verfahren
         in bürgerlichen Rechtsstreitigkeiten (Zivilprozessordnung)) of August (RGBl. 113/1895), as amended (‘the ZPO’), which
         is in Part 2, Section 1, Title of the code, headed ‘Proof by documents’. Under that provision, authentic documents, that
         is, documents drawn up in due form by a person invested with public confidence within the activities assigned to him, are
         complete proof of what is attested by that person. Proof that the event or fact attested or the authentication is incorrect
         is admissible under Paragraph 292(2).
      
Paragraph of the ZPO lays down the principle that the court is unfettered in its assessment of the evidence.
      
Under Paragraph of the NO, a notarial act is enforceable if certain conditions are met, in particular the debtor’s submission
         to immediate enforcement.
      
In accordance with Paragraph of the Code of Enforcement (Gesetz über das Exekutions- und Sicherungsverfahren (Exekutionsordnung))
         of May (RGBl. Nr. 79/1896), as amended, the notarial acts mentioned in Paragraph of the NO are enforceable within
         the meaning of the Code of Enforcement.
      
It follows from the provisions of the Code of Enforcement, as amended, that a notary does not exercise functions in connection
         with enforcement.
      
In the second place, a notary is empowered under Paragraph of the NO to draw up private documents and to represent parties
         in certain proceedings exhaustively listed in that provision.
      
In the third place, a notary acting as a commissioner of the court (‘Gerichtskommissär’) carries out in certain non-contentious
         matters the activities listed in Paragraph 1(1) of the Federal Law on commissioners of the courts (Bundesgesetz über die Tätigkeit
         der Notare als Beauftragte des Gerichtes im Verfahren außer Streitsachen (Gerichtskommissärsgesetz)) of November (BGBl.
         343/1970), in the version of BGBl. I, 112/(‘the GKG’).
      
Those activities include various tasks of the law of succession for the purpose of dealing with successions, such as in particular
         recording the death, drawing up the inventory of the estate, identifying the heirs and receiving their declarations of acceptance
         of the inheritance, conserving the estate, and taking the necessary measures for that purpose.
      
The Federal Law on judicial proceedings in non-contentious matters (Bundesgesetz über das gerichtliche Verfahren in Rechtsangelegenheiten
         außer Streitsachen (Außerstreitgesetz)) (BGBl. I, 111/2003), as amended (‘the AußStrG’), lays down detailed rules in this
         respect. Thus, under Paragraph 144(3) of that law, the notary must immediately produce the document to the court if the court
         so requests or a judicial decision is necessary.
      
Also, in accordance with Paragraphs and of the AußStrG, in the event of contradictory declarations of acceptance of
         an inheritance, if no agreement can be reached the notary must refer the question to the court, which will examine the claims
         of the parties and the evidence they adduce and decide who is entitled to the inheritance.
      
Under Paragraph 166(2) of the AußStrG, disputes concerning whether an item belongs to the deceased’s estate are to be decided
         by the court.
      
Under Paragraphs and of the AußStrG, the court is to award the estate to the heirs, by means of an order.
      
Other tasks assigned to notaries under the GKG, outside the field of the law on succession, include the valuation and sale
         of movable and immovable property, the drawing up of inventories, and the conducting of agreed divisions of property.
      
Excluded from the notary’s powers, in accordance with Paragraph 1(2) of the GKG, are in particular the making of judicial
         decisions, the drawing up of statements of judicial settlements, and the imposition of coercive measures within the meaning
         of Paragraph of the AußStrG.
      
In accordance with Paragraph of the GKG, the notary must carry out the tasks described in paragraphs to above within
         the time-limits set by the court. If he fails to comply with the time-limits, the commission is withdrawn from him and another
         notary is appointed as commissioner in his place.
      
In accordance with Paragraph 7a of the GKG, the notary carries out the above tasks under the supervision of the court. In
         that respect the court may undertake the necessary investigations, ask the notary to report on his activity, and give him
         instructions. Under Paragraph 7a(2) of the GKG, challenges to measures taken by the notary or to his conduct must be brought
         before the court.
      
 The administrative procedure
A complaint was made to the Commission concerning the nationality condition for access to the profession of notary in Austria.
         After examining the complaint the Commission, by letter of November 2000, gave the Republic of Austria formal notice to
         submit its observations within two months on the compliance of the nationality condition with the first paragraph of Article
         EC and on the failure to transpose Directive 89/with respect to the profession of notary.
      
The Republic of Austria replied to the letter of formal notice by letter of January 2001.
      
The Commission sent the Republic of Austria a supplementary letter of formal notice on July 2002, complaining that it had
         failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC, the first paragraph of Article EC, and Directive 89/48.
      
The Republic of Austria replied to the supplementary letter of formal notice by letter of September 2002.
      
Since it was not persuaded by the arguments put forward by the Republic of Austria, the Commission on October sent
         it a reasoned opinion in which it concluded that that State had failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC, the
         first paragraph of Article EC, and Directive 89/48. The Commission invited the Republic of Austria to take the necessary
         steps to comply with the reasoned opinion within two months from its receipt.
      
By letter of December 2006, the Republic of Austria stated why it considered that the position adopted by the Commission
         was not well founded.
      
In those circumstances, the Commission decided to bring the present action.
      
 The action
 First head of claim
 Arguments of the parties
By its first head of claim, the Commission asks the Court to declare that, by reserving access to the profession of notary
         exclusively to its own nationals, the Republic of Austria has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC and the
         first paragraph of Article EC.
      
The Commission notes, as a preliminary point, that access to the profession of notary is not subject to any nationality condition
         in some Member States and that condition has been abolished in other Member States, such as the Kingdom of Spain, the Italian
         Republic and the Portuguese Republic.
      
It observes, in the first place, that Article EC is one of the fundamental provisions of European Union law which is intended
         to ensure that all nationals of Member States who establish themselves in another Member State, even if that establishment
         is only secondary, for the purpose of pursuing activities there as self-employed persons receive the same treatment as nationals
         of that State and prohibits any discrimination on grounds of nationality.
      
The Commission and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland submit that the first paragraph of Article EC must be given an autonomous and uniform interpretation (Case 147/Commission v Greece [1988] ECR 1637, paragraph 8). In that it lays down an exception to freedom of establishment for activities connected with
         the exercise of official authority, that article must moreover be interpreted strictly (Case 2/Reyners [1974] ECR 631, paragraph 43).
      
The exception under the first paragraph of Article EC must therefore be restricted to activities which in themselves involve
         a direct and specific connection with the exercise of official authority (Reyners, paragraphs and 45). According to the Commission, the concept of official authority implies the exercise of a decision-making
         power going beyond the ordinary law and taking the form of being able to act independently of, or even contrary to, the will
         of other subjects of law. Official authority manifests itself in particular, according to the Court’s case-law, in the exercise
         of powers of constraint (Case C‑114/Commission v Spain [1998] ECR I‑6717, paragraph 37).
      
In the view of the Commission and the United Kingdom, activities connected with the exercise of official authority must be
         distinguished from those carried out in the public interest. A number of professions are entrusted with special powers in
         the public interest, but do not for all that take part in the exercise of official authority.
      
The Commission and the United Kingdom also observe that the first paragraph of Article EC in principle refers to specific
         activities, not to an entire profession, unless the activities concerned are inseparable from the professional activity in
         question taken as a whole.
      
The Commission examines, in the second place, the various activities of notaries in the Austrian legal system.
      
First, as regards the authentication of documents and agreements, the Commission submits that the notary merely attests the
         wishes of the parties, after advising them, and gives legal effect to those wishes. In carrying out that activity, the notary
         has no decision-making powers with respect to the parties.
      
That function of authentication requires notaries to have a high level of professional competence and integrity but does not
         involve a direct and specific connection with the exercise of public authority. The fact that that activity is regarded in
         the Austrian legal system as part of the preventive administration of justice and is entrusted to notaries by the State in
         order to reduce the burden of work of the courts does not mean that the activity may be equated to a function of authority.
      
Moreover, many other tasks which were at one time regarded as functions of authority as have now been privatised or outsourced.
      
As regards the particular features of the rules of evidence regarding notarial acts, probative force similar to that of notarial
         acts is also enjoyed by other documents which do not fall within the exercise of official authority, such as statements drawn
         up by sworn field watchmen, forest rangers, gamekeepers and water bailiffs.
      
As regards the enforceability of authentic instruments, the Commission submits that the endorsement of a document with the
         authority to enforce precedes the enforcement proper and is not part of it. Enforceability does not therefore confer any power
         of constraint on notaries, since they are not enforcement officers. Moreover, any disputes that may arise will be decided
         not by the notary but by the court.
      
Secondly, as regards the activities of notaries acting as Gerichtskommissäre, the Commission submits that these cannot be
         regarded as connected with the exercise of official authority, as a notary does not have any decision-making or coercive power,
         that is, the power to impose a decision on a person against his will, in connection with those activities. In any case, those
         activities are preparatory and auxiliary to those of the courts. In addition, a Gerichtskommissär has no real discretion when
         adopting measures to conserve an estate.
      
Thirdly, the Commission, with the United Kingdom, submits that the provisions of European Union law that contain references
         to the activities of notaries do not prejudge the application of Article EC and the first paragraph of Article EC to
         those activities.
      
Both Article 1(5)(d) of Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of June on certain legal
         aspects of information society services, in particular electronic commerce, in the Internal Market (‘Directive on electronic
         commerce’) (OJ L 178, p. 1) and recital in the preamble to Directive 2005/exclude from their scope the activities
         of notaries only to the extent that they involve a direct and specific connection with the exercise of public authority. This
         is thus merely a reservation which has no effect on the interpretation of the first paragraph of Article EC. As to Article
         2(2)(1) of Directive 2006/123/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of December on services in the internal
         market (OJ L 376, p. 36), which excludes the activities of notaries from the scope of that directive, the Commission
         argues that the fact that the legislature chose to exclude a particular activity from the scope of that directive does not
         mean that the first paragraph of Article EC applies to that activity.
      
Council Regulation (EC) No 44/of December on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in
         civil and commercial matters (OJ L 12, p. 1) and Regulation (EC) No 805/of the European Parliament and of the Council
         of April creating a European Enforcement Order for uncontested claims (OJ L 143, p. 15) do no more, in the Commission’s
         submission, than require the Member States to recognise and make enforceable documents which have been formally drawn up or
         registered as authentic instruments and are enforceable in another Member State.
      
Council Regulation (EC) No 2157/of October on the Statute for a European company (SE) (OJ L 294, p. 1), Council
         Regulation (EC) No 1435/of July on the Statute for a European Cooperative Society (SCE) (OJ L 207, p. 1)
         and Directive 2005/56/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of October on cross-border mergers of limited
         liability companies (OJ L 310, p. 1) are not relevant to the outcome of the present case, since they merely confer on
         notaries, and on other competent authorities appointed by the State, the task of certifying that certain acts and formalities
         have been carried out before the transfer of the registered office and the creation and merger of companies.
      
The European Parliament Resolution of March on the legal professions and the general interest in the functioning of
         legal systems (OJ C E, p. 105, ‘the resolution’) is a purely political act, whose terms are ambiguous because
         in point the European Parliament asserts that Article EC must be applied to the profession of notary, while in point
         it reaffirms the position taken in its Resolution of January on the state and organisation of the profession of
         notary in the twelve Member States of the Community (OJ C 44, p. 36, ‘the resolution’), in which it expressed the
         wish that the nationality condition for access to the profession of notary laid down in the legislation of several Member
         States should be abolished.
      
The Commission and the United Kingdom further submit that Case C‑405/Colegio de Oficiales de la Marina Mercante Española [2003] ECR I‑10391, referred to by several Member States in their written observations, concerned the exercise by masters
         and chief mates of merchant ships of a wide range of functions in connection with the maintenance of safety, police powers,
         and authority in respect of notarial matters and the registration of births, marriages and deaths. The Court did not therefore
         have occasion to make a detailed examination of the various activities carried out by notaries from the point of view of the
         first paragraph of Article EC. Consequently, that judgment is not a sufficient basis for concluding that that provision
         applies to notaries.
      
Moreover, contrary to the submissions of the Republic of Austria, the Court’s case-law distinguishes notaries from public
         authorities by acknowledging that an authentic instrument may be drawn up by a public authority or any other authority empowered
         by the State (Case C‑260/Unibank [1999] ECR I‑3715, paragraphs and 21).
      
The Republic of Austria, supported by the Czech Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, the French Republic, the Republic
         of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak
         Republic, submits that the activities of notaries are connected with the exercise of official authority and therefore fall
         within the exception in the first paragraph of Article EC.
      
The Republic of Austria submits, first, that Article EC guarantees the right of the Member States to define freely the
         rules they wish to impose on access to professions connected permanently or occasionally with the exercise of official authority.
         In its view, the Commission’s interpretation of Article EC is founded on case-law of the Court that is not relevant in
         the present case. In Colegio de Oficiales de la Marina Mercante Española, by contrast, the Court held that the tasks entrusted to masters of Spanish ships in notarial matters were connected with
         the exercise of official authority.
      
The Republic of Austria, the Federal Republic of Germany, the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak
         Republic further submit that the exercise of official authority cannot be limited solely to activities involving the exercise
         of powers of coercion or to activities exercised by the courts. Other activities may also fall within the concept of the exercise
         of official authority if they are characterised in particular by the exercise of special powers.
      
Secondly, the special status of notaries in the Austrian legal system shows, according to the Republic of Austria, in particular
         through the procedure for appointing notaries and the rules under which notaries cannot be removed, are disqualified from
         certain offices, and are independent, that notaries exercise official authority. The Republic of Austria further submits that
         the profession of notary is a single profession and the various activities carried on by notaries cannot be separated from
         it.
      
Thirdly, the activities of authentication carried out by notaries are intended, according to the Republic of Austria, to resolve
         civil law claims or definitively rule them out and create an enforceable document. Notarial instruments can be contested only
         by judicial proceedings on strictly limited grounds.
      
Notarial instruments also have enhanced probative force which is binding on the courts when they exercise their powers of
         assessment. They are also enforceable. Both the enforcement procedure and the procedure leading to the establishment of an
         authority to enforce lie at the heart of the exercise of official authority by the State. It follows that the activity of
         notaries establishing authentic instruments is directly and specifically connected to the exercise of official authority.
      
Fourthly, as regards the activities carried out by notaries as Gerichtskommissäre, the Republic of Austria submits that a
         Gerichtskommissär conducts quasi-judicial proceedings in successions, in which he may, independently of the wishes of the
         parties or even against their wishes, have to take measures to conserve the estate, such as ordering residential and business
         premises to be closed, placing official seals on them, freezing or unfreezing bank accounts, taking into safekeeping and releasing
         assets, and various procedural measures.
      
The Republic of Austria also states that when a notary acts as a Gerichtskommissär he engages the liability of the State.
         He is also regarded as an official for the purposes of the criminal law.
      
Fifthly, the European Union acts mentioned in paragraphs to above place notarial instruments on the same level as judicial
         decisions. Moreover, the Parliament confirmed in its and resolutions that the profession of notary is connected
         with the exercise of official authority.
      
Similarly, it follows from Unibank that the establishment of authentic instruments by an office-holder such as a notary is directly and specifically connected
         with the exercise of official authority.
      
 Findings of the Court
–       Preliminary observations
By its first head of claim, the Commission complains that the Republic of Austria is blocking the establishment in its territory,
         for the purpose of practising as a notary, of nationals of other Member States by reserving access to that profession to its
         own nationals, in breach of Article EC.
      
This head of claim thus concerns solely the nationality condition laid down by the Austrian legislation at issue for access
         to that profession, from the point of view of Article 43.
      
Accordingly, it does not relate to the status and organisation of notaries in the Austrian legal system, nor to the conditions
         of access, other than that of nationality, to the profession of notary in that Member State.
      
Moreover, as the Commission stated at the hearing, the first head of claim does not concern the application of the provisions
         of the EC Treaty on the freedom to provide services. Nor does it relate to the Treaty provisions on freedom of movement for
         workers.
      
–       Substance
Article EC is one of the fundamental provisions of European Union law (see, to that effect, inter alia, Reyners, paragraph 43).
      
The concept of establishment within the meaning of that provision is a very broad one, allowing a national of the European
         Union to participate, on a stable and continuous basis, in the economic life of a Member State other than his State of origin
         and to profit therefrom, so contributing to economic and social interpenetration within the European Union in the sphere of
         activities of self-employed persons (see, inter alia, Case C‑161/Commission v Austria [2008] ECR I‑10671, paragraph 24).
      
The freedom of establishment conferred on nationals of one Member State in the territory of another Member State includes
         in particular access to and exercise of activities of self-employed persons under the same conditions as are laid down by
         the law of the Member State of establishment for its own nationals (see, inter alia, Case 270/Commission v France [1986] ECR 273, paragraph 13, and, to that effect, Commission v Austria, paragraph 27). In other words, Article EC prohibits the Member States from laying down in their laws conditions for the
         pursuit of activities by persons exercising their right of establishment there which differ from those laid down for its own
         nationals (Commission v Austria, paragraph 28).
      
Article EC is thus intended to ensure that all nationals of all Member States who establish themselves in another Member
         State for the purpose of pursuing activities there as self-employed persons receive the same treatment as nationals of that
         State, and it prohibits, as a restriction on freedom of establishment, any discrimination on grounds of nationality resulting
         from national legislation (Commission v France, paragraph 14).
      
In the present case, the national legislation at issue reserves access to the profession of notary to Austrian nationals,
         thus enshrining a difference in treatment on grounds of nationality which is prohibited in principle by Article EC.
      
The Republic of Austria submits, however, that the activities of notaries are outside the scope of Article EC because they
         are connected with the exercise of official authority within the meaning of the first paragraph of Article EC. The Court
         must therefore begin by examining the concept of the exercise of official authority within the meaning of that provision,
         before going on to ascertain whether the activities of notaries in the Austrian legal system fall within that concept.
      
As regards the concept of the ‘exercise of official authority’ within the meaning of the first paragraph of Article EC,
         the assessment of that concept must take account, in accordance with settled case-law, of the character as European Union
         law of the limits imposed by that provision on the permitted exceptions to the principle of freedom of establishment, so as
         to ensure that the effectiveness of the Treaty in the field of freedom of establishment is not frustrated by unilateral provisions
         of the Member States (see, to that effect, Reyners, paragraph 50; Commission v Greece, paragraph 8; and Case C‑438/Commission v Portugal [2009] ECR I‑10219, paragraph 35).
      
It is also settled case-law that the first paragraph of Article EC is an exception to the fundamental rule of freedom of
         establishment. As such, the exception must be interpreted in a manner which limits its scope to what is strictly necessary
         to safeguard the interests it allows the Member States to protect (Commission v Greece, paragraph 7; Commission v Spain, paragraph 34; Case C‑451/Servizi Ausiliari Dottori Commercialisti [2006] ECR I‑2941, paragraph 45; Case C‑393/Commission v Austria [2007] ECR I‑10195, paragraph 35; Case C‑404/Commission v Germany [2007] ECR I‑10239, paragraphs and 46; and Commission v Portugal, paragraph 34).
      
In addition, the Court has repeatedly held that the exception in the first paragraph of Article EC must be restricted to
         activities which in themselves are directly and specifically connected with the exercise of official authority (Reyners, paragraph 45; Case C‑42/Thijssen [1993] ECR I‑4047, paragraph 8; Commission v Spain, paragraph 35; Servizi Ausiliari Dottori Commercialisti, paragraph 46; Commission v Germany, paragraph 38; and Commission v Portugal, paragraph 36).
      
In this respect, the Court has had occasion to rule that the exception in the first paragraph of Article EC does not extend
         to certain activities that are auxiliary or preparatory to the exercise of official authority (see, to that effect, Thijssen, paragraph 22; Commission v Spain, paragraph 38; Servizi Ausiliari Dottori Commercialisti, paragraph 47; Commission v Germany, paragraph 38; and Commission v Portugal, paragraph 36), or to certain activities whose exercise, although involving contacts, even regular and organic, with the
         administrative or judicial authorities, or indeed cooperation, even compulsory, in their functioning, leaves their discretionary
         and decision-making powers intact (see, to that effect, Reyners, paragraphs and 53), or to certain activities which do not involve the exercise of decision-making powers (see, to that
         effect, Thijssen, paragraphs and 22; Case C‑393/Commission v Austria, paragraphs and 42; Commission v Germany, paragraphs and 44; and Commission v Portugal, paragraphs and 41), powers of constraint (see, to that effect, inter alia, Commission v Spain, paragraph 37) or powers of coercion (see, to that effect, Case C‑47/Anker and Others [2003] ECR I‑10447, paragraph 61, and Commission v Portugal, paragraph 44).
      
It must be ascertained in the light of the above considerations whether the activities entrusted to notaries in the Austrian
         legal system involve a direct and specific connection with the exercise of official authority.
      
Account must be taken of the nature of the activities carried out by the members of the profession at issue (see, to that
         effect, Thijssen, paragraph 9).
      
First, in order to draw up authentic instruments in due and proper form, the notary must ascertain that all the conditions
         required by law for drawing up the instrument are satisfied. Moreover, an authentic instrument has probative force and is
         enforceable.
      
It must be observed, in this respect, that the documents that may be authenticated under Austrian law are documents and agreements
         freely entered into by the parties. They decide themselves, within the limits laid down by law, the extent of their rights
         and obligations and choose freely the conditions which they wish to be subject to when they produce a document or agreement
         to the notary for authentication. The notary’s intervention thus presupposes the prior existence of an agreement or consensus
         of the parties.
      
Furthermore, the notary cannot unilaterally alter the agreement he is called on to authenticate without first obtaining the
         consent of the parties.
      
The activity of authentication entrusted to notaries does not therefore, as such, involve a direct and specific connection
         with the exercise of official authority within the meaning of the first paragraph of Article EC.
      
The fact that some documents and agreements are subject to mandatory authentication, in default of which they are void, cannot
         call that conclusion into question. It is normal for the validity of various documents to be subject, in national legal systems
         and in accordance with the rules laid down, to formal requirements or even compulsory validation procedures.
      
The obligation of notaries to ascertain, before carrying out the authentication of a document or agreement, that all the conditions
         required by law for drawing up that document or agreement have been satisfied and, if that is not the case, to refuse to perform
         the authentication cannot call that conclusion into question either.
      
It is true that, as the Republic of Austria observes, the notary’s verification of those facts pursues an objective in the
         public interest, namely to guarantee the lawfulness and legal certainty of documents entered into by individuals. However,
         the mere pursuit of that objective cannot justify the powers necessary for that purpose being reserved exclusively to notaries
         who are nationals of the Member State concerned.
      
Acting in pursuit of an objective in the public interest is not, in itself, sufficient for a particular activity to be regarded
         as directly and specifically connected with the exercise of official authority. It is not disputed that activities carried
         out in the context of various regulated professions frequently, in the national legal systems, involve an obligation for the
         persons concerned to pursue such an objective, without falling within the exercise of official authority.
      
However, the fact that notarial activities pursue objectives in the public interest, in particular to guarantee the lawfulness
         and legal certainty of documents entered into by individuals, constitutes an overriding reason in the public interest capable
         of justifying restrictions of Article EC deriving from the particular features of the activities of notaries, such as the
         restrictions which derive from the procedures by which they are appointed, the limitation of their numbers and their territorial
         jurisdiction, or the rules governing their remuneration, independence, disqualification from other offices and protection
         against removal, provided that those restrictions enable those objectives to be attained and are necessary for that purpose.
      
It is also true that a notary must refuse to authenticate a document or agreement which does not satisfy the conditions laid
         down by law, regardless of the wishes of the parties. However, following such a refusal, the parties remain free to remedy
         the unlawfulness, amend the conditions in the document or agreement, or abandon the document or agreement.
      
As to the probative force and the enforceability of notarial acts, these indisputably endow those acts with significant legal
         effects. However, the fact that an activity includes the drawing up of acts with such effects does not suffice for that activity
         to be regarded as directly and specifically connected with the exercise of official authority within the meaning of the first
         paragraph of Article EC.
      
Thus, in particular, as far as the probative force of notarial acts is concerned, it must be pointed out that that force derives
         from the rules on evidence laid down by law in the legal system in question. Paragraph of the ZPO, which defines the probative
         force of an authentic instrument, forms part of Part 2, Section 1, Title of that code, ‘Proof by documents’. The probative
         force conferred by law on a particular document thus has no direct effect on whether the activity which includes the drawing
         up of the document is in itself directly and specifically connected with the exercise of official authority, as required by
         the case-law (see, to that effect, Thijssen, paragraph 8, and Commission v Spain, paragraph 35).
      
Moreover, as follows in particular from Paragraph 292(2) of the ZPO, proof that the event or fact attested or the authentication
         is incorrect is admissible.
      
It cannot therefore be argued that a notarial act, because of its probative force, unconditionally binds a court exercising
         its power of assessment, since, as is not disputed, the judge decides in accordance with his own firm conviction in the light
         of all the facts and evidence collected in the judicial proceedings. The principle of the unfettered assessment of the evidence
         by the court is moreover laid down in Paragraph of the ZPO.
      
As regards the enforceable nature of an authentic instrument, it must be observed, as the Republic of Austria submits, that
         that enforceability enables the obligation embodied in the instrument to be enforced without the prior intervention of the
         court.
      
The enforceability of an authentic instrument does not, however, derive from powers possessed by the notary which are directly
         and specifically connected with the exercise of official authority. As follows from Paragraph of the NO, the enforceability
         of a notarial act is conditional in particular on the debtor’s agreement to submit to enforcement of the act with no prior
         proceedings being brought. It follows that the notarial act is not enforceable without the consent of the debtor. So, while
         the notary’s endorsement of the authority to enforce on the authentic instrument does give it enforceable status, that status
         is based on the intention of the parties to enter into a document or agreement, after its conformity with the law has been
         checked by the notary, and to make it enforceable.
      
Secondly, as regards the power of notaries to draw up private documents and represent the parties in certain clearly defined
         cases, it must be recalled that the legal advice and assistance provided by a notary, even if compulsory or the subject of
         a statutory monopoly, cannot be regarded as connected with the exercise of official authority (see, to that effect, Reyners, paragraph 52).
      
Thirdly, as regards the activities entrusted to notaries under the GKG, it must be noted that the notary’s function is primarily
         to carry out certain tasks in connection with the law of succession, such as recording the death, drawing up the inventory
         of the estate, identifying the heirs, conserving the estate, and taking measures for that purpose.
      
It is clear that the notary carries out those tasks under the supervision of the court, which may at any time request him
         to report on the state of progress, or indeed conduct an investigation in that respect, as follows from Paragraph 7a(1) of
         the GKG. Under Paragraph of that law, the court may also revoke the commission given to the notary if he has not completed
         his tasks within the time-limits prescribed. Furthermore, if the court so requests, the notary must immediately produce the
         document to the court, in accordance with Paragraph 144(3) of the AußStrG.
      
The notary must also refer to the court for a decision any objection to the various measures taken in connection with a succession,
         as follows in particular from Paragraphs 7a(2) of the GKG and Paragraphs 160, and 166(2) of the AußStrG. It is also for
         the court to award the estate to the heirs, pursuant to Paragraphs and of the AußStrG, and thus to bring the procedure
         to an end.
      
The tasks assigned to notaries in connection with the law of succession are thus performed under the supervision of the court,
         to which the notary must refer any disputes, and which moreover takes the final decision. Those tasks cannot therefore be
         regarded, as such, as directly and specifically connected with the exercise of official authority (see, to that effect, Thijssen, paragraph 21; Case C‑393/Commission v Austria, paragraphs and 42; Commission v Germany, paragraphs and 44; and Commission v Portugal, paragraphs and 41).
      
That conclusion is not affected by the fact that a notary can take various measures of conservation or organisation in connection
         with his functions concerning successions. That power is ancillary to the notary’s principal task of handling the succession,
         to which those measures are intended to contribute. As stated in the preceding paragraph, that task cannot be regarded as
         directly and specifically connected with the exercise of official authority.
      
The same applies to the other tasks entrusted to notaries under the GKG, such as the valuation and sale of movable and immovable
         property, the drawing up of inventories, and the regulation of agreed divisions of property, as those tasks are also performed
         under the supervision of the court, as follows from Paragraphs and 7a of the GKG.
      
Fourthly, as regards the particular status of notaries in the Austrian legal system, it need only be recalled that, as follows
         from paragraphs and above, it is by reference to the nature of the relevant activities themselves, not by reference
         to that status as such, that it must be ascertained whether those activities fall within the exception in the first paragraph
         of Article EC.
      
Two points must be made here, however. In the first place, it is not disputed that, apart from the cases in which a notary
         is appointed by law, every party can choose a notary freely. While notaries’ fees are indeed fixed by law, the quality of
         the services they provide may vary from one notary to another, depending in particular on their professional capabilities.
         It follows that, within the geographical limits of their office, notaries practise their profession, as the Advocate General
         observes in point of his Opinion, in conditions of competition, which is not characteristic of the exercise of official
         authority.
      
In the second place, the Republic of Austria cannot plead in response to the above considerations the fact that, where a notary
         acts as a Gerichtskommissär, he engages the liability of the State. Outside that particular case, the notary is solely liable
         for the actions carried out in his professional activity.
      
Fifthly, the argument which the Republic of Austria bases on certain European Union acts also fails to convince. As regards
         the acts mentioned in paragraph above, it must be stated that the fact that the legislature chose to exclude the activities
         of notaries from the scope of a particular measure does not mean that those activities necessarily fall within the exception
         in the first paragraph of Article EC. In the case of Directive 2005/in particular, the very wording of recital in
         the preamble to that directive, stating that the directive ‘is without prejudice to the application of [Article EC] concerning
         notably notaries’,  shows that the European Union legislature precisely did not adopt a position on the applicability of the
         first paragraph of Article EC to the profession of notary.
      
The regulations mentioned in paragraph above relate to the recognition and enforcement of authentic instruments formally
         drawn up or registered and enforceable in a Member State, and do not therefore affect the interpretation of the first paragraph
         of Article EC. Nor is that conclusion called into question by the European Union acts mentioned in paragraph above,
         in that, as the Commission rightly submits, they are confined to entrusting to notaries and to other competent authorities
         appointed by the State the task of certifying that certifying that certain acts and formalities have been carried out before
         the transfer of the registered office and the creation and merger of companies.
      
As to the and resolutions, mentioned in paragraph above, it is clear that they have no legal effect, since such
         resolutions are by nature not legally binding. Moreover, although they state that the profession of notary comes under Article
         EC, the Parliament specifically expressed the wish in the resolution that measures should be taken to abolish the
         nationality condition for access to the profession of notary, that position being implicitly confirmed again in the resolution.
      
Sixthly, as regards the argument which the Republic of Austria bases on Colegio de Oficiales de la Marina Mercante Española, it must be observed that that case concerned the interpretation of Article 39(4) EC, not the first paragraph of Article
         EC. Moreover, it follows from paragraph of that judgment that, when the Court held that the functions entrusted to masters
         and chief mates of ships were connected with the exercise of rights under powers conferred by public law, it was referring
         to the totality of the functions exercised by them. The Court thus did not examine the single notarial power conferred on
         masters and chief mates of ships, namely the power to receive, safeguard and dispatch wills, separately from their other powers,
         such as their powers of coercion and punishment.
      
As to the Unibank case, also relied on by the Republic of Austria, it is clear that that case had nothing to do with the interpretation of
         the first paragraph of Article EC. Moreover, the Court held, in paragraph of Unibank, that for a document to be an ‘authentic’ instrument within the meaning of Article of the Convention of September on jurisdiction and the enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters (OJ L 304, p. 36), the involvement of
         a public authority or any other authority empowered by the State of origin is necessary.
      
In those circumstances, it must be concluded that the activities of notaries as defined in the current state of the Austrian
         legal system are not connected with the exercise of official authority within the meaning of the first paragraph of Article
         EC.
      
Consequently, the nationality condition required by Austrian legislation for access to the profession of notary constitutes
         discrimination on grounds of nationality prohibited by Article EC.
      
In the light of all the above considerations, the first head of claim is well founded.
      
 Second head of claim
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission claims that the Republic of Austria has failed to transpose, as regards the profession of notary, Directive
         89/for the period up to October and Directive 2005/for the period from that date.
      
The Commission submits, as does the United Kingdom, that the profession of notary is a regulated profession within the meaning
         of Article 1(c) of Directive 89/and consequently falls within the scope of that directive. Recital in the preamble to
         Directive 2005/does not have the effect of excluding that profession from the scope of that directive unless the profession
         comes under the first paragraph of Article EC, which the Commission denies. Moreover, if the legislature had intended to
         exclude the profession of notary from the scope of Directive 2005/36, it would have done so expressly.
      
The Commission notes that Directives 89/and 2005/allow the Member States to prescribe an aptitude test or an adaptation
         period capable of ensuring the high level of qualifications required of notaries. In addition, the application of those directives
         does not have the effect of preventing the recruitment of notaries by means of competitions, but only of giving nationals
         of the other Member States access to those competitions. That application also has no effect on the procedure for appointing
         notaries.
      
The Republic of Austria, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic
         submit that notaries are excluded from the scope of those directives because their activity falls within the exception in
         Article EC.
      
The Republic of Slovenia argues that the Court should of its own motion reject the Commission’s second head of claim as inadmissible
         in that, first, it has become devoid of purpose since the repeal of Directive 89/and, secondly, the subject-matter of the
         dispute has been extended beyond what was determined in the administrative proceedings.
      
 Findings of the Court
–       Admissibility
The legal arguments put forward by the Commission show that this claim relates to the alleged failure to transpose Directive
         89/and/or Directive 2005/as regards the profession of notary. It must be noted, however, that both the letters of formal
         notice and the reasoned opinion of the Commission relate to the former directive. The Court must therefore examine of its
         own motion whether the second head of claim is admissible.
      
In accordance with its case-law, the Court may of its own motion examine whether the conditions laid down in Article EC
         for bringing an action for failure to fulfil obligations are satisfied (Case C‑362/Commission v Italy [1992] ECR I‑2353, paragraph 8, and Case C‑417/Commission v Greece [2004] ECR I‑7973, paragraph 16).
      
It is settled case-law that, in the context of proceedings under Article EC, the existence of a failure to fulfil obligations
         must be assessed in the light of the European Union legislation in force at the close of the period prescribed by the Commission
         for the Member State concerned to comply with its reasoned opinion (see, inter alia, Case C‑365/Commission v Italy [1999] ECR I‑7773, paragraph 32; Case C‑275/Commission v Belgium [2006] ECR I‑9883, paragraph 34; and Case C‑270/Commission v Germany [2009] ECR I‑1983, paragraph 49).
      
In the present case, that period ended on December 2006. On that date Directive 89/was still in force, since Directive
         2005/repealed it only with effect from October 2007. Consequently, in so far as the present claim is based on the alleged
         failure to transpose Directive 89/48, it is not devoid of purpose (see, by analogy, judgment of June in Case C‑327/Commission v France, paragraph 23).
      
As to the admissibility of the claim in so far as it concerns the alleged failure to transpose Directive 2005/36, it must
         be recalled that, as the Court has previously held, although the claims as stated in the application cannot in principle be
         extended beyond the infringements alleged in the operative part of the reasoned opinion and in the letter of formal notice,
         the fact nevertheless remains that the Commission has standing to seek a declaration that a Member State has failed to fulfil
         obligations which were created in the original version of a European Union measure, subsequently amended or repealed, and
         which were maintained in force under the provisions of a new European Union measure. Conversely, the subject-matter of the
         dispute cannot be extended to obligations arising under new provisions which have no equivalent in the original version of
         the measure concerned, for otherwise it would constitute a breach of the essential procedural requirements of infringement
         proceedings (see, to that effect, Case C‑365/Commission v Italy, paragraph 36; Case C‑363/Commission v Italy [2003] ECR I‑5767, paragraph 22; and Case C‑416/Commission v Greece [2009] ECR I‑7883, paragraph 28).
      
Consequently, the claims in the Commission’s application seeking a declaration that the Republic of Austria has failed to
         fulfil its obligations under Directive 2005/are in principle admissible, on condition that those obligations are analogous
         to those arising under Directive 89/(see, by analogy, Case C‑416/Commission v Greece, paragraph 29).
      
As appears from recital in the preamble to Directive 2005/36, while aiming to improve, reorganise and rationalise the existing
         provisions by standardising the principles applicable, that directive maintains, for freedom of establishment, the principles
         and safeguards underlying the different systems of recognition in force, such as those established by Directive 89/48.
      
Similarly, recital in the preamble to Directive 2005/states that the mechanism of recognition established inter alia
         by Directive 89/remains unchanged.
      
In the present case, the Commission’s complaint against the Republic of Austria relates, as far as the profession of notary
         is concerned, to the failure to transpose not a particular provision of Directive 2005/but that directive as a whole.
      
In those circumstances, the alleged obligation to transpose Directive 2005/as regards the profession of notary is analogous
         to that arising under Directive 89/in so far as the principles and safeguards underlying the system of recognition established
         by that directive are maintained in Directive 2005/and the mechanism of recognition established by Directive 89/remained
         unchanged after the adoption of Directive 2005/36.
      
This head of claim must therefore be regarded as admissible.
      
–       Substance
The Commission complains that the Republic of Austria has not transposed Directives 89/and 2005/with reference to the
         profession of notary. The Court must therefore examine whether those directives apply to that profession.
      
The legislative context of those directives must be taken into account here.
      
Thus it must be noted that the legislature expressly stated in the 12th recital in the preamble to Directive 89/that the
         general system for the recognition of higher education diplomas introduced by that directive is ‘entirely without prejudice
         to the application of … Article [EC]’. That reservation reflects the legislature’s intention to leave activities covered
         by the first paragraph of Article EC outside the scope of that directive.
      
At the time of adoption of that directive, the Court had not yet had occasion to rule on whether the activities of notaries
         were covered by the first paragraph of Article EC.
      
Over the years following the adoption of the directive, the Parliament, in its and resolutions mentioned in paragraphs
         and above, asserted on the one hand that the first paragraph of Article EC should be fully applied to the profession
         of notary as such, while expressing the wish on the other hand that the nationality condition for access to that profession
         should be abolished.
      
Moreover, when adopting Directive 2005/36, which replaced Directive 89/48, the European Union legislature was careful to state
         in recital in the preamble to the directive that it was without prejudice to the application of Article EC ‘concerning
         notably notaries’. As stated in paragraph above, by expressing that reservation the European Union legislature did not
         adopt a position on the applicability of the first paragraph of Article EC, and hence of Directive 2005/36, to the activities
         of notaries.
      
That is shown in particular by the legislative history of Directive 2005/36. In its legislative resolution on the proposal
         for a European Parliament and Council directive on the recognition of professional qualifications (OJ C 97E, p. 230),
         adopted on first reading on February 2004, the Parliament had proposed that it should be expressly stated in Directive
         2005/that it did not apply to notaries. Although that proposal was not taken up in the amended proposal for a Directive
         of the European Parliament and of the Council on the recognition of professional qualifications (COM(2004) final) or in
         Common Position (EC) No 10/of December adopted by the Council, acting in accordance with the procedure referred
         to in Article of the Treaty establishing the European Community, with a view to adopting a directive of the European Parliament
         and of the Council on the recognition of professional qualifications (OJ C 58E, p. 1), that was not because the proposed
         directive was to apply to the profession of notary but because, in particular, a ‘derogation from the principle of freedom
         of establishment and the freedom to provide services for activities that involve direct and specific participation in the
         exercise of official authority [was] provided for’ by the first paragraph of Article EC.
      
In view of the particular circumstances of the legislative procedure and the situation of uncertainty which resulted, as may
         be seen from the legislative context described above, it does not appear possible to conclude that, at the end of the period
         prescribed in the reasoned opinion, there existed a sufficiently clear obligation for the Member States to transpose Directives
         89/and 2005/with respect to the profession of notary.
      
The second head of claim must therefore be rejected.
      
In the light of all the foregoing considerations, it must be held that, by imposing a nationality condition for access to
         the profession of notary, the Republic of Austria has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC, and the action
         must be dismissed as to the remainder.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(3) of the Rules of Procedure, where each party succeeds on some and fails on other heads, the Court may order
         that the costs be shared or that the parties bear their own costs. Since the Commission’s application has been upheld only
         in part, each party must be ordered to bear its own costs.
      
Under the first subparagraph of Article 69(4) of the Rules of Procedure, Member States which intervene in the proceedings
         are to bear their own costs. The Czech Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, the French Republic, the Republic of Latvia,
         the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia, the Slovak Republic
         and the United Kingdom must therefore bear their own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby
1.      Declares that, by imposing a nationality condition for access to the profession of notary, the Republic of Austria has failed
            to fulfil its obligations under Article EC;
2.      Dismisses the action as the remainder;
3.      Orders the European Commission, the Republic of Austria, the Czech Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, the French Republic,
            the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia,
            the Slovak Republic and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to bear their own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 