
Order of the Court (Sixth Chamber) of June – RANI Slovakia v Hankook Tire Magyarország
(Case C‑298/09)
First subparagraph of Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure – Accession to the European Union – Freedom to provide services – Directive 96/71/EC – Posting of workers in the framework of the provision of services – Temporary employment undertaking – Requirement to have a head office in the territory of the Member State in which the services are supplied
1.                     Freedom to provide services – Provisions of the Treaty – Applicability to the new Member States – Hungary (Arts EC to EC; Act of Accession 2003, Arts 2, and 54) (see paras 37-39, operative part 1)
2.                     Freedom to provide services – Posting of workers in the framework of the provision of services – Directive 96/(European
            Parliament and Council Directive 96/71, Recital and Art. 1(4) (see paras 47-51, operative part 2)
3.                     Freedom to provide services – Restrictions – Temporary employment undertaking (Arts EC to EC) (see paras 56-58, operative
            part 3)
Re: 
Reference for a preliminary ruling – Fővárosi Bíróság – Interpretation of Article 3(c) EC, of Articles EC, EC and EC, and of Directive 96/71/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of December concerning the posting of
                  workers in the framework of the provision of services (OJ L 18, p. 1) – National legislation restricting the undertaking
                  of the activity of temporary employment undertakings to those undertakings established in national territory.
               
Operative part: 
1.
	Declares that Articles EC to EC cannot be interpreted as meaning that a Member State’s legislation concerning the activity
                     of temporary employment undertakings, in force at the time of accession of that State to the European Union, remains valid
                     so long as the Council of the European Union has not adopted a programme or directives for the purpose of implementing those
                     provisions, with a view to laying down the conditions for liberalisation of the category of supply of services in question.
                     
                  
2.
	Neither the 19th recital in the preamble to Directive 96/71/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of December
                     concerning the posting of workers in the framework of the provision of services nor Article 1(4) thereof can be interpreted
                     as meaning that a Member State may reserve the exercise of the activity of temporary employment undertaking to those undertakings
                     alone that have their head office in the territory of that Member State or may treat them more favourably with regard to authorisation
                     of the activity in question than undertakings established in another Member State. 
                  
3.
	Articles EC to EC must be interpreted as precluding legislation of a Member State, such as that at issue in the main
                     proceedings, that reserves the exercise of the activity of temporary employment undertaking to undertakings having their head
                     office in the territory of that Member State.
                  
Top  
 