
Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber) of November – Commission v Spain
(Case C‑94/08)
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Posts of ship’s captain and chief mate – Nationality clause
1.                     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Examination of the merits by the Court – Situation to be taken into consideration
            – Situation on expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion (Art. EC) (see para. 19)
2.                     Member States – Obligations – Failure to fulfil obligations – National system pleaded as justification – Not permissible (Art.
            EC) (see para. 21)
3.                     Freedom of movement for persons – Workers – National legislation reserving the posts of captain and chief mate on all vessels
            flying the flag of a Member State, other than merchant ships with a gross tonnage of less than GT which carry cargo or
            fewer than passengers, to nationals (Art. EC) (see para. 23, operative part)
Re: 
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Infringement of Article EC – Requirement of Spanish nationality for persons
                  occupying the posts of captain and chief mate on certain ships flying the Spanish flag – Incompatibility with Community law.
               
Operative part
The Court: 
1.
	Declares that in requiring in its legislation Spanish nationality for persons occupying the posts of ship’s captain and chief
                     mate of all vessels flying the Spanish flag other than merchant ships with a gross tonnage of less than GT, which carry
                     cargo or fewer than passengers and operate exclusively between ports or points situated in areas in which the Kingdom
                     of Spain has sovereignty, sovereign rights or jurisdiction, the Kingdom of Spain has failed to fulfil its obligations under
                     Community law and, in particular, under Article EC;
                  
2.
	Orders the Kingdom of Spain to pay the costs.
Top  
 