
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-338/Commission of the European Communities
v
Council of the European Union
(Directive 2001/44/EC – Choice of legal basis)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Acts of the institutions – Choice of legal basis – Criteria – Community measure pursuing a twofold purpose or having a twofold
            component – Reference to the main or predominant purpose or component – Inseparable objectives – Dual legal bases – Limit
            – Incompatibility of procedures – Procedures under Articles EC and EC, on the one hand, and under Article EC, on
            the other
(Arts EC, EC and EC)
2.        Approximation of laws – Article EC – Scope – Exclusion of ‘fiscal provisions’ – Concept – Arrangements for the collection
            of taxes – Included
(Art. 95(2) EC)
3.        Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Directive 2001/– Legal basis – Articles EC and EC
(Arts EC, EC and EC; Council Directive 2001/44)
1.        The choice of the legal basis for a Community measure must rest on objective factors amenable to judicial review, which include
         in particular the aim and the content of the measure.  If examination of a Community measure reveals that it pursues a twofold
         purpose or that it has a twofold component and if one of these is identifiable as the main or predominant purpose or component
         whereas the other is merely incidental, the act must be based on a single legal basis, namely that required by the main or
         predominant purpose or component.  By way of exception, if it is established that the measure simultaneously pursues several
         objectives which are inseparably linked without one being secondary and indirect in relation to the other, the measure must
         be founded on the corresponding legal bases.  No dual legal basis, however, is possible where the procedures laid down for
         each legal basis are incompatible with each other.  In that regard, the procedures set out under Articles EC and EC,
         on the one hand, and that set out under Article EC, on the other, mean that the latter article cannot be applied in conjunction
         with one of the other two articles mentioned above in order to serve as the legal basis for the adoption of a Community measure.
         Whereas unanimity is required for the adoption of a measure on the basis of Articles EC and EC, a qualified majority
         is sufficient for a measure to be capable of valid adoption on the basis of Article EC.  Thus, of the provisions cited
         above, Articles EC and EC alone may provide a valid dual legal basis for the adoption of a legal measure by the Council.
      
(see paras 54-58)
2.        The words ‘fiscal provisions’ contained in Article 95(2) EC, which excludes the application to such provisions of the procedure
         for the adoption of approximation measures which have as their object the establishment and functioning of the internal market,
         as provided for under Article 95(1) EC, must be interpreted as covering not only the provisions determining taxable persons,
         taxable transactions, the basis of imposition, and rates of and exemptions from direct and indirect taxes, but also those
         relating to arrangements for the collection of such taxes.
      
(see para. 67)
3.        The Council acted correctly in adopting Directive 2001/amending Directive 76/on mutual assistance for the recovery
         of certain claims on the basis of Article EC and Article EC, and not on the basis of Article EC.  Directive 2001/does in fact relate to ‘fiscal provisions’ within the meaning of Article 95(2) EC, with the result that Article EC cannot
         constitute the correct legal basis for the adoption of that directive.
      
(see paras 76-77)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)April 2004(1)
(Directive 2001/44/EC  –  Choice of legal basis)
 In Case C-338/01,
            
Commission of the European Communities, represented by R. Lyal, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg, 
            
applicant, supported byEuropean Parliament, represented by R. Passos and A. Baas, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg, 
            
intervener,
v
Council of the European Union, represented by M. Sims-Robertson and F. Florindo Gijón, acting as Agents, 
            
defendant, supported byIreland, represented by D. O'Hagan, acting as Agent, E. Fitzsimons SC, K. Maguire BL and D. Moloney BL, with an address for service
            in Luxembourg, 
            
by bybyGrand Duchy of Luxembourg, represented by J. Faltz, acting as Agent,
            
by bybyPortuguese Republic, represented by L. Fernandes, V. Guimarães and Â. Seiça Neves, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
            
and by and byand byUnited Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, represented by J.E. Collins, acting as Agent, and D. Wyatt QC, with an address for service in Luxembourg, 
            
interveners,
 APPLICATION for the annulment of Council Directive 2001/44/EC of June amending Directive 76/308/EEC on mutual assistance
            for the recovery of claims resulting from operations forming part of the system of financing the European Agricultural Guidance
            and Guarantee Fund, and of agricultural levies and customs duties and in respect of value added tax and certain excise duties
            (OJ L 175, p. 17) and for the maintenance of the effects of that directive until the entry into force of a directive
            adopted on the correct legal basis,
            
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
 composed of: C. Gulmann, acting for the President of the Sixth Chamber, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, J.-P. Puissochet, R. Schintgen
            (Rapporteur) and F. Macken, Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: S. Alber, Registrar: R. Grass,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By application lodged at the Court Registry on September 2001, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         under the first paragraph of Article EC for the annulment of Council Directive 2001/44/EC of June amending Directive
         76/308/EEC on mutual assistance for the recovery of claims resulting from operations forming part of the system of financing
         the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund, and of agricultural levies and customs duties and in respect of value
         added tax and certain excise duties (OJ L 175, p. 17) and for maintenance of the effects of that directive until the
         entry into force of a directive adopted on the correct legal basis.
         
Background to the dispute and legal framework
            
 Council Directive 76/308/EEC of March on mutual assistance for the recovery of claims resulting from operations forming
         part of the system of financing the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund, and of the agricultural levies and
         customs duties (OJ L 73, p. 18) was adopted on the basis of Article of the EEC Treaty (after amendment, Article of the EC Treaty, which in turn became Article EC).
         
            
 Council Directive 79/1071/EEC of December amending Directive 76/(OJ L 331, p. 10) broadened the scope of Directive
         76/by extending it to claims relating to value added tax (‘VAT’). In view of the fact that this directive dealt with indirect
         taxation, it was adopted on the basis of Articles of the EEC Treaty (after amendment, Article of the EC Treaty, which
         in turn became Article EC) and of the Treaty.
         
            
 Council Directive 92/12/EEC of February on the general arrangements for products subject to excise duty and on the
         holding, movement and monitoring of such products (OJ L 76, p. 1), as amended by Council Directive 92/108/EEC of December
         (OJ L 390, p. 124) (‘Directive 92/12’), once again enlarged the scope of Directive 76/by extending it to cover
         claims relating to harmonised excise duties. Directive 92/was also based on Article of the EEC Treaty.
         
            
 The first four recitals in the preamble to Directive 2001/provide:
         
‘(1)
The existing arrangements for mutual assistance for recovery set out in Directive 76/... should be modified to meet the
               threat to the financial interests of the Community and the Member States and to the internal market posed by the development
               of fraud.
            
(2) 
In the context of the internal market, Community and national financial interests, which are increasingly threatened by fraud,
               must be protected so as to safeguard better the competitiveness and fiscal neutrality of the internal market.
            
(3)
In order to safeguard better the financial interests of the Member States and the neutrality of the internal market, claims
               relating to certain taxes on income and capital and taxes on insurance premiums should be added to the scope of the mutual
               assistance provided for by Directive 76/308/EEC.
            
(4)
In order to permit more efficient and effective recovery of claims in respect of which a request for recovery has been made,
               the instrument permitting enforcement of the claim should, in principle, be treated as an instrument of the Member State in
               which the requested authority is situated.’
            
            
 Article of Directive 76/308, as amended by Directive 2001/(‘Directive 76/308’), provides:
         ‘This Directive shall apply to all claims relating to:
         
(a)
refunds, interventions and other measures forming part of the system of total or partial financing of the European Agricultural
               Guidance and Guarantee Fund (EAGGF), including sums to be collected in connection with these actions;
            
(b)
levies and other duties provided for under the common organisation of the market for the sugar sector;
(c)
import duties; 
(d)
export duties; 
(e)
value added tax; 
(f)
excise duties on:
–
manufactured tobacco,
–
alcohol and alcoholic beverages,
–
mineral oils;
(g)
taxes on income and capital;
(h)
taxes on insurance premiums;
(i)
interest, administrative penalties and fines, and costs incidental to the claims referred to in points (a) to (h), with the
               exclusion of any sanction of a criminal nature as determined by the laws in force in the Member State in which the requested
               authority is situated.’
            
            
 Article of Directive 76/provides:
         ‘1.     The request for recovery of a claim which the applicant authority addresses to the requested authority must be accompanied
         by an official or certified copy of the instrument permitting its enforcement, issued in the Member State in which the applicant
         authority is situated and, if appropriate, by the original or a certified copy of other documents necessary for recovery.
          2.       The applicant authority may not make a request for recovery unless:
         
(a)
the claim and/or the instrument permitting its enforcement are not contested in the Member State in which it is situated,
               except in cases where the second subparagraph of Article 12(2) is applied,
            
(b)
it has, in the Member State in which it is situated, applied appropriate recovery procedures available to it on the basis
               of the instrument referred to in paragraph 1, and the measures taken will not result in the payment in full of the claim.
            
 3.       The request for recovery shall indicate:
         
(a)
the name, address and any other relevant information relating to the identification of the person concerned and/or to the
               third party holding his or her assets;
            
(b)
the name, address and any other relevant information relating to the identification of the applicant authority;
(c)
a reference to the instrument permitting its enforcement issued in the Member State in which the applicant authority is situated;
(d)
the nature and the amount of the claim, including the principal, the interest, and any other penalties, fines and costs due
               indicated in the currencies of the Member States in which both authorities are situated;
            
(e)
the date of notification of the instrument to the addressee by the applicant authority and/or by the requested authority;
(f)
the date from which and the period during which enforcement is possible under the laws in force in the Member State in which
               the applicant authority is situated;
            
(g)
any other relevant information.
 4.       The request for recovery shall also contain a declaration by the applicant authority confirming that the conditions set out
         in paragraph have been fulfilled.
          5.       As soon as any relevant information relating to the matter which gave rise to the request for recovery comes to the knowledge
         of the applicant authority it shall forward it to the requested authority.’
         
            
 Article of Directive 76/is worded as follows:
         ‘1.     The instrument permitting enforcement of the claim shall be directly recognised and automatically treated as an instrument
         permitting enforcement of a claim of the Member State in which the requested authority is situated.
          2.       Notwithstanding the first paragraph, the instrument permitting enforcement of the claim may, where appropriate and in accordance
         with the provisions in force in the Member State in which the requested authority is situated, be accepted as, recognised
         as, supplemented with, or replaced by an instrument authorising enforcement in the territory of that Member State.
          Within three months of the date of receipt of the request for recovery, Member States shall endeavour to complete such acceptance,
         recognition, supplementing or replacement, except in cases where the third subparagraph is applied. They may not be refused
         if the instrument permitting enforcement is properly drawn up. The requested authority shall inform the applicant authority
         of the grounds for exceeding the period of three months.
          If any of these formalities should give rise to contestation in connection with the claim and/or the instrument permitting
         enforcement issued by the applicant authority, Article shall apply.’
         
            
 Article 9(2) of Directive 76/provides as follows:
         ‘The requested authority may, where the laws, regulations or administrative provisions in force in the Member State in which
         it is situated so permit, and after consultations with the applicant authority, allow the debtor time to pay or authorise
         payment by instalment. Any interest charged by the requested authority in respect of such extra time to pay shall also be
         remitted to the Member State in which the applicant authority is situated.
          From the date on which the instrument permitting enforcement of recovery of the claim has been directly recognised or accepted,
         recognised, supplemented or replaced in accordance with Article 8, interest will be charged for late payment under the laws,
         regulations and administrative provisions in force in the Member State in which the requested authority is situated and shall
         also be remitted to the Member State in which the applicant authority is situated.’
         
            
 Article of Directive 76/provides:
         ‘Notwithstanding Article 6(2), the claims to be recovered shall not necessarily benefit from the privileges accorded to similar
         claims arising in the Member State in which the requested authority is situated.’
         
            
 Article 12(2) of Directive 76/reads as follows:
         ‘As soon as the requested authority has received the notification referred to in paragraph either from the applicant authority
         or from the interested party, it shall suspend the enforcement procedure pending the decision of the body competent in the
         matter. Should the requested authority deem it necessary, and without prejudice to Article 13, that authority may take precautionary
         measures to guarantee recovery in so far as the laws or regulations in force in the Member State in which it is situated allow
         such action for similar claims, unless the applicant authority requests otherwise in accordance with the second subparagraph.
          Notwithstanding the first subparagraph of paragraph 2, the applicant authority may, in accordance with the law[s], regulations
         and administrative practices in force in the Member State in which it is situated, request the requested authority to recover
         a contested claim, in so far as the relevant laws, regulations and administrative practices in force in the Member State in
         which the requested authority is situated allow such action. If the result of contestation is subsequently favourable to the
         debtor, the applicant authority shall be liable for the reimbursement of any sums recovered, together with any compensation
         due, in accordance with the laws in force in the Member State in which the requested authority is situated.’
         
            
 Directive 2001/resulted from a procedure which the Commission initiated when it submitted, on June 1998, a proposal
         for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 76/(OJ C 269, p. 16). That proposal, which envisaged
         extending the scope of Directive 76/to certain direct taxes and was also to have a bearing on the procedure for the recovery
         of the taxes and charges covered by Directive 76/308, was based on Article 100a of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article
         EC).
         
            
 Following the opinion of the European Parliament, the Commission, on May 1999, submitted a new proposal for a European
         Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 76/(OJ C 179, p. 6) which took account of a number of the modifications
         which the Parliament had proposed. This proposed text was also based on Article EC.
         
            
 As it took the view, however, that this proposal related to fiscal matters, the Council of the European Union adopted Directive
         2001/on the basis of Articles EC and EC.
         
            
 Being satisfied that Directive 2001/ought to have been adopted on the basis of Article EC, the Commission brought the
         present action for annulment.
         
            
 By order of the President of the Court of January 2002, the Parliament was granted leave to intervene in support of the
         form of order sought by the Commission, while leave was granted to Ireland, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the Portuguese
         Republic and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to intervene in support of the form of order sought
         by the Council.
         
The actionArguments of the parties
            
 The Commission submits at the outset that Directive 2001/could be adopted only on the basis of Articles EC and EC
         or on that of Article EC. Contrary to what the Council argues, it would have been impossible to base that directive on
         both Article EC and Article EC. According to the judgment in Case C‑300/Commission v Council [1991] ECR I-2867, paragraph (hereinafter ‘the titanium dioxide judgment’), such a dual basis is not possible where the procedures provided for each legal basis are incompatible.
         
            
 So far as the purpose of Directive 2001/is concerned, the Commission submits that it is common ground that the measures
         introduced by that directive are necessary for the establishment of the internal market. In the Commission’s view, it follows
         clearly from the preamble to Directive 76/and from the preambles to the various amending directives which successively
         extended its scope, including Directive 2001/44, that the objective pursued by those directives was to make it possible to
         recover claims in a Member State on the basis of instruments originating in another Member State, thereby removing barriers
         to cross-border economic activities. The Commission contends that those directives therefore clearly seek to bring about the
         internal market.
         
            
 That being so, the choice of Article EC as the legal basis for the adoption of Directive 2001/was necessary, unless
         the view is to be taken that the amendments which it made to Directive 76/relate to fiscal provisions, in which case that
         choice would come up against the prohibition laid down in Article 95(2) EC. In view, however, of the fact that Article 95(2) EC
         constitutes an exception to the principle set out in Article 95(1) EC, it should be narrowly construed and its application
         restricted to what is necessary for the attainment of its objectives, such as the protection of Member States’ sovereignty
         in matters relating to taxation.
         
            
 Directive 2001/respects that sovereignty in so far as it does not relate to ‘fiscal provisions’ within the meaning of Article
         95(2) EC. That notion refers solely to the substantive provisions determining taxable persons, taxable events, basis of taxation,
         rates and exemptions, together with the detailed rules for the assessment and enforcement of tax claims. Directive 2001/has no effect whatever on these national provisions in view of the fact that the mutual assistance to which it seeks to give
         effect can take place without harmonisation or approximation of national rules on taxation. While Directive 2001/does,
         admittedly, extend the mechanisms of Directive 76/308, in particular, to certain direct taxes and introduces changes to the
         information which must be notified, the substantive tax law of the different Member States is not affected.
         
            
 The Commission notes in particular in this regard that the new version of Article 9(2) of Directive 76/does not affect
         the national provisions concerning payment periods or ‘fines’.
         
            
 The Commission adds that, in any event, as demonstrated by a large number of measures adopted on the basis of Article EC,
         the fact that a measure has a link with taxation does not suffice to bring it within the scope of the prohibition laid down
         in Article 95(2) EC.
         
            
 The Parliament takes the view that the position adopted by the Commission is in line with the established case-law to the
         effect that the choice of the correct legal basis for a measure must rest on objective factors such as the purpose and content
         of that measure. As different legal bases may be incompatible by reason of the decision-making procedures which they involve,
         it is necessary, in order to define the correct legal basis, to refer to the ‘centre of gravity’ of the measure to be adopted
         (see Case C‑42/Parliament  v Council [1999] ECR I-869, paragraph 43).
         
            
 The purpose of Directive 2001/44, it argues, is to protect the financial interests of the Community and the Member States,
         to combat fraud and to safeguard the fiscal neutrality of the internal market. As the fight against fraud is an important,
         but not essential, element of the directive, it was not necessary to use Article EC as the legal basis.
         
            
 The Parliament submits further that, even if the term ‘fiscal provisions’ in Article 95(2) EC were to be construed as referring
         to provisions dealing with the arrangements for the payment and recovery of taxes, such wording does not preclude Directive
         2001/from being adopted on the basis of Article EC. Directive 2001/does not contain any provision relating to national
         provisions on the collection and recovery of the claims here in issue and merely prescribes ‘national treatment’ for foreign
         claims. The various elements which the Council treats as being covered by the term ‘fiscal provisions’ continue to be governed
         by national law and Directive 2001/does not harmonise them.
         
            
 The Parliament adds that Article EC must be construed as being a derogation from Article EC and that the latter cannot
         therefore constitute a proper legal basis for the adoption of Directive 2001/44. Article EC, for its part, cannot be chosen
         as a legal basis by virtue of the fact that Directive 2001/does not aim to harmonise indirect taxation within the meaning
         of that article. Finally, Article 95(2) EC cannot apply on the ground that Directive 2001/does not introduce any fiscal
         provision. Article EC alone is therefore the correct legal basis for the adoption of Directive 2001/44.
         
            
 That conclusion cannot be brought into question by the fact that some of the claims covered by Directive 2001/are fiscal
         in nature. The ‘centre of gravity’ of that directive is clearly the establishment and operation of the internal market, a
         fact which calls for the choice of Article EC as the legal basis.
         
            
 The Council begins by submitting that, contrary to what the Commission asserts, the possible correct legal bases for the adoption
         of Directive 2001/are not limited to either Articles EC and EC or Article EC. There is, for instance, nothing
         to preclude the choice of Articles EC and EC as a legal basis in view of the fact that the Court has already admitted
         the possibility of a dual legal basis requiring a decision by the Council by qualified majority and unanimity (Case 165/Commission v Council [1988] ECR 5545).
         
            
 The Council goes on to point out that the Court has consistently held that the choice of the legal basis for a measure must
         be founded on objective factors which are amenable to judicial review. Those factors include, in particular, the aim and content
         of the measure. Furthermore, the fact that an institution wishes to participate more fully in the adoption of a given measure
         has no bearing on that choice.
         
            
 So far as the purpose of Directive 2001/is concerned, the Council states that it follows from the recitals in the preamble
         to that directive that this is to protect the financial interests of the Community and the Member States, as well as better
         to safeguard the competitiveness and fiscal neutrality of the internal market and limit the risk of fraud. It also follows
         from the Commission’s proposal for a directive of June that the directive forms part of the Community strategy of
         building up non-distortionary and Single-Market-oriented tax systems, as set out in the Commission communication entitled
         ‘Taxation in the European Union’ (COM/96/final).
         
            
 With regard to the content of Directive 2001/44, the Council argues that its provisions set out the procedure to be followed
         by the Member States respectively requesting and providing assistance in relation to a claim to collect the money owed and
         define the legal standing of the debtor throughout this procedure. Directive 2001/deals specifically with the privileges
         which may be accorded to the claim, the recourses available to the debtor, the recovering of costs incurred by the Member
         States from the debtor and the sharing of funds between the Member States concerned. As Directive 2001/applies those rules
         to claims relating to taxes on income and capital and to taxes on insurance premiums, it applies in both the area of direct
         taxation and that of indirect taxation.
         
            
 Finally, in regard to the legal bases capable of being used for adopting measures relating to such taxes, the Council submits,
         first, that, contrary to what the Commission argues, the procedure laid down in Article 95(1) EC cannot be regarded as the
         ‘normal’ procedure for the adoption of measures intended to complete the internal market.
         
            
 Second, the Council notes that the Court has consistently held that, where there is a specific legal basis, this should form
         the basis of the measure to be adopted (Case C-271/Parliament v Council [1996] ECR I-1689). As Articles EC and EC clearly relate to the adoption of measures within the area of taxation, they
         are specific provisions in contrast to Article EC.
         
            
 With more specific reference to the correct legal basis for the adoption of Directive 2001/44, the Council contends that,
         as that directive deals with the harmonisation of legislation concerning turnover taxes, excise duties and other forms of
         indirect taxation by establishing common rules for the collection of such taxes and duties, Article EC alone can constitute
         a valid legal basis. As it follows from the Court's case-law that provisions dealing with the collection of taxes and with
         the penalties imposed for offences relating to the payment of VAT form part of the internal taxation of Member States (see
         Case 55/Commission v Ireland [1980] ECR and Case 299/Drexl [1988] ECR 1213), provisions such as those introduced by Directive 2001/also form part of the internal taxation of the
         Member States. 
         
            
 With regard to the extension of the scope of Directive 76/to claims relating to certain direct taxes, the Council submits
         that it is precisely this extension which meant that Article 95(1) EC could no longer be treated as constituting an appropriate
         legal basis for the adoption of Directive 2001/44, as Article 95(2) EC states that paragraph (1) may not apply to ‘fiscal
         provisions’.
         
            
‘Fiscal provisions’ within the meaning of Article 95(2) EC must be understood as meaning any measure regulating public revenue,
         covering not only the definition and description of taxes but also the manner in which taxes are assessed and collected. The
         word ‘fiscal’ refers to the notion of public revenue. In referring to ‘tax provisions’, the English version of the title of
         Chapter of Title VI of Part Three of the Treaty emphasises the compulsory nature of such public revenue. This idea of compulsion,
         linked to the very special privileges and powers which Member States enjoy to assess and collect fiscal revenues, is an important
         characteristic of taxes or fiscal charges and is more clearly embodied in the word ‘fiscal’ as used in other language versions.
         The expression ‘fiscal law’ in principle comprises the law dealing with the structure of taxes, their assessment and their
         collection. The interpretation of Article 95(2) EC must take this into account and the prohibition set out therein thus covers
         all provisions relating to the structure, assessment and collection of the taxes in question.
         
            
 Contrary to the Commission’s argument, there is nothing in the wording of Article 95(2) EC to suggest that the term ‘fiscal
         provisions’ should be interpreted restrictively. Nor can the choice of legal basis be made to depend on the degree to which
         the measure to be adopted impinges on the sovereignty of Member States, as such an approach would be dependent on political
         assessments, something which would be at variance with the system of the attribution of powers within the Community and with
         the principle of legal certainty. Finally, the provisions of Directive 2001/do not foresee a diffuse cooperation or verification
         among administrative authorities aimed at serving purely national interests but rather are designed to regulate the manner
         in which Member States collect their fiscal revenues and apply their fiscal provisions with a view to eliminating the disparities
         in this regard in conditions of competition.
         
            
 The Council also points out that, even though the Court has ruled that a mere practice cannot derogate from the rules laid
         down in the Treaty (Case C‑84/United Kingdom v Council [1996] ECR I-5755, paragraph 19), the practice in regard to the choice of legal basis has in this context been consistent
         and recourse has been made to Articles EC and/or EC whenever fiscal provisions have been the subject of harmonisation.
         
            
 The Irish Government submits that the Commission’s interpretation of the term ‘fiscal provisions’ is too restrictive. A fiscal
         provision, it argues, is any provision that is related to the administration and collection of taxes. Moreover, it is clear
         from the English version of Article 95(2) EC that this refers to provisions relating to government finances and tax revenue.
         Nor is there anything in the Treaty or the case-law to support the construction advocated by the Commission.
         
            
 The Irish Government further contends that the question of the extent to which the Commission is free to choose Article EC
         as the legal basis for the adoption of a directive cannot be answered in the absence of a definition of the concept of approximation
         of laws as opposed to harmonisation of laws. If doubts exist as to the specific effects of a measure, it is necessary, in
         order to comply with the principle of legal certainty, to refer to the rules which govern the implementation of the Community
         provisions on harmonisation of such legislation.
         
            
 In the present case, as Directive 2001/relates to fiscal matters, the prohibition laid down in Article 95(2) EC prevents
         that directive from being adopted on the basis of Article EC. It follows from both the purpose and the content of Directive
         2001/that, apart from the fact that it extended the mutual assistance regime to taxes on income and capital and to taxes
         on insurance premiums, it also imposed mandatory obligations on Member States in respect of the enforcement and collection
         of taxes and levies. As the measures introduced by Directive 2001/relate to tax collection, tax administration and tax
         enforcement, and thus to fiscal matters, the ‘centre of gravity’ of that directive is clearly demarcated.
         
            
 The Irish Government adds that Article 95(1) EC also precludes the adoption of Directive 2001/on the basis of Article EC. According to its wording, Article EC can apply only where the Treaty does not provide otherwise. As Articles EC
         and EC constitute more specific provisions than does Article EC for the adoption of measures such as those laid down
         in Directive 2001/44, Article EC cannot be applied.
         
            
 According to the Luxembourg Government, the Commission’s interpretation of the term ‘fiscal provisions’ is unduly restrictive
         and does not correspond to the legislative reality in the Member States. When interpreting that provision, account must be
         taken of the fact that the concepts of ‘taxation’, ‘fiscal provisions’ and ‘taxes’ cover provisions relating to the administration
         and collection of taxes, and that, in several Member States, the arrangements for the administration and collection of taxes
         come under tax law.
         
            
 The Luxembourg Government also takes note of the Commission’s acknowledgment, in its reply, that Directive 2001/is not
         intended to harmonise existing rules but seeks to create possibilities for the exchange of information and mutual assistance
         which did not exist hitherto. For that reason, the choice of Article EC as the basis for the adoption of that directive
         cannot be justified.
         
            
 The Luxembourg Government submits further that, contrary to what the Commission argues, Article of Directive 76/does
         have a direct effect on the national provisions of Member States.
         
            
 The Court, the Luxembourg Government adds, has already ruled that payment arrangements, tax bases and the penalties for tax
         offences may come within the prohibition laid down in Article EC (see Case C-47/Commission v Denmark [1990] ECR I‑4509). It cannot therefore be validly argued that provisions governing the arrangements for the recovery of
         direct and indirect taxes are not fiscal provisions.
         
            
 In the present case, Directive 2001/allows national authorities to determine and collect properly any tax due by extending
         the scope of their competence beyond the boundaries of the territory of the Member State concerned. Mutual assistance in matters
         of recovery of amounts owing thus constitutes an essential complement inherent in the exercise of Member States’ fiscal functions
         at an internal level. The correct legal basis for the adoption of that directive is therefore Articles EC and EC.
         
            
 The Portuguese Government also takes the view that the interpretation of the term ‘fiscal provisions’ proposed by the Commission
         is too restrictive and must be rejected. That term, it argues, must include the rights and guarantees of taxable persons.
         Directive 2001/lays down, in particular by way of the amendments to Articles 8(1), and of Directive 76/308, a number
         of rules which are in direct conflict with the rights of taxable persons and which must therefore be transposed into national
         law. Further, Directive 2001/infringes the principle of audi alteram partem in so far as an alleged resident debtor to a State seeking recovery of a claim is unable to contest the instrument permitting
         enforcement of the recovery of that claim even if the claim which that State invokes is contested. Finally, Directive 2001/creates, through its amendment of Article 12(2) of Directive 76/308, a direct substantive right to compensation whenever improper
         use or erroneous exercise of the powers conferred on Member States gives rise to injury. In light of the content of Directive
         2001/44, the Portuguese Government argues, Articles EC and EC must be used as the legal basis for its adoption.
         
            
 The United Kingdom Government shares the position taken by the Irish Government. It submits that Article EC is the specific
         legal basis for the adoption of harmonisation measures in the field of indirect taxation. Inasmuch as the Treaty thus made
         specific provision for such harmonisation, Article EC cannot serve as a legal basis for this. So far as harmonisation of
         the provisions relating to direct taxation is concerned, it follows clearly from Article 95(2) EC that the applicable Treaty
         provision is Article EC.
         
            
 The United Kingdom Government criticises the Commission for its unduly strict interpretation of the term ‘fiscal provisions’
         and for failing to take account of the opening sentence of Article 95(1) EC, to the effect that this provision applies only
         where nothing in the Treaty provides otherwise. Article EC and Article EC are both special provisions for the adoption
         of measures relating to direct and indirect taxes. In view of the fact that Directive 2001/harmonises national rules on
         those two types of taxes, Article 95(1) EC is not the correct legal basis for its adoption.
         
            
 Moreover, there can be no doubt that rules pursuing such an objective impinge on the tax sovereignty of Member States and
         that their adoption must for that reason be unanimous.
         
            
 The United Kingdom Government adds that the term ‘fiscal’ used in the English-language version of Article EC embraces not
         only taxation stricto sensu but also public spending and borrowing. Contrary to the Commission’s contention, there is no justification for drawing a
         distinction between rules on taxable persons, taxable events, bases of taxation, rates and exemptions and rules for the administration
         and enforcement of taxes. This interpretation, moreover, is in line with the Court’s settled case-law (see Case C‑327/Commission v Greece [1992] ECR I‑and Case C‑68/Grundig Italiana [1998] ECR I‑3775).
         
            
 In conclusion, the United Kingdom Government states that the regulation of taxpayers with a view to preventing fraud and tax
         evasion is a matter which goes to the core of the relationship between the revenue authorities and taxpayers of the Member
         States and is thus inseparable from Member States’ revenue-raising powers.
         
Appraisal of the Court
            
 It is settled case-law that the choice of the legal basis for a Community measure must rest on objective factors amenable
         to judicial review, which include in particular the aim and the content of the measure (see, inter alia, the titanium dioxide judgment, paragraph 10, Case C-269/Commission v Council [2000] ECR I-2257, paragraph 43, and Case C-211/Commission  v Council [2003] ECR I-0000, paragraph 38).
         
            
 If examination of a Community measure reveals that it pursues a twofold purpose or that it has a twofold component and if
         one of these is identifiable as the main or predominant purpose or component whereas the other is merely incidental, the act
         must be based on a single legal basis, namely that required by the main or predominant purpose or component (see to that effect,
         inter alia, Case C-155/Commission v Council [1993] ECR I-939, paragraphs and 21, Case C-36/Spain v Council [2001] ECR I-779, paragraph 59, and Case C-211/Commission v Council, cited above, paragraph 39).
         
            
 By way of exception, if it is established that the measure simultaneously pursues several objectives which are inseparably
         linked without one being secondary and indirect in relation to the other, the measure must be founded on the corresponding
         legal bases (see, inter alia, Case C-336/Huber [2002] ECR I-7699, paragraph 31; Case C-281/Commission v Council [2002] ECR I-12049, paragraph 35, Case C-211/Commission v Council, paragraph 40, and Opinion 2/[2001] ECR I-9713, paragraph 23). 
         
            
 However, no dual legal basis is possible where the procedures laid down for each legal basis are incompatible with each other
         (titanium dioxide judgment, cited above, paragraphs to 21, and Joined Cases C-164/and C-165/Parliament v Council [1999] ECR I-1139, paragraph 14).
         
            
 In the present case, the procedures set out under Articles EC and EC, on the one hand, and that set out under Article
         EC, on the other, mean that the latter article cannot be applied in conjunction with one of the other two articles mentioned
         above in order to serve as the legal basis for a measure such as Directive 2001/44. Whereas unanimity is required for the
         adoption of a measure on the basis of Articles EC and EC, a qualified majority is sufficient for a measure to be capable
         of valid adoption on the basis of Article EC. Thus, of the provisions cited above, Articles EC and EC alone may provide
         a valid dual legal basis for the adoption of a legal measure by the Council.
         
            
 So far as concerns the scope of Article EC, which the Commission and Parliament argue ought to have been used as the legal
         basis for the adoption of Directive 2001/44, it must be pointed out that it is clear from the very wording of Article 95(1) EC
         that that article applies only if the Treaty does not provide otherwise.
         
            
 It follows that, if the Treaty contains a more specific provision that is capable of constituting the legal basis for the
         measure in question, that measure must be founded on such provision. That is, in particular, the case with regard to Article EC
         so far as concerns the harmonisation of legislation concerning turnover taxes, excise duties and other forms of indirect taxation.
         
            
 It must also be pointed out that Article 95(2) EC expressly excludes certain areas from the scope of that article. This is
         in particular the case with regard to ‘fiscal provisions’, the approximation of which cannot therefore take place on the basis
         of that article.
         
            
 The Court considers that it is first necessary to examine whether Directive 2001/comes within the concept of ‘fiscal provisions’
         within the meaning of Article 95(2) EC.
         
            
 With regard to the interpretation of the words ‘fiscal provisions’, there is nothing in the Treaty to indicate how that concept
         should be construed. It is, however, necessary to point out that, by reason of their general character, those words cover
         not only all areas of taxation, without drawing any distinction between the types of duties or taxes concerned, but also all
         aspects of taxation, whether material rules or procedural rules.
         
            
 This is also corroborated by the fact that in certain Member States the provisions governing the arrangements for payment
         and collection of direct and indirect taxes are treated as being ‘fiscal provisions’.
         
            
 It should further be added that, in accordance with the Court’s case-law on Article EC, it is necessary, for the purposes
         of assessing whether or not a system of taxation is discriminatory, to take into consideration not only the rate of tax but
         also the basis of assessment and the detailed rules for levying the various duties. The decisive criterion for purposes of
         comparison with a view to the application of Article EC is the actual effect of each tax on domestic production, on the
         one hand, and on imported products, on the other. Even where the rate is the same, the effect of the tax may vary according
         to the detailed rules for the assessment and collection thereof applied to domestic production and imported products (Commission v Ireland, paragraph 8, and Grundig Italiana, paragraph 13, cited above).
         
            
 It follows that the detailed arrangements for the collection of taxes of whatever kind cannot be disassociated from the system
         of taxation or imposition of which they form part.
         
            
 In the light of those considerations, the words ‘fiscal provisions’ contained in Article 95(2) EC must be interpreted as covering
         not only the provisions determining taxable persons, taxable transactions, the basis of imposition, and rates of and exemptions
         from direct and indirect taxes, but also those relating to arrangements for the collection of such taxes.
         
            
 With regard to the purpose of Directive 2001/44, it follows from the first three recitals in its preamble that it seeks to
         safeguard the ‘fiscal neutrality of the internal market’ and to protect the financial interests of both the Community and
         the Member States.
         
            
 As the recitals in the preamble to Directive 2001/make clear, that objective is to be attained, on the one hand, by extending
         the scope of Directive 76/to certain taxes on income and capital and to certain taxes on insurance premiums (recital (3))
         and, on the other, by ensuring that instruments permitting enforcement of a claim issued in the Member State of the requesting
         authority should in principle be treated as an instrument of the Member State in which the requested authority is situated
         (recital (4)).
         
            
 The amendments which Directive 2001/makes to Directive 76/reflect those objectives. Thus, Article of Directive 76/308,
         which defines that directive’s scope, now provides, under headings (g) and (h), that the directive is to apply to taxes on
         income and capital and to taxes on insurance premiums. Article 7(3) of Directive 76/was so amended as now to provide for
         a more detailed list of the information which must be set out in a request for recovery sent by the applicant authority to
         the requested authority.
         
            
 In accordance with Article of Directive 76/308, instruments permitting enforcement of the recovery of claims must now, as
         a general rule, be directly recognised and automatically treated as instruments permitting enforcement of a claim within national
         territory, whereas previously those instruments had only to be accepted, recognised, supplemented or replaced by an instrument
         authorising their enforcement within the territory of the Member State in which the requested authority was situated.
         
            
 So far as concerns Article of Directive 76/308, which provided that instruments for recovery were not to be given preferential
         treatment in the Member State in which the requested authority was situated, the amended version of that article resulting
         from Directive 2001/provides that such claims will not necessarily benefit from the privileges accorded to similar claims
         arising in the Member State in which the requested authority is situated. Such an amendment constitutes a substantial change
         in the treatment of the claims covered by Directive 76/inasmuch as it is equivalent to a reversal of the principle hitherto
         applicable that such claims could not benefit from preferential treatment in the Member State to which the request was addressed.
         
            
 The unavoidable conclusion is that all of these amendments concern the recovery of claims relating to both direct and indirect
         taxes and will require Member States to adopt laws, regulations or administrative provisions in order to guarantee their implementation.
         
            
 Next, it must be noted that, while it is true, as the Commission argues, that Directive 2001/does not harmonise the substantive
         provisions on arrangements for recovery in the Member States, the fact none the less remains that the Member States are required
         to extend the scope of their national provisions on arrangements for recovery of claims relating to direct taxes such as taxes
         on income and capital in order that they can also apply to tax claims originating in another Member State.
         
            
 Finally, it is necessary to add that Directive 2001/carries out a degree of approximation of national provisions in the
         area of taxation inasmuch as it obliges all Member States to treat claims originating in other Member States as being national
         claims, such an interpretation being corroborated by the words ‘fiscal neutrality’ featuring in the second recital in the
         preamble to Directive 2001/44.
         
            
 In the light of all those factors, it must be held that Directive 2001/does relate to ‘fiscal provisions’ within the meaning
         of Article 95(2) EC, with the result that Article EC cannot constitute the correct legal basis for the adoption of that
         directive.
         
            
 That being so, the Council acted correctly in adopting Directive 2001/on the basis of Article EC and Article EC.
         
            
 The action brought by the Commission must accordingly be dismissed.
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Council has applied for costs to be awarded against the Commission
         and the latter has been unsuccessful, the Commission must be ordered to pay the costs. Under the first subparagraph of Article
         69(4) of the Rules of Procedure, the Member States and institutions which intervene in proceedings must bear their own costs.
         
On those grounds,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
 hereby:
         
 
1.
Dismisses the application;
 
2.
Orders the Commission of the European Communities to pay the costs;
 Orders Ireland, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the Portuguese Republic, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
            and the European Parliament to pay their own costs.	
            
C. Gulmann
J. N. Cunha Rodrigues
J.-P. Puissochet
R. Schintgen
F. Macken
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on April 2004.
         
R. Grass
V. Skouris
Registrar
President
 –
            
Language of the case: English.
Top  
 