
Case C-432/Unibet (London) Ltd
and
Unibet (International) Ltd
v
Justitiekanslern
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Högsta domstolen)
(Principle of judicial protection – National legislation not providing for a self-standing action to challenge the compatibility of a national provision with
         Community law – Procedural autonomy – Principles of equivalence and effectiveness – Interim protection)
      
Opinion of Advocate General Sharpston delivered on November Judgment of the Court (Grand Chamber), March Summary of the Judgment
1.     Community law – Principles – Right to effective judicial protection 
(Charter of fundamental rights of the European Union, Art. 47)
2.     Community law – Direct effect – Individual rights – Safeguard by national courts 
(Art. EC)
3.     Community law – Principles – Right to effective judicial protection 
4.     Community law – Principles – Right to effective judicial protection 
1.     The principle of effective judicial protection is a general principle of Community law stemming from the constitutional traditions
         common to the Member States, which has been enshrined in Articles and of the European Convention for the Protection of
         Human Rights and which has also been reaffirmed by Article of the Charter of fundamental rights of the European Union.
      
(see para. 37)
2.     Under the principle of cooperation laid down in Article EC, it is for the Member States to ensure judicial protection of
         an individual’s rights under Community law. In the absence of Community rules governing the matter, it is for the domestic
         legal system of each Member State to designate the courts and tribunals having jurisdiction and to lay down the detailed procedural
         rules governing actions for safeguarding rights which individuals derive from Community law.
      
Although the EC Treaty has made it possible in a number of instances for private persons to bring a direct action, where appropriate,
         before the Community Court, it was not intended to create new remedies in the national courts to ensure the observance of
         Community law other than those already laid down by national law. It would be otherwise only if it were apparent from the
         overall scheme of the national legal system in question that no legal remedy existed which made it possible to ensure, even
         indirectly, respect for an individual’s rights under Community law. Thus, while it is, in principle, for national law to determine
         an individual’s standing and legal interest in bringing proceedings, Community law nevertheless requires that the national
         legislation does not undermine the right to effective judicial protection. It is for the Member States to establish a system
         of legal remedies and procedures which ensure respect for that right.
      
In that regard, the detailed procedural rules governing actions for safeguarding an individual’s rights under Community law
         must be no less favourable than those governing similar domestic actions (principle of equivalence) and must not render practically
         impossible or excessively difficult the exercise of rights conferred by Community law (principle of effectiveness). Each case
         which raises the question whether a national procedural provision is effective must be analysed by reference to the role of
         that provision in the procedure, its progress and its special features, viewed as a whole, before the various national instances.
         Moreover, it is for the national courts to interpret the procedural rules governing actions brought before them, in such a
         way as to enable those rules, wherever possible, to be implemented in such a manner as to contribute to the attainment of
         the objective of ensuring effective judicial protection of an individual’s rights under Community law.
      
(see paras 38-44, 54)
3.     The principle of effective judicial protection of an individual’s rights under Community law must be interpreted as meaning
         that it does not require the national legal order of a Member State to provide for a free-standing action for an examination
         of whether national provisions are compatible with Community law, provided that other effective legal remedies, which are
         no less favourable than those governing similar domestic actions, make it possible for such a question of compatibility to
         be determined as a preliminary issue, which is a matter for the national court to establish. 
      
Effective judicial protection is not ensured if the individual is forced to be subject to administrative or criminal proceedings
         and to any penalties that may result as the sole form of legal remedy for disputing the compatibility of the national provision
         at issue with Community law. 
      
(see paras 61, 64-65, operative part 1)
4.     The principle of effective judicial protection of an individual’s rights under Community law must be interpreted as requiring
         it to be possible in the legal order of a Member State for interim relief to be granted until the competent court has given
         a ruling on whether national provisions are compatible with Community law, where the grant of such relief is necessary to
         ensure the full effectiveness of the judgment to be given on the existence of such rights.
      
Where it is uncertain under national law, applied in accordance with the requirements of Community law, whether an action
         to safeguard respect for an individual’s rights under Community law is admissible, the principle of effective judicial protection
         requires the national court to be able, none the less, at that stage, to grant the interim relief necessary to ensure those
         rights are respected. However, the principle of effective judicial protection of an individual’s rights under Community law
         does not require it to be possible in the legal order of a Member State to obtain interim relief from the competent national
         court in the context of an application that is inadmissible under the law of that Member State, provided that Community law
         does not call into question that inadmissibility.
      
Where the compatibility of national provisions with Community law is being challenged, the grant of any interim relief to
         suspend the application of such provisions until the competent court has given a ruling on whether those provisions are compatible
         with Community law is governed by the criteria laid down by the national law applicable before that court, provided that those
         criteria are no less favourable than those applying to similar domestic actions and do not render practically impossible or
         excessively difficult the interim judicial protection of those rights.
      
In the absence of Community rules governing the matter, it is for the domestic legal system of each Member State to determine
         the conditions under which interim relief is to be granted for safeguarding an individual’s rights under Community law. 
      
(see paras 72-73, 77, 80, 83, operative part 2-3)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
March (*)
      
(Principle of judicial protection – National legislation not providing for a self-standing action to challenge the compatibility of a national provision with
         Community law – Procedural autonomy – Principles of equivalence and effectiveness – Interim protection)
      
In Case C-432/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Högsta domstolen (Sweden), made by decision of November
         2005, received at the Court on December 2005, in the proceedings
      
Unibet (London) Ltd,
      
Unibet (International) Ltd
v
Justitiekanslern,
      
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas, K. Lenaerts (Rapporteur), R. Schintgen, P. Kūris and E. Juhász,
         Presidents of Chambers, J. Makarczyk, G. Arestis, U. Lõhmus, E. Levits, A. Ó Caoimh and L. Bay Larsen, Judges,
      
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: J. Swedenborg, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on October 2006,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Unibet (London) Ltd and Unibet (International) Ltd, by H. Bergman and O. Wiklund, advokater,
–       the Swedish Government, by K. Wistrand, acting as Agent,
–       the Belgian Government, by A. Hubert, S. Verhulst and P. Vlaemminck, advocaten,
–       the Czech Government, by T. Boček, acting as Agent,
–       the German Government, by M. Lumma and A. Dittrich, acting as Agents,
–       the Greek Government, by A. Samoni-Rantou and K. Boskovits, acting as Agents,
–       the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and F. Sclafani, avvocato dello Stato,
–       the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster and C. ten Dam, acting as Agents,
–       the Austrian Government, by H. Dossi, acting as Agent,
–       the Portuguese Government, by L. Fernandes and J. de Oliveira, acting as Agents,
–       the Finnish Government, by E. Bygglin, acting as Agent,
–       the United Kingdom Government, by C. White and, subsequently, by Z. Bryanston-Cross, acting as Agents, and T. Ward, Barrister,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by E. Traversa and K. Simonsson, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on November 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of the principle of effective judicial protection of an
         individual’s rights under Community law. 
      
This reference was made in proceedings between Unibet (London) Ltd, Unibet (International) Ltd (taken together, ‘Unibet’)
         and the Justitiekanslern (Office of the Chancellor of Justice) concerning the application of the Swedish Law on Lotteries
         and games of chance (Lotterilagen SFS No 1000) (‘the Law on Lotteries’).
      
 National legal background
 Rules of procedure
It is apparent from the order for reference that judicial review of the conformity of national legislative or regulatory provisions
         with higher-ranking legal rules is governed by Chapter 11, Section 14, of the Swedish Constitution (Regeringsformen). Under
         that section, where a court considers that a national provision conflicts with a rule of constitutional law or other higher-ranking
         rule, that provision may not be applied. However, if that provision was adopted by the Swedish Parliament or Government, it
         is to be disapplied only if the non-conformity is manifest. That condition does not apply, however, where the question of
         conformity arises in relation to a rule of Community law. 
      
According to the Högsta domstolen (Supreme Court) (Sweden), Swedish law does not provide for a self-standing application for
         a declaration that a measure adopted by the Parliament or the Government conflicts with a higher-ranking legal rule, such
         a review being possible only by way of a preliminary issue in proceedings brought before the ordinary courts or the administrative
         courts.
      
Under Chapter 13, Section 1, of the Swedish Code of Judicial Procedure (Rättegångsbalken, ‘the Code of Judicial Procedure’),
         which governs proceedings before the ordinary courts, an action may be brought for damages. Such an action may result in an
         enforceable judgment ordering the defendant to pay damages to the applicant. 
      
Under the first subparagraph of Section of Chapter of the Code of Judicial Procedure, an action may be brought to determine
         whether a legal relationship exists between the defendant and the applicant where such a relationship exposes the latter to
         detriment. Under the second subparagraph of that section, the application may be considered if it relates to whether such
         a relationship exists. The result of such an action can only be a declaratory judgment stating, where appropriate, that there
         is a legal relationship between the parties, such as an obligation to pay damages to the applicant. 
      
In that situation, the court seised may have cause to determine as a preliminary issue the compatibility of a relevant legislative
         provision with a higher-ranking rule and, where appropriate, that provision must be disapplied.
      
Chapter of the Code of Judicial Procedure governs the grant of interim relief in civil actions. Section of that chapter
         provides that it is possible to order interim relief in favour of the applicant in order to safeguard that party’s rights.
         Under that provision, if the applicant demonstrates that he has probable cause to believe that he has a claim against another
         that is or can be made the basis of an action, and that other party may, by performing or failing to perform an action, adversely
         affect the applicant’s rights, the competent court may order measures, such as a prohibition or an order, coupled, where appropriate,
         with financial penalties, against that other party. 
      
Section of Chapter requires the applicant in favour of whom interim relief has been ordered, inter alia under Section
         of that chapter, to bring a substantive action before the competent court in the month following the grant of that relief
         so that, according to the referring court, those measures may provide only interim protection of the rights which the applicant
         claims by ensuring that those rights are respected pending delivery of the judgment in the substantive action. 
      
 The Law on Lotteries
Under the Law on Lotteries, lotteries for the general public and, more generally, all activities relating to games in which
         the possibility of gain is based on chance, such as betting, bingo games, slot machines and roulette machines, require an
         administrative licence issued by the competent authorities at local or national level. 
      
A decision rejecting an application for authorisation to organise such activities may be challenged before the lower administrative
         courts or, where such a decision is made by the Government, before the Regeringsrätten (Supreme Administrative Court) (Sweden).
         In that situation, those courts may have cause to determine as a preliminary issue whether the relevant legislative provision
         is compatible with Community law, and, where appropriate, that provision must be disapplied. 
      
Under Section of the Law on Lotteries, it is not permitted, in commercial operations or otherwise for gain, to promote
         participation in unlawful lotteries organised domestically or in lotteries organised abroad. 
      
Under Section of that law, that prohibition may be enforced by the issue of an order, the breach of which may be subject
         to an administrative fine. Administrative measures taken on that basis by the competent authorities may be challenged before
         the administrative courts, which may order suspension of the operation of those measures and have cause to determine as a
         preliminary issue whether a relevant legislative provision is compatible with Community law and, where appropriate, that provision
         must be disapplied. 
      
An application may be made to the Government or the designated authority for an exception to the prohibition on promotion
         in Section of the Law on Lotteries. Under the Lagen om rättsprövning av vissa förvaltningsbeslut (Law on judicial review
         of certain administrative decisions, SFS 1988, No 205), a decision rejecting such an application may be subject to judicial
         review by the Regeringsrätten, which may have cause to determine, as a preliminary issue, whether a relevant legislative provision
         is compatible with Community law and, where appropriate, that provision must be disapplied. 
      
Under Section of the Law on Lotteries, promotion of participation in a lottery organised abroad is liable to the imposition
         of a fine and six months’ imprisonment if the promotion specifically targets those resident in Sweden.
      
In criminal proceedings instigated on that basis by the competent authorities, the Tingsrätt (District Court) (Sweden) may
         have cause, as a preliminary issue, to determine whether a relevant legislative provision is compatible with Community law
         and, where appropriate, that provision must be disapplied.   
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
According to the documents in the case-file, in November 2003, Unibet purchased advertising space in a number of different
         Swedish media with a view to promoting its gaming services on the internet. In accordance with the Law on Lotteries, the Swedish
         State took a number of measures, including obtaining injunctions and commencing criminal proceedings, against those media
         which had agreed to provide Unibet with advertising space. 
      
No administrative action or criminal proceedings were brought against Unibet, which, on December 2003, brought an action
         against the Swedish State in the Tingsrätt seeking, firstly, a declaration that it has the right, pursuant to Article EC,
         to promote its gaming and betting services in Sweden and is not prevented from doing so by the prohibition under Section of the Law on Lotteries (‘the application for a declaration’), secondly, compensation for the damage suffered as a result
         of that prohibition on promotion (‘the claim for damages’) and, thirdly, a declaration that the prohibition and the measures
         and sanctions for breach thereof did not apply to it (‘the first application for interim relief’). 
      
The application for a declaration was dismissed by decision of July of the Tingsrätt. That court considered that it
         did not follow from the arguments put forward in support of that application that there was a specific legal relationship
         between Unibet and the Swedish State and that that application sought an abstract review of a legislative provision, whereas
         such an action is inadmissible under Swedish law. The Tingsrätt did not give a ruling on the claim for damages or on the first
         application for interim relief. 
      
In response to an appeal lodged by Unibet, the application for a declaration and the first application for interim relief
         were also dismissed by judgment of the Hovrätt (Court of Appeal) (Sweden) on October 2004. That court considered that the
         application constituted an action for a declaration, which is inadmissible under Swedish law, and that it does not follow
         from the case-law of the Court of Justice that the principle of judicial protection requires that an abstract review of a
         legislative provision should be possible where there is no provision for such an action under national law. That court also
         considered that the question whether the prohibition on promotion under Section of the Law on Lotteries is consistent with
         Community law would be determined when the claim for damages was considered by the Tingsrätt. 
      
The Hovrätt also considered that if Unibet were to exercise the rights it claims and promote its services in Sweden, the compatibility
         of that prohibition with Community law could be examined by the court seised in the context of a direct action against administrative
         measures or in criminal proceedings. 
      
The Hovrätt thus found that Unibet’s application for a declaration could not be regarded as admissible under Community law
         and that it was unnecessary to address the first application for interim relief.  
      
In its first appeal to the Högsta domstolen against the judgment of the Hovrätt of October 2004, Unibet asserted that its
         application for a declaration and its first application for interim relief were admissible under both Swedish law and Community
         law. 
      
Shortly after the judgment delivered by the Hovrätt on October dismissing its application for a declaration and its
         first application for interim relief, Unibet made a fresh application for interim relief to the Tingsrätt seeking to be permitted
         immediately, notwithstanding the prohibition on promotion under Section of the Law on Lotteries, to promote its services
         pending the outcome of the substantive proceedings concerning its claim for damages and to mitigate the loss arising from
         that prohibition (‘the second application for interim relief’). Unibet stated that that application was directly linked to
         the infringement of its rights under Community law and to its claim for damages in that it sought to bring to an end the loss
         arising as a result of that infringement. 
      
By decision of November 2004, the Tingsrätt dismissed that application, considering that its examination of the case had
         not demonstrated that Section of the Law on Lotteries conflicts with Community law and that Unibet had also failed to establish
         that there were serious doubts as to whether the prohibition under that provision is compatible with Community law. The appeal
         lodged by Unibet against that decision was also dismissed by judgment of the Hovrätt on January 2005. 
      
In a second appeal to the Högsta domstolen, Unibet sought to have that judgment of the Hovrätt set aside and an order made
         for interim relief in accordance with its application at first instance. 
      
With regard to the first appeal, the Högsta domstolen states that, under Swedish law, a self-standing application cannot be
         brought primarily for a declaration that a national provision conflicts with a higher-ranking legal rule. The Högsta domstolen
         entertains doubts in this regard concerning the requirements under Community law relating to the principle of  judicial protection,
         whilst at the same time stating that Unibet could have the question whether the Law on Lotteries is compatible with Community
         law examined if it breached the provisions of that law and was subject to criminal proceedings or in an action for damages
         or, in the event of judicial review of an administrative decision rejecting, as the case may be, an application for a licence
         or for an exception brought under that law. 
      
According to the Högsta domstolen, the first application for interim relief brought before the courts hearing the merits in
         connection with that appeal raises similar questions since, under Swedish law, such an application cannot be admissible if
         the main claim is itself inadmissible. 
      
With regard to the second appeal concerning the second application for interim relief, the Högsta domstolen considers that
         questions of Community law arise since Unibet maintains that that application is linked to its rights under Community law.
         Those questions essentially concern the criteria to be applied in granting such measures in the context of the action in the
         main proceedings. 
      
In those circumstances, taking the view that an interpretation of Community law was necessary in order for it to reach a decision
         in the main action, the Högsta domstolen decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court
         for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Is the requirement of Community law that national procedural rules must provide effective protection of an individual’s rights
         under Community law to be interpreted as meaning that an action for a declaration that certain national substantive provisions
         conflict with Article EC must be permitted to be brought in a case where the compatibility of the substantive provisions
         with that article may otherwise be examined only as a preliminary issue in, for example, an action for damages, proceedings
         concerning infringement of the national substantive provisions or judicial review proceedings?
      
(2)      Does the requirement of effective legal protection under Community law mean that the national legal order must provide interim
         protection, through which national rules which prevent the exercise of an alleged right based on Community law may be disapplied
         in relation to an individual so that he is able to exercise that right until the question of the existence of the right has
         been finally settled by a national court?
      
(3)      If the answer to Question is in the affirmative:
Does it follow from Community law that, where the compatibility of national provisions with Community law is being challenged,
         in its substantive examination of an application for interim protection of rights under Community law a national court must
         apply national provisions governing the conditions for interim protection, or in such a situation must the national court
         apply Community law criteria for interim protection?
      
(4)      If the answer to Question is that Community law criteria must be applied, what are those criteria?’
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 Preliminary considerations
The Belgian Government’s argument that the present reference for a preliminary ruling is inadmissible since there is no genuine
         dispute pending before the Högsta domstolen must be disregarded.
      
As the Advocate General observed at point of her Opinion, there is a dispute requiring resolution before the Högsta domstolen
         in that Unibet brought an action before the Swedish courts for a declaration that Section of the Law on Lotteries is incompatible
         with Article EC so that it may lawfully promote its services in Sweden and obtain compensation for the damage it has suffered
         as a result of the prohibition under Section 38. 
      
The question whether Unibet’s action is admissible before the Swedish courts, which is the subject of the first question referred
         by the Högsta domstolen, is irrelevant for the purposes of determining whether the reference for a preliminary ruling is admissible.
         
      
The reference for a preliminary ruling is therefore admissible. 
It follows that it is necessary to answer the questions asked by the Högsta domstolen in the light of the information provided
         by that court concerning the Swedish legal framework, as set out at paragraphs to above. 
      
 Question By its first question, the Högsta domstolen asks, in essence, whether the principle of effective judicial protection of an
         individual’s rights under Community law must be interpreted as requiring it to be possible in the legal order of a Member
         State to bring a free-standing action for an examination as to whether national provisions are compatible with Article EC if other legal remedies permit the question of compatibility to be determined as a preliminary issue. 
      
It is to be noted at the outset that, according to settled case-law, the principle of effective judicial protection is a general
         principle of Community law stemming from the constitutional traditions common to the Member States, which has been enshrined
         in Articles and of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (Case 222/Johnston [1986] ECR 1651, paragraphs and 19; Case 222/Heylens and Others [1987] ECR 4097, paragraph 14; Case C-424/Commission v Austria [2001] ECR I-9285, paragraph 45; Case C-50/P Unión de Pequeños Agricultores v Council [2002] ECR I-6677, paragraph 39; and Case C-467/Eribrand [2003] ECR I-6471, paragraph 61) and which has also been reaffirmed by Article of the Charter of fundamental rights of
         the European Union, proclaimed on December in Nice (OJ C 364, p. 1).
      
Under the principle of cooperation laid down in Article EC, it is for the Member States to ensure judicial protection of
         an individual’s rights under Community law (see, to that effect, Case 33/Rewe, [1976] ECR 1989, paragraph 5; Case 45/Comet [1976] ECR 2043, paragraph 12; Case 106/Simmenthal [1978] ECR 629, paragraphs and 22; Case C-213/Factortame and Others [1990] ECR I-2433, paragraph 19; and Case C-312/Peterbroeck [1995] ECR I-4599, paragraph 12).
      
It is also to be noted that, in the absence of Community rules governing the matter, it is for the domestic legal system of
         each Member State to designate the courts and tribunals having jurisdiction and to lay down the detailed procedural rules
         governing actions for safeguarding rights which individuals derive from Community law (see, inter alia, Rewe, paragraph 5; Comet, paragraph 13; Peterbroeck, paragraph 12; Case C‑453/Courage and Crehan [2001] ECR I-6297, paragraph 29; and Case C-13/Safalero [2003] ECR I-8679, paragraph 49).
      
Although the EC Treaty has made it possible in a number of instances for private persons to bring a direct action, where appropriate,
         before the Community Court, it was not intended to create new remedies in the national courts to ensure the observance of
         Community law other than those already laid down by national law (Case 158/Rewe [1981] ECR 1805, paragraph 44).
      
It would be otherwise only if it were apparent from the overall scheme of the national legal system in question that no legal
         remedy existed which made it possible to ensure, even indirectly, respect for an individual’s rights under Community law (see,
         to that effect, Case 33/Rewe, paragraph 5; Comet, paragraph 16; and Factortame, paragraphs to 23).
      
Thus, while it is, in principle, for national law to determine an individual’s standing and legal interest in bringing proceedings,
         Community law nevertheless requires that the national legislation does not undermine the right to effective judicial protection
         (see, inter alia, Joined Cases C-87/to C-89/Verholen and Others [1991] ECR I‑3757, paragraph 24, and Safalero, paragraph 50). It is for the Member States to establish a system of legal remedies and procedures which ensure respect for
         that right (Unión de Pequeños Agricultores v Council, paragraph 41).
      
In that regard, the detailed procedural rules governing actions for safeguarding an individual’s rights under Community law
         must be no less favourable than those governing similar domestic actions (principle of equivalence) and must not render practically
         impossible or excessively difficult the exercise of rights conferred by Community law (principle of effectiveness) (see, inter
         alia, Case 33/Rewe, paragraph 5; Comet, paragraphs to 16; Peterbroeck, paragraph 12; Courage and Crehan, paragraph 29; Eribrand, paragraph 62; and Safalero, paragraph 49). 
      
Moreover, it is for the national courts to interpret the procedural rules governing actions brought before them, such as the
         requirement for there to be a specific legal relationship between the applicant and the State, in such a way as to enable
         those rules, wherever possible, to be implemented in such a manner as to contribute to the attainment of the objective, referred
         to at paragraph above, of ensuring effective judicial protection of an individual’s rights under Community law.
      
It is in the light of those considerations that the answer must be given to the first question referred by the Högsta domstolen.
         
      
According to that court, Swedish law does not provide for a self-standing action which seeks primarily to dispute the compatibility
         of a national provision with higher-ranking legal rules. 
      
In that regard, it is to be noted, as is apparent from the case-law referred to at paragraph above and has been argued
         by all the governments which have submitted observations to the Court and by the Commission of the European Communities, that
         the principle of effective judicial protection does not require it to be possible, as such, to bring a free-standing action
         which seeks primarily to dispute the compatibility of national provisions with Community law, provided that the principles
         of equivalence and effectiveness are observed in the domestic system of judicial remedies. 
      
Firstly, it is apparent from the order for reference that Swedish law does not provide for such a free-standing action, regardless
         of whether the higher-ranking legal rule to be complied with is a national rule or a Community rule. 
      
However, with regard to those two categories of legal rules, Swedish law permits individuals to obtain an examination of that
         question of compatibility in proceedings before the ordinary courts or before the administrative courts by way of a preliminary
         issue. 
      
It is also apparent from the order for reference that the court which is to determine that question is required to disapply
         the contested provision if it considers that it conflicts with a higher-ranking legal rule, regardless of whether it is a
         national or a Community rule. 
      
In that examination, it is only where a provision adopted by the Swedish Parliament or Government is manifestly in conflict
         with a higher-ranking legal rule that such a provision is to be disapplied. As is apparent from paragraph above, that condition
         does not apply, on the other hand, where the higher-ranking rule in question is a rule of Community law. 
      
Therefore, as was observed by all the governments which submitted observations and by the Commission, it is clear that the
         detailed procedural rules governing actions brought under Swedish law for safeguarding an individual’s rights under Community
         law are no less favourable than the rules governing actions for safeguarding an individual’s rights under national provisions.
         
      
It is necessary, secondly, to establish whether the effect of the indirect legal remedies provided for by Swedish law for
         disputing the compatibility of a national provision with Community law is to render practically impossible or excessively
         difficult the exercise of rights conferred by Community law.  
      
In that regard, each case which raises the question whether a national procedural provision renders the application of Community
         law impossible or excessively difficult must be analysed by reference to the role of that provision in the procedure, its
         progress and its special features, viewed as a whole, before the various national instances (Peterbroeck, paragraph 14).
      
It is apparent from the order for reference that Swedish law does not prevent a person, such as Unibet, from disputing the
         compatibility of national legislation, such as the Law on Lotteries, with Community law but that, on the contrary, there exist
         various indirect legal remedies for that purpose. 
      
Thus, firstly, the Högsta domstolen states that Unibet may obtain an examination of whether the Law on Lotteries is compatible
         with Community law in the context of a claim for damages before the ordinary courts. 
      
It is also clear from the order for reference that Unibet brought such a claim and that the Högsta domstolen found it to be
         admissible. 
      
Consequently, where an examination of the compatibility of the Law on Lotteries with Community law takes place in the context
         of the determination of a claim for damages, that action constitutes a remedy which enables Unibet to ensure effective protection
         of the rights conferred on it by Community law. 
      
It is for the Högsta domstolen to ensure that the examination of the compatibility of that law with Community law takes place
         irrespective of the assessment of the merits of the case with regard to the requirements for damage and a causal link in the
         claim for damages.  
      
Secondly, the Högsta domstolen adds that, if Unibet applied to the Swedish Government for an exception to the prohibition
         on the promotion of its services in Sweden, any decision rejecting that application could be the subject of judicial review
         proceedings before the Regeringsrätten, in which Unibet would be able to argue that the provisions of the Law on Lotteries
         are incompatible with Community law. Where appropriate, the competent court would be required to disapply the provisions of
         that law that were considered to be in conflict with Community law.  
      
It is to be noted that such judicial review proceedings, which would enable Unibet to obtain a judicial decision that those
         provisions are incompatible with Community law, constitute a legal remedy securing effective judicial protection of its rights
         under Community law (see, to that effect, Heylens, paragraph 14, and Case C-340/Vlassopoulou [1991] ECR I-2357, paragraph 22). 
      
Moreover, the Högsta domstolen states that if Unibet disregarded the provisions of the Law on Lotteries and administrative
         action or criminal proceedings were brought against it by the competent national authorities, it would have the opportunity,
         in proceedings brought before the administrative court or an ordinary court, to dispute the compatibility of those provisions
         with Community law. Where appropriate, the competent court would be required to disapply the provisions of that law that were
         considered to be in conflict with Community law. 
      
In addition to the remedies referred to at paragraphs and above, it would therefore be possible for Unibet to claim
         in court proceedings against the administration or in criminal proceedings that measures taken or required to be taken against
         it were incompatible with Community law on account of the fact that it had not been permitted by the competent national authorities
         to promote its services in Sweden. 
      
In any event, it is clear from paragraphs to above that Unibet must be regarded as having available to it legal remedies
         which ensure effective judicial protection of its rights under Community law. If, on the contrary, as mentioned at paragraph
         above, it was forced to be subject to administrative or criminal proceedings and to any penalties that may result as the
         sole form of legal remedy for disputing the compatibility of the national provision at issue with Community law, that would
         not be sufficient to secure for it such effective judicial protection. 
      
Accordingly, the answer to the first question must be that the principle of effective judicial protection of an individual’s
         rights under Community law must be interpreted as meaning that it does not require the national legal order of a Member State
         to provide for a free-standing action for an examination of whether national provisions are compatible with Article EC,
         provided that other effective legal remedies, which are no less favourable than those governing similar domestic actions,
         make it possible for such a question of compatibility to be determined as a preliminary issue, which is a matter for the national
         court to establish. 
      
 Question By its second question, the Högsta domstolen essentially asks whether the principle of effective judicial protection of an
         individual’s rights under Community law requires it to be possible in the legal order of a Member State to obtain interim
         relief suspending the application of national measures until the competent court has given a ruling on whether those measures
         are compatible with Community law. 
      
As a preliminary point, it must be pointed out that a court seised of a dispute governed by Community law must be in a position
         to grant interim relief in order to ensure the full effectiveness of the judgment to be given on the existence of the rights
         claimed under Community law (Factortame, paragraph 21, and Case C-226/Siples [2001] ECR I‑277, paragraph 19).
      
Under the national law set out in the order for reference, the purpose of applications for such relief can only be to provide
         interim protection of the rights the applicant asserts in the substantive action, as is apparent from paragraph above. 
      
In the action in the main proceedings, it is not disputed that Unibet made two applications for interim relief, the first
         in connection with an application for a declaration, and the second in connection with a claim for damages. 
      
With regard to the first of those applications for interim relief, it is apparent from the order for reference that the application
         for a declaration was considered to be inadmissible, under national law, at first instance and on appeal. Whilst upholding
         that interpretation of national law, the Högsta domstolen none the less has doubts concerning the requirements of Community
         law in that regard, which led it to ask the first question referred for a preliminary ruling (see paragraphs to above).
         
      
According to the answer to the first question, the principle of effective judicial protection of an individual’s rights under
         Community law does not require the national legal order of a Member State to provide for a free-standing action for an examination
         of whether national provisions are compatible with Community law, provided that other legal remedies make it possible for
         such an issue of compatibility to be determined as a preliminary issue, which is a matter for the national court to establish.
         
      
Where it is uncertain under national law, applied in accordance with the requirements of Community law, whether an action
         to safeguard respect for an individual’s rights under Community law is admissible, the principle of effective judicial protection
         requires the national court to be able, none the less, at that stage, to grant the interim relief necessary to ensure those
         rights are respected.  
      
However, the principle of effective judicial protection of an individual’s rights under Community law does not require it
         to be possible in the legal order of a Member State to obtain interim relief from the competent national court in the context
         of an application that is inadmissible under the law of that Member State, provided that Community law, as interpreted in
         accordance with paragraph above, does not call into question that inadmissibility.
      
With regard to the application for interim relief made in connection with the claim for damages, it is apparent from the order
         for reference and from other documents in the case-file that that claim was considered to be admissible. 
      
As the Advocate General stated at point of her Opinion and as was noted at paragraph above, the national court seised
         of a dispute governed by Community law must be able to grant interim relief in order to ensure the full effectiveness of the
         judgment to be given on the existence of the rights claimed under Community law. 
      
Consequently, where the competent national court examines, in the context of the claim for damages, whether the Law on Lotteries
         is compatible with Community law, it must be able to grant the interim relief sought, provided that such relief is necessary,
         which it is a matter for the national court to determine, in order to ensure the full effectiveness of the judgment to be
         given on the existence of the rights claimed under Community law.
      
It follows from the foregoing that the answer to the second question must be that the principle of effective judicial protection
         of an individual’s rights under Community law must be interpreted as requiring it to be possible in the legal order of a Member
         State for interim relief to be granted until the competent court has given a ruling on whether national provisions are compatible
         with Community law, where the grant of such relief is necessary to ensure the full effectiveness of the judgment to be given
         on the existence of such rights. 
      
 Question By its third question, the Högsta domstolen asks essentially whether, having regard to the principle of effective judicial
         protection of an individual’s rights under Community law, and where the compatibility of national provisions with Community
         law is being challenged, the grant of interim relief to suspend the application of such provisions, until the competent court
         has given a ruling on whether those provisions are compatible with Community law, is governed by the criteria laid down by
         the national law applicable before the competent court or by Community criteria. 
      
It is clear from established case-law that the suspension of enforcement of a national provision based on a Community regulation
         in proceedings pending before a national court, whilst it is governed by national procedural law, is in all Member States
         subject to conditions which are uniform and analagous with the conditions for an application for interim relief brought before
         the Community Court (Joined Cases C-143/and C-92/Zuckerfabrik SüderdithmarschenandZuckerfabrik Soest [1991] ECR I-415, paragraphs and 27; Case C-465/Atlanta Fruchthandelsgesellschaft [1995] ECR I-3761, paragraph 39; and Joined Cases C-453/03, C-11/04, C-12/and C-194/ABNA and Others [2005] ECR I-10423, paragraph 104). However, the case in the main proceedings is different from those giving rise to those
         judgments in that Unibet’s application for interim relief does not seek to suspend the effects of a national provision adopted
         in accordance with a Community regulation where the legality of that regulation is contested, but rather the effects of national
         legislation where the compatibility of that legislation with Community law is contested. 
      
Therefore, in the absence of Community rules governing the matter, it is for the domestic legal system of each Member State
         to determine the conditions under which interim relief is to be granted for safeguarding an individual’s rights under Community
         law.
      
Accordingly, the grant of interim relief to suspend the application of national provisions until the competent court has given
         a ruling on whether those provisions are compatible with Community law is governed by the criteria laid down by the national
         law applicable before that court. 
      
However, those criteria cannot be less favourable than those applying to similar domestic actions (principle of equivalence)
         and must not render practically impossible or excessively difficult the interim judicial protection of rights conferred by
         Community law (principle of effectiveness). 
      
The answer to the third question must therefore be that the principle of effective judicial protection of an individual’s
         rights under Community law must be interpreted as meaning that, where the compatibility of national provisions with Community
         law is being challenged, the grant of any interim relief to suspend the application of such provisions until the competent
         court has given a ruling on whether those provisions are compatible with Community law is governed by the criteria laid down
         by the national law applicable before that court, provided that those criteria are no less favourable than those applying
         to similar domestic actions and do not render practically impossible or excessively difficult the interim judicial protection
         of those rights. 
      
 Question In the light of the answer given to the third question, there is no need to answer the fourth question. 
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      The principle of effective judicial protection of an individual’s rights under Community law must be interpreted as meaning
            that it does not require the national legal order of a Member State to provide for a free-standing action for an examination
            of whether national provisions are compatible with Article EC, provided that other effective legal remedies, which are
            no less favourable than those governing similar domestic actions, make it possible for such a question of compatibility to
            be determined as a preliminary issue, which is a matter for the national court to establish.
2.      The principle of effective judicial protection of an individual’s rights under Community law must be interpreted as requiring
            it to be possible in the legal order of a Member State for interim relief to be granted until the competent court has given
            a ruling on whether national provisions are compatible with Community law, where the grant of such relief is necessary to
            ensure the full effectiveness of the judgment to be given on the existence of such rights.
3.      The principle of effective judicial protection of an individual’s rights under Community law must be interpreted as meaning
            that, where the compatibility of national provisions with Community law is being challenged, the grant of any interim relief
            to suspend the application of such provisions until the competent court has given a ruling on whether those provisions are
            compatible with Community law is governed by the criteria laid down by the national law applicable before that court, provided
            that those criteria are no less favourable than those applying to similar domestic actions and do not render practically impossible
            or excessively difficult the interim judicial protection of those rights.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Swedish.
      
Top  
 