
Case C-186/Pierre Housieaux
v
Délégués du conseil de la Région de Bruxelles-Capitale
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Counseil d’État (Belgium))
(Directive 90/313/EEC – Freedom of access to information on the environment – Request for information – Requirement to give reasons in the event of refusal – Mandatory time-limit – Failure of a public authority to respond within the time-limit for reply – Implied refusal – Fundamental right to effective judicial protection)
Opinion of Advocate General Kokott delivered on January Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), April 2005. 
Summary of the Judgment
1.     Environment — Freedom of access to information — Directive 90/— Request for information — Two-month time-limit for a reply
            imposed on the public authority — Mandatory
(Council Directive 90/313, Art. 3(4))
2.     Environment — Freedom of access to information — Directive 90/— Implied decision to refuse a request for information —
            No reasons given at the end of the two-month period for response — Unlawfulness of the decision
(Council Directive 90/313, Art. 3(4) and 4)
3.     Environment — Freedom of access to information — Directive 90/— Judicial protection — Decision which may be open to review
            — Implied refusal of a request for information
(Council Directive 90/313, Art. 4)
1.     The two-month time-limit within which the public authority must reply to the request for access to information laid down in
         Article 3(4) of Directive 90/on the freedom of access to information on the environment is mandatory.
      
(see para. 29, operative part 1)
2.     Article 3(4) of Directive 90/on the freedom of access to information on the environment, in conjunction with Article thereof, does not preclude national legislation according to which, for the purposes of granting effective judicial protection,
         the failure of a public authority to respond within a period of two months is deemed to give rise to an implied refusal which
         may be the subject of a judicial or administrative review in accordance with the national legal system. However, by virtue
         of Article 3(4) it is unlawful for such a decision not to be accompanied by reasons when the two-month time-limit expires.
         In those circumstances, the implied refusal must be regarded as unlawful.
      
(see para. 36, operative part 3)
3.     The decision referred to in Article of Directive 90/on the freedom of access to information on the environment, against
         which a judicial or administrative review may be sought by the person who made the request for information, is the implied
         refusal which arises from the failure by the public authority competent to decide on that request to respond within two months.
      
(see para. 39, operative part 2)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Directive 90/313/EEC – Freedom of access to information on the environment – Request for information – Requirement to give reasons in the event of refusal – Mandatory time-limit – Failure of a public authority to respond within the time-limit for reply – Implied refusal – Fundamental right to effective judicial protection)
In Case C-186/04,
Reference for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Conseil d’État (Belgium), made by decision of April 2004,
         received at the Court on April 2004, in the proceedings 
      
Pierre Housieaux
v
Délégués du conseil de la Région de Bruxelles-Capitale,
interested parties:
Société de développement régional de Bruxelles (SDRB), 
Batipont Immobilier SA (BPI),
Immomills Louis de Waele Development SA (ILDWD),
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, R. Silva de Lapuerta, P. Kūris, G. Arestis and J. Klučka (Rapporteur),
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on January 2005,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Pierre Housieaux, by J. Sambon and P. Reyniers, avocats,
–       Délégués du conseil de la Région de Bruxelles-Capitale, by P. Coenraets and C. Lepinois, avocats,
–       Société de développement régional de Bruxelles (SDRB), by F. Krenc and P. Lambert, avocats,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by U. Wölker and F. Simonetti, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles 3(4) and of Council Directive 90/313/EEC
         of June on the freedom of access to information on the environment (OJ L 158, p. 56). 
      
This reference was made in the context of a dispute between Mr Housieaux and the Collège des délégués du conseil de la Région
         de Bruxelles-Capitale (Board of Delegates of the Council of the Brussels Capital Region) (hereinafter ‘the Board’) in relation
         to a decision by the Board on access to documents relating to an urban development contract. 
      
 Legal framework
 Community legislation
Article 3(1) of Directive 90/provides: 
‘Save as provided in this Article, Member States shall ensure that public authorities are required to make available information
         relating to the environment to any natural or legal person at his request and without his having to prove an interest. 
      
Member States shall define the practical arrangements under which such information is effectively made available.’ 
Article 3(2) and (3) of the same directive lists the reasons which may justify the refusal of a request for information. 
Article 3(4) of the said directive is worded as follows: 
‘A public authority shall respond to a person requesting information as soon as possible and at the latest within two months.
         The reasons for a refusal to provide the information requested must be given.’ 
      
Article of Directive 90/provides: 
‘A person who considers that his request for information has been unreasonably refused or ignored, or has been inadequately
         answered by a public authority, may seek a judicial or administrative review of the decision in accordance with the relevant
         national legal system.’ 
      
 National legislation
By the Order of August on access to information on the environment in the Région de Bruxelles-Capitale (Moniteur belge of October 1991, p. 21505; hereinafter ‘the Order’), the relevant provisions of Directive 90/were transposed into
         the law of that region. 
      
Article of the Order states: 
‘The Executive shall decide the list of categories of written documents which the authorities concerned must allow to be consulted
         immediately on the premises.’ 
      
Article of the said order is worded as follows: 
‘As regards information other than the documents mentioned in Article 7, and without prejudice to an authority’s power to
         allow it to be consulted immediately on the premises, the authority to which the request is addressed shall have one month
         in which to reply to the applicant in writing.
      
Where, at the expiry of the time-limit indicated, no action has been taken on the request, the authority’s failure to reply
         shall be deemed to constitute a decision to refuse access.  In that case, the applicant may, by way of exception to Article
         § 2, refer the matter directly to the Délégués du Conseil, who shall then decide on the request.’
      
Under Article of the same order: 
‘§ 1. Only the Délégués du Conseil shall have the power to refuse access to information held by the authorities … . They shall
         exercise that power acting as a body and within the limits set out in Article 9. 
      
§ 2. ... any authority which refuses to disclose information which is the subject of a request for access must inform the
         applicant of that decision and at the same time refer the matter to the Délégués du Conseil. Reference to the Délégués du
         Conseil is made by transmission of the request for access, together with a specimen or a copy of the information and the reasons
         which the authority considers justify the refusal of access. The time-limit mentioned in Article § shall be extended by
         one month from the date of the notification to the applicant of the reference to the Délégués du Conseil.’ 
      
Article of the Order provides: 
‘Any total or partial refusal of access must set out the reasons which seek to justify it in a manner that is clear, precise,
         complete and genuine.’ 
      
Article of the said order provides: 
‘The Délégués du Conseil shall provide the applicant with the document requested or notify him of refusal of access within
         two months of his request. Failure to reply within that period shall be deemed to constitute a decision to refuse access.
         Their decision shall also be communicated to the authority to which the request for access has been referred.’ 
      
The Order does not establish any specific procedure for appealing against decisions of the Board concerning access to
         information on the environment and, therefore, the usual means of obtaining redress in administrative proceedings apply. 
      
Thus, under Article 14(1) of the lois coordonnées sur le Conseil d’État (Consolidated Laws on the Council of State) (Moniteur belge of March 1973, p. 3459), ‘the [Administrative Section of the Conseil d’État] shall rule by way of judgments on actions
         for annulment of acts and regulations of the various administrative authorities on the ground of infringement of procedural
         requirements which are essential or breach of which leads to nullity, or of abuse or misuse of powers’. 
      
The Royal Decree of August relating to proceedings before the Administrative Section of the Conseil d’État stipulates
         in the third paragraph of Article that ‘actions referred to in Article [14] of the law shall be time-barred days after
         publication or notification of the acts, regulations or decisions contested. If they are not required to be either published
         or notified, the time-limit shall run from the date on which the applicant becomes aware of them’. 
      
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
In February 1991, the Région de Bruxelles-Capitale expropriated the site of a former military hospital for the benefit of
         the Société de développement régional de Bruxelles (hereinafter ‘the SDRB’), which was designated as the operator for the
         redevelopment of the site. The SDRB then entered into a contract by private treaty (hereinafter ‘the contract’) with a temporary
         association made up of the companies Batipont Immobilier SA and Immomills Louis de Waele Development SA (hereinafter ‘Batipont’).
         Under the terms of that contract, Batipont agreed to put up a complex of buildings and structures on the said site in accordance
         with a plan pre-established by the SDRB. 
      
By letter of March addressed to the President of the SDRB, Mr Housieaux asked to be allowed to consult the contract
         and to obtain a copy of it. By decision dated April 1994, the SDRB refused the request on the ground that, according to
         the Order, it is the Executive which ‘shall decide the arrangements for organising access to information for each individual
         public authority’. 
      
On April 1994, Mr Housieaux appealed to the Board against that decision, and repeated his request for access to the contract.
         
      
After various exchanges of correspondence with Mr Housieaux, the Board, having deliberated on February 1995, took the decision
         to provide to the applicant Annexes H and I to the contract, which related to the environment and whose disclosure did not
         compromise any commercial or industrial interest. By letter of February 1995, the Board informed Mr Housieaux and the SDRB
         of that decision. 
      
Being dissatisfied with that decision, on March Mr Housieaux brought an action before the Conseil d’État for annulment
         of that decision. 
      
Before that court, the Board raised a plea of inadmissibility in respect of the action, based on the fact that the decision
         of February was only a confirmatory decision which, as such, could not be challenged. The Board argued that, leaving
         aside the communication of Annexes H and I to the contract, that decision merely confirmed the implied refusal which had arisen
         earlier, owing to the failure of the Board to respond for over two months to the request for information which Mr Housieaux
         had submitted on April 1994. That implied refusal became definitive when it was not challenged within the 60-day time-limit
         laid down in Article 14(1) of the lois coordonnées sur le Conseil d’État. Consequently, the Board maintains that on March
         Mr Housieaux was time-barred from commencing an action for annulment of the refusal of February 1995. 
      
It is on that basis that the Conseil d’État decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court
         for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘(1)  Is the two-month time-limit in Article 3(4) of … Directive 90/… a directory time-limit – that is to say, merely indicatory
         for the authority to which a request for information is addressed – or is it a mandatory time-limit with which that authority
         must comply? 
      
(2)       If the two-month time-limit is mandatory and on expiry of that time-limit the authority to which a request for information
         was addressed has not taken a decision, what is the “decision” referred to at the end of Article of the directive against
         which a judicial or administrative review may be sought “in accordance with the relevant national legal system”? 
      
(3)       Do Articles 3(4) and of the directive prohibit a “relevant national legal system” from interpreting a failure to respond
         on the part of the authority to which a request for information is referred – a failure to respond which continues throughout
         the two-month period referred to in Article 3(4) of the directive – as a decision implicitly refusing that request, a decision
         for which no reasons are thus given but which may be the subject of the judicial or administrative review provided for in
         Article 4?
      
(4)       If the two-month time-limit referred to in Article 3(4) of the directive is a directory time-limit, do Articles 3(4) and of the directive preclude a “national legal system” from providing that the person requesting information may give the authority
         notice to respond to his request for information within a certain period, failing which the persistent failure by the authority
         to respond will be deemed  to be an implied decision to refuse to provide the information, which can then be the subject of
         an administrative judicial review?’ 
      
 On the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 The first question
By its first question, the referring court is essentially asking whether the time-limit laid down in Article 3(4) of Directive
         90/is indicatory or mandatory. 
      
In that regard, it must be noted, as the Advocate General has done in points and of her Opinion, that it follows from
         both the text and the spirit of that provision that the two-month time-limit must be regarded as mandatory. 
      
First, the use of the phrase ‘as soon as possible and at the latest within two months’ clearly shows that the public authority
         that is competent to decide on the request for information (hereinafter ‘the public authority’) is required to comply with
         the time-limit imposed for considering the request and responding to it. 
      
Second, if the time-limit was not mandatory but merely indicatory, Article of Directive 90/313, which provides for judicial
         protection for the individual, would be ineffective. Indeed, the person making the request for information would not know
         precisely the date from which he might seek review. 
      
That interpretation of Article 3(4) of Directive 90/is supported by the directive’s objective, as set out in particular
         in the 11th recital in the preamble, which is that general information should actively be provided to the public on the state
         of the environment. 
      
As the Advocate General has noted in point of her Opinion, the value of that information depends to a large extent on the
         fact that individuals are able to obtain it as quickly as possible. 
      
Having regard to those considerations, the answer to the first question must be that the two-month time-limit laid down in
         Article 3(4) of Directive 90/is mandatory. 
      
 The third question
By its third question, which it is appropriate to consider before the second question, the referring court is essentially
         asking whether Articles  3(4) and of Directive 90/preclude national rules under which the failure of a public authority
         to respond to a request for information for two months is considered to give rise, at the end of that period, to an implied
         decision to refuse that request, a decision for which admittedly no reasons are given, but which may be the subject of a judicial
         or administrative review pursuant to Article of the said directive. 
      
In that respect, it must be recalled that the Court has already held that the fiction by which the failure of the authorities
         to reply is deemed to constitute an implied refusal cannot, as such, be considered incompatible with the requirements of Directive
         90/on the sole ground that a tacit refusal, by definition, does not include any reasons (Case C-233/Commission v France [2003] ECR I-6625, paragraph 111). 
      
On the other hand, the Court found that, in the case of an implied refusal of a request for information relating to the environment,
         the reasons for that refusal must be notified, even if after the date of the implied refusal, within two months of the submission
         of the initial request since that notification must, in that situation, be regarded as a ‘response’ for the purposes of Article
         3(4) of the directive (Commission v France, cited above, paragraph 118). 
      
Interpreting Article 3(4) of Directive 90/in that way alone preserves the effectiveness of the provision, the very wording
         of which implies that the public authority is required to give reasons for any decision to refuse a request for information.
         
      
By contrast to the national legislation in issue in Commission v France, cited above, according to which the failure of a public authority to reply to the request for information within one month
         was deemed to constitute an implied decision to refuse the request, the legislation in issue in the main proceedings deems
         there to be a tacit refusal after a failure to respond within two months following submission of the request. 
      
It therefore follows from the judgment in Commission v France, cited above, that whereas, so as to grant effective judicial protection in accordance with Article of Directive 90/313,
         the said directive does not preclude the fiction of implied refusal of a request for access to information where there has
         been a failure to respond within two months, by virtue of Article 3(4) of the directive it is unlawful for such a decision
         not to be accompanied by reasons when the two-month time-limit expires. In those circumstances, whilst the implied refusal
         does constitute a ‘response’ for the purposes of Article 3(4), it must be regarded as unlawful. 
      
Accordingly, the answer to the third question must be that Article 3(4) of Directive 90/313, in conjunction with Article thereof, does not preclude, in a situation such as that in the main proceedings, national legislation according to which,
         for the purposes of granting effective judicial protection, the failure of a public authority to respond within a period of
         two months is deemed to give rise to an implied refusal which may be the subject of a judicial or administrative review in
         accordance with the national legal system. However, by virtue of Article 3(4) it is unlawful for such a decision not to be
         accompanied by reasons when the two-month time-limit expires. In those circumstances, the implied refusal must be regarded
         as unlawful.
      
 The second question
By its second question, the referring court asks what is the ‘decision’ which may be the subject of a review within the meaning
         of Article of Directive 90/313,  where no decision has been taken by the public authority upon expiry of the two-month time-limit
         referred to in Article 3(4) of that directive. 
      
The answer to that question is apparent from the explanations in relation to the third question, from which it follows that
         the failure of a public authority to respond within a period of two months is deemed to give rise to a decision that may be
         open to review in accordance with the national legal system. 
      
Consequently, the answer to the second question must be that the decision referred to in Article of Directive 90/313, against
         which a judicial or administrative review may be sought by the person who made the request for information, is the implied
         refusal which arises from the failure by the public authority competent to decide on that request to respond within two months.
         
      
 The fourth question
In view of the answer to the first question, namely that the time-limit laid down in Article 3(4) of Directive 90/is mandatory,
         it is no longer necessary to answer the fourth question. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) rules as follows: 
1.      The two-month time-limit laid down in Article 3(4) of Council Directive 90/313/EEC of June on the freedom of access
            to information on the environment is mandatory.
2.      The decision referred to in Article of Directive 90/313, against which a judicial or administrative review may be sought
            by the person who made the request for information, is the implied refusal which arises from the failure by the public authority
            competent to decide on that request to respond within two months.
3.      Article 3(4) of Directive 90/313, in conjunction with Article thereof, does not preclude, in a situation such as that in
            the main proceedings, national legislation according to which, for the purposes of granting effective judicial protection,
            the failure of a public authority to respond within a period of two months is deemed to give rise to an implied refusal which
            may be the subject of a judicial or administrative review in accordance with the national legal system. However, by virtue
            of Article 3(4) it is unlawful for such a decision not to be accompanied by reasons when the two-month time-limit expires.
            In those circumstances, the implied refusal must be regarded as unlawful. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 