
Joined Cases C-261/and C-348/María Julia Zurita García
and
Aurelio Choque Cabrera 
v
Delegado del Gobierno en la Región de Murcia
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Tribunal Superior de Justicia de Murcia)
(Visas, asylum and immigration – Measures concerning the crossing of external borders – Article 62(1) and (2)(a) EC – Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement – Articles 6b and – Regulation (EC) No 562/– Articles 5, and – Presumption concerning the duration of the stay – Unlawful presence of third-country nationals on the territory of a Member State – National legislation allowing for either a fine or expulsion, depending on the circumstances)
Summary of the Judgment
Visas, asylum, immigration – Crossing of the external borders of the Member States – Common rules on standards and procedures
            for border controls – Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement – Community Code on movement across borders – Unlawful
            stay of an individual in the territory of a Member State – Obligation on that Member State to adopt an expulsion order – None
(Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement, as amended by Regulation No 2133/2004, Arts 6b and 23; European Parliament
            and Council Directive 562/2006, Art. 11)
Articles 6b and of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement as amended by Regulation No 2133/on the requirement
         for the competent authorities of the Member States to stamp systematically the travel documents of third‑country nationals
         when they cross the external borders of the Member States and amending the provisions of the Convention implementing the Schengen
         agreement and the common manual to this end, and Article of Regulation No 562/establishing a Community Code on the
         rules governing the movement of persons across borders (Schengen Borders Code), must be interpreted as meaning that, where
         a third-country national is unlawfully present on the territory of a Member State because he or she does not fulfil, or no
         longer fulfils, the conditions of duration of stay applicable there, that Member State is not obliged to adopt a decision
         to expel that person.
      
(see para. 66, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Visas, asylum and immigration – Measures concerning the crossing of external borders – Article 62(1) and (2)(a) EC – Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement – Articles 6b and – Regulation (EC) No 562/– Articles 5, and – Presumption concerning the duration of the stay – Unlawful presence of third-country nationals on the territory of a Member State – National legislation allowing for either a fine or expulsion, depending on the circumstances)
In Joined Cases C‑261/and C‑348/08,
REFERENCES for preliminary rulings under Articles EC and EC from the Tribunal Superior de Justicia de Murcia (Spain),
         made by decisions of June and July 2008, received at the Court on June and July respectively, in the proceedings
      
María Julia Zurita García (C-261/08),
      
Aurelio Choque Cabrera (C-348/08)
      
v
Delegado del Gobierno en la Región de Murcia,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of P. Lindh, President of the Sixth Chamber, acting as President of the Third Chamber, A. Rosas, U. Lõhmus (Rapporteur),
         A. Ó Caoimh and A. Arabadjiev, Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
having regard to the request of the national court of June 2008, received at the Court on June 2008, that the urgent
         procedure be applied to the order for reference in Case C‑261/Zurita García under Article 104b of the Rules of Procedure, 
      
having regard to the decision of the Third Chamber of the Court of June not to apply the urgent procedure to that
         order for reference,
      
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Mr Choque Cabrera, by E. Bermejo Garrés, procuradora, and A. Corbalán Maiquez, abogado,
–        the Spanish Government, by N. Díaz Abad, acting as Agent,
–        the Italian Government, by I. Bruni, acting as Agent, and by G. Fiengo and W. Ferrante, avvocati dello Stato,
–        the Austrian Government, by E. Riedl, acting as Agent,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by M. Wilderspin and E. Adsera Ribera, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2009,
gives the following
Judgment
The present references for preliminary rulings concern the interpretation of Article 62(1) and (2)(a) EC, and Articles 5,
         and of Regulation (EC) No 562/of the European Parliament and of the Council of March establishing a Community
         Code on the rules governing the movement of persons across borders (Schengen Borders Code) (OJ L 105, p. 1). 
      
The references have been made in the course of two actions brought by Bolivian nationals, namely Ms Zurita García (Case C‑261/08)
         and Mr Choque Cabrera (Case C‑348/08), against the Delegado del Gobierno en la Región de Murcia (government representative
         for the region of Murcia; ‘the Delgado del Gobierno’) relating to orders for expulsion from Spanish territory, with a prohibition
         on entry into the Schengen area for five years, adopted against Ms Zurita García and Mr Choque Cabrera. 
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
 The Schengen Protocol 
Under Article of the Protocol integrating the Schengen acquis into the framework of the European Union, annexed to the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty establishing the European
         Community by the Treaty of Amsterdam (‘the Protocol’), Member States of the European Union are authorised to establish
         closer cooperation among themselves within the scope of the Schengen acquis, as defined in the annex to that protocol. That cooperation is conducted within the institutional and legal framework of
         the European Union and with respect for the relevant provisions of the Treaty on European Union and of the Treaty establishing
         the European Community. 
      
Under the first subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the Protocol, from the date of entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam,
         that is to say, from May 1999, the Schengen acquis was to apply immediately to the Member States referred to in Article of the Protocol.
      
Both the Agreement between the Governments of the States of the Benelux Economic Union, the Federal Republic of Germany and
         the French Republic on the gradual abolition of checks at their common borders, signed at Schengen on June (OJ L 239, p. 13), and the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement, signed at Schengen on June (OJ L 239,
         p. 19), as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 2133/of December on the requirement for the competent authorities
         of the Member States to stamp systematically the travel documents of third-country nationals when they cross the external
         borders of the Member States and amending the provisions of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement and the common
         manual to this end (OJ L 369, p. 5) (‘the CISA’), form part of that acquis.
      
Pursuant to the second sentence of the second subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the Protocol, the Council of the European Union
         adopted, on May 1999, Decision 1999/436/EC determining, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Treaty establishing
         the European Community and the Treaty on European Union, the legal basis for each of the provisions or decisions which constitute
         the Schengen acquis (OJ L 176, p. 17). It follows from Article of Decision 1999/436, in conjunction with Annex A thereto, that the Council
         selected Articles EC and EC, which form part of Title IV of the EC Treaty, entitled ‘Visas, asylum, immigration and
         other policies related to free movement of persons’, as the legal bases for Article of the CISA.
      
 The CISA
Article 6b of the CISA provides:
      
‘1.      If the travel document of a third-country national does not bear an entry stamp, the competent national authorities may presume
         that the holder does not fulfil, or no longer fulfils, the conditions of duration of stay applicable within the Member State
         concerned.
      
2.      This presumption may be rebutted where the third-country national provides, by any means, credible evidence such as transport
         tickets or proof of his or her presence outside the territory of the Member States, which shows that he or she has respected
         the conditions relating to the duration of a short stay.
      
...
3.      Should the presumption referred to in paragraph not be rebutted, the third-country national may be expelled by the competent
         authorities from the territory of the Member States concerned.’
      
Article of the CISA states:
      
‘1.      Aliens who do not fulfil or who no longer fulfil the short-stay conditions applicable within the territory of a Contracting
         Party shall normally be required to leave the territories of the Contracting Parties immediately.
      
...
3.      Where such aliens have not left voluntarily or where it may be assumed that they will not do so or where their immediate departure
         is required for reasons of national security or public policy, they must be expelled from the territory of the Contracting
         Party in which they were apprehended, in accordance with the national law of that Contracting Party. If under that law expulsion
         is not authorised, the Contracting Party concerned may allow the persons concerned to remain within its territory.
      
...
5.      Paragraph shall not preclude the application of national provisions on the right of asylum, the Geneva Convention relating
         to the Status of Refugees of July 1951, as amended by the New York Protocol of January 1967, paragraph of this Article
         or Article 33(1) of this Convention.’
      
 Regulation No 562/Regulation No 562/codifies the existing texts on border controls and seeks to consolidate and develop the legislative
         aspect of the policy of integrated management of borders by detailing rules on the crossing of external borders.
      
Under Article of that regulation, relating to entry conditions for third-country nationals:
      
‘1.      For stays not exceeding three months per six-month period, the entry conditions for third-country nationals shall be the following:
(a)      they are in possession of a valid travel document or documents authorising them to cross the border;
(b)      they are in possession of a valid visa, if required pursuant to Council Regulation (EC) No 539/of March listing
         the third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders and those whose nationals
         are exempt from that requirement [OJ L 81, p. 1], except where they hold a valid residence permit;
      
(c)      they justify the purpose and conditions of the intended stay, and they have sufficient means of subsistence, both for the
         duration of the intended stay and for the return to their country of origin or transit to a third country into which they
         are certain to be admitted, or are in a position to acquire such means lawfully;
      
(d)      they are not persons for whom an alert has been issued in the [Schengen Information System] for the purposes of refusing entry;
(e)      they are not considered to be a threat to public policy, internal security, public health or the international relations of
         any of the Member States, in particular where no alert has been issued in Member States’ national databases for the purposes
         of refusing entry on the same grounds.
      
…’
The wording of Article 11(1) and (3) of Regulation No 562/2006, concerning the presumption as regards fulfilment of conditions
         of duration of stay, adopted that of Article 6b(1) and (3) of the CISA, except in the Spanish-language version, which provides
         as follows in Article 11(3) of the regulation:
      
‘Should the presumption referred to in paragraph not be rebutted, the competent authorities shall expel the third-country
         national from the territories of the Member States concerned.’
      
Article of Regulation No 562/2006, concerning the refusal of entry, states:
      
‘1.      A third-country national who does not fulfil all the entry conditions laid down in Article 5(1) and does not belong to the
         categories of persons referred to in Article 5(4) shall be refused entry to the territories of the Member States. This shall
         be without prejudice to the application of special provisions concerning the right of asylum and to international protection
         or the issue of long-stay visas.
      
…’
Under Article 39(1) of that regulation, Articles to of the CISA were repealed with effect from October 2006.
      
Pursuant to its Article 40, Regulation No 562/entered into force on October 2006.
      
 National legislation
Framework Law 4/on the rights and freedoms of aliens in Spain and their social integration (Ley Orgánica sobre derechos
         y libertades de los extranjeros en España y su integración social) of January (BOE No of January 2000, p. 1139)
         was amended by Framework Law 8/of December (BOE No of December 2000, p. 45508), and by Framework Law 14/of November (BOE No of November 2003, p. 41193) (‘the Law on Aliens’). 
      
Article 28(3) of the Law on Aliens, which governs the departure of aliens from Spain, provides: 
      
‘Departure [from Spanish territory] is obligatory in the following situations:
...
(c)      in the event of administrative refusal of applications to remain on Spanish territory submitted by an alien, or in the absence
         of authorisation to be in Spain.’
      
Pursuant to Article of the Law on Aliens, offences under the provisions relating to the entry and stay of aliens are classified
         according to their gravity as ‘less serious’, ‘serious’ and ‘very serious’.
      
Article 53(a) of that law defines a serious offence as:
      
‘Being unlawfully present on Spanish territory, on the ground that the person concerned has not obtained an extension of permission
         to stay or a residence permit, or on the ground that these have expired more than three months previously, and that person
         has not applied for renewal of that permission to stay or residence permit within the period laid down by law.’
      
Under Article of the Law on Aliens, the penalty for a serious offence is a maximum fine of EUR 000. When imposing the
         penalty, the competent authority must apply criteria of proportionality, taking into account the degree of culpability, the
         damage caused, and the risk arising from the offence and its repercussions. 
      
Article of the Law on Aliens, concerning expulsion from the territory, provides:
      
‘1.      If the offender is a foreign national and behaves in a manner defined by law as very serious, or serious, within the meaning
         of Article 53(a), (b), (c), (d) and (f) of this Framework Law, it is possible, instead of imposing a fine, to expel that person
         from Spanish territory, at the conclusion of the corresponding administrative procedure. 
      
2.      Where the alien has been found guilty, in Spain or abroad, of intentional conduct which constitutes a criminal offence in
         Spain punishable by a prison sentence of longer than one year, that shall constitute a further legal basis for expulsion at
         the end of the corresponding administrative procedure, save where the previous conviction has been removed from the criminal
         record.
      
3.      Under no circumstances may the penalties of expulsion and a fine be imposed together.
...’
Article of Royal Decree 2393/2004, which adopted rules for the implementation of the Law on Aliens (Reglamento de la Ley
         de Extranjería) of December (BOE No of January 2005, p. 485), provides:
      
‘1.      In the absence of authorisation to be in Spain, inter alia, because the conditions for entry or residence are not met, or
         are no longer met, or in the event of an administrative refusal of an application for permission to stay, a residence permit
         or any other documentation necessary so that the alien may remain on Spanish territory … the administrative decision shall
         inform the person concerned of the obligation on him to leave the country, without prejudice to the possibility of that warning
         also being indicated on his passport or similar document, or even being indicated on a separate document if the person concerned
         is present in Spain on the basis of an identification document which does not allow for a suitable statement to be inserted.
      
...
2.      The compulsory departure must take place within the period prescribed by the decision refusing the request or, if appropriate
         and at the latest, within days of the notification of the decision of refusal, save for exceptional circumstances and where
         the person concerned is able to prove that he has sufficient means of subsistence; in such a situation, the period may be
         extended by days at most. If the period expires and the departure has not taken place, the provisions laid down in the
         present rules for the cases referred to in Article 53(a) of the Law [on Aliens] shall be applied.
      
3.      If the aliens to whom the present article refers in fact leave Spanish territory in accordance with the provisions of the
         foregoing paragraphs, they shall not be prohibited from entering the country and they may return to Spain, on condition that
         they comply with the rules governing access to Spanish territory.
      
...’
It is apparent from the orders for reference that the abovementioned national provisions are interpreted by the Tribunal Supremo
         (Supreme Court) as meaning that, since expulsion is a criminal penalty, the decision which imposes it must be specifically
         reasoned and must comply with the principle of proportionality.
      
It is apparent from the files before the Court that, in practice, where a third-country national does not have the right to
         enter or remain in Spain and his conduct has not given rise to aggravating circumstances, the penalty imposed is to be restricted
         to a fine, except where there is an additional factor which would justify replacing the fine with expulsion. 
      
 The disputes in the main proceedings and the question referred for preliminary ruling
In Case C-261/08, on September 2006, the competent authorities initiated an administrative procedure for infringement of
         Article 53(a) of the Law on Aliens against Ms Zurita García, a Bolivian national who was unlawfully present in Spain, either
         on the ground that she had not obtained an extension of her permission to stay or residence permit, or on the ground that
         the validity of those documents had expired more than three months previously and she had not sought to have them renewed.
      
That procedure led, on November 2006, to the adoption of a decision by the Delgado del Gobierno announcing that Ms Zurita
         García was to be expelled from Spanish territory. That penalty was accompanied by a prohibition on entry to the Schengen area
         for a period of five years.
      
Ms Zurita García challenged that decision before the Juzgado de lo Contencioso-Administrativo nº de Murcia (Court for Contentious
         Administrative Proceedings No of Murcia), which rejected the action at first instance. On appeal, Ms Zurita García claimed
         that that decision should be quashed because the administration had not correctly applied the principle of proportionality
         when assessing the circumstances of the case, which in no way justified the replacement of a fine by expulsion.
      
In Case C‑348/08, by decision of July 2007, the Delgado del Gobierno ordered the expulsion from Spanish territory of Mr
         Choque Cabrera, a Bolivian national who was unlawfully in Spain, within the meaning of Article 53(a) of the Law on Aliens,
         either on the ground that he had not obtained an extension of his permission to stay or residence permit, or on the ground
         that the validity of those documents had expired more than three months previously and he had not sought to have them renewed.
         That penalty was accompanied with a prohibition on entry to the Schengen area for a period of five years.
      
Mr Choque Cabrera challenged that decision before the Juzgado de lo Contencioso-Administrativo nº de Murcia (Court for Contentious
         Administrative Proceedings No of Murcia), which rejected the action at first instance. On appeal, Mr Choque Cabrera claimed
         that that decision should be quashed because the administration had not applied the principle of proportionality when assessing
         the circumstances of the case, and did not give reasons for replacing a fine with expulsion.
      
In those circumstances, the Tribunal Superior de Justicia de Murcia (High Court of Justice of Murcia) decided to stay both
         actions before it and to refer the following question, worded identically in each case, to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
         
      
‘Should Article 62(1) and (2)(a) of the Treaty establishing the European Community and Articles 5, and of Regulation
         (EC) No 562/… be interpreted as precluding national legislation, and the case-law which interprets it, which permits
         the substitution of the expulsion of any “third-country national” who does not have documentation authorising him to enter
         and remain in the territory of the European Union by imposition of a fine?’
      
By order of the President of the Third Chamber of March 2009, Cases C‑261/and C‑348/were joined for the purposes
         of the oral procedure and of judgment.
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
 Admissibility of the question referred in Case C‑261/The Spanish Government submits that the question referred in Case C‑261/is inadmissible on the ground that it is purely
         hypothetical.
      
It claims that the principle of non-retroactivity in criminal law precludes the application ratione temporis of the obligation, which may be laid down in Article 11(3) of Regulation No 562/2006, to penalise the facts of the case in
         the main proceedings by expulsion, inasmuch as that regulation entered into force only on October 2006, whereas the appellant
         in the main proceedings had already been accused of being unlawfully present on Spanish territory on September 2006.
      
In the Spanish Government’s view, as the case in the main proceedings concerns an administrative penalty, to which the same
         principles apply as those which apply to criminal proceedings, in particular the principle of legality and that of incrimination,
         the applicable legislation should be that which was in force on the date of the facts alleged, and not that which was applicable
         on the date on which the expulsion decision was taken by the national authorities, namely November 2006, a position which
         the referring court appears to share.
      
In that regard, it should be recalled that, in proceedings under Article EC, which are based on a clear separation of
         functions between the national courts and the Court of Justice, any assessment of the facts in the case is a matter for the
         national court. Similarly, it is solely for the national court, before which the dispute has been brought and which must assume
         responsibility for the ultimate judicial decision, to determine in the light of the particular circumstances of the case both
         the need for a preliminary ruling in order to enable it to deliver judgment and the relevance of the questions which it submits
         to the Court. Consequently, where the questions submitted concern the interpretation of Community law, the Court is in principle
         bound to give a ruling (see, inter alia, Case C‑326/IKA [2003] ECR I‑1703, paragraph 27; Case C‑145/Keller [2005] ECR I‑2529, paragraph 33; Case C‑419/Conseil général de la Vienne [2006] ECR I‑5645, paragraph 19; and Case C‑537/Gómez-Limón [2009] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 24).
      
The Court may refuse to rule on a question referred for a preliminary ruling by a national court only where it is quite obvious
         that the interpretation of Community law that is sought bears no relation to the actual facts of the main action or its purpose,
         where the problem is hypothetical, or where the Court does not have before it the factual or legal material necessary to give
         a useful answer to the questions submitted to it (see, inter alia, Case C‑379/PreussenElektra [2001] ECR I‑2099, paragraph 39; Case C‑390/Canal Satélite Digital [2002] ECR I‑607, paragraph 19; and Gómez-Limón, paragraph 25).
      
However, the Court has also held that, in exceptional circumstances, it can examine the conditions in which the case was referred
         to it by the national court, in order to assess whether it has jurisdiction (see, to that effect, Case 244/Foglia [1981] ECR 3045, paragraph 21). The spirit of cooperation which must prevail in the preliminary ruling procedure requires
         the national court, for its part, to have regard to the function entrusted to the Court of Justice, which is to assist in
         the administration of justice in the Member States and not to deliver advisory opinions on general or hypothetical questions
         (Foglia, paragraphs and 20; Case 149/Robards [1983] ECR 171, paragraph 19; and Case C‑83/Meilicke [1992] ECR I‑4871, paragraph 25).
      
In the present context, it must be held that, on the date on which the appellant in the main proceedings in Case C‑261/was officially accused of being unlawfully present on Spanish territory, namely September 2006, Regulation No 562/had not yet entered into force, with the result that the issue as to whether that regulation needs to be interpreted may arise
         in relation to the facts giving rise to that case. 
      
It is Article 6b of the CISA, and not Article 11(3) of Regulation No 562/2006, which will be applicable if the date of the
         facts were to be the criterion for determining the law applicable ratione temporis in Case C‑261/08. Article 6b of the CISA is among those provisions which were repealed under Article of Regulation No
         562/with effect from October 2006.
      
In any event, however, as the Advocate General notes in point of her Opinion, Article 11(3) of Regulation No 562/merely
         repeats the wording of Article 6b(3) of the CISA, which was in force when the appellant in the main proceedings was officially
         accused of being unlawfully present on Spanish territory.
      
Moreover, it should be pointed out that the referring court has submitted a question for a preliminary ruling to the Court
         with the same wording, in the course of the proceedings giving rise to the case which is joined to Case C‑261/08, that is
         to say, Case C‑348/08, the facts of which occurred when Regulation No 562/was already in force.
      
Therefore, the question referred in each of the two joined cases must be held to be admissible.
      
 Substance
At the outset, it should be pointed out that the request for interpretation concerns Article 62(1) and (2)(a) EC, and Articles
         5, and of Regulation No 562/2006.
      
It must be specified, firstly, that Article 62(1) and (2)(a) EC constitutes the legal basis for the Council’s action with
         a view to the adoption of measures ensuring the absence of any checks on persons when crossing internal borders, and measures
         on the crossing of the external borders of the Member States, and does not have the objective, in and of itself, of granting
         rights to third-country nationals, or of imposing obligations on Member States.
      
Next, Article of Regulation No 562/establishes the entry conditions for third-country nationals when they cross an
         external border for stays not exceeding three months per six-month period, while Article of that regulation concerns the
         refusal of entry, to the territory of the Member States, to third-country nationals who do not fulfil all of those conditions.
      
Consequently, Articles and of Regulation No 562/likewise do not govern the situation of third-country nationals,
         such as Ms Zurita García and Mr Choque Cabrera, who were already on Spanish territory, since an unspecified date, when the
         expulsion order was made against them on grounds of their unlawful stay.
      
Lastly, having regard to the fact that it cannot be ruled out that Articles 6b and of the CISA may be applicable, ratione temporis, in Case C‑261/(see paragraphs and of this judgment), as the Austrian Government and the Commission of the European
         Communities suggest, it is appropriate to take those articles of the CISA into account when examining the question referred
         for a preliminary ruling in order to provide the referring court with an answer which will be of use to it (see, by analogy,
         Case C‑275/Promusicae [2008] ECR I‑271, paragraph 46, and Case C‑346/Rüffert [2008] ECR I‑1989, paragraph 18).
      
As is clear from its wording, Article of the CISA applies to all those who are not nationals of a Member State and who
         do not fulfil, or no longer fulfil, the short-stay conditions applicable within the territory of one of the Member States,
         which, according to the factual account given in the orders for reference, would appear to be the situation of both Ms Zurita
         García and Mr Choque Cabrera.
      
It follows that, by its question, the referring court is asking, in essence, whether Articles 6b and of the CISA and Article
         of Regulation No 562/must be interpreted as meaning that, where a third-country national is unlawfully present on
         the territory of a Member State because he or she does not fulfil, or no longer fulfils, the short-stay conditions applicable
         in that Member State, that Member State is obliged to adopt a decision to expel that person.
      
Both Article 6b(1) of the CISA and Article 11(1) of Regulation No 562/establish a rebuttable presumption under which,
         if the travel document of a third-country national does not bear an entry stamp, the competent national authorities may presume
         that the holder does not fulfil, or no longer fulfils, the conditions of duration of stay applicable within the Member State
         concerned.
      
Article 6b(2) of the CISA, like Article 11(2) of Regulation No 562/2006, allows for that presumption to be rebutted where
         the third-country national provides, by any means, credible evidence, such as transport tickets or proof of his or her presence
         outside the territory of the Member States, that he or she has respected the conditions relating to the duration of a short
         stay.
      
Pursuant to Article 6b(3) of the CISA and Article 11(3) of Regulation No 562/2006, should the presumption referred to in paragraph
         of both of those articles not be rebutted, the third-country national may be expelled by the competent authorities from
         the territory of the Member States concerned.
      
The Commission points out, correctly, that there is a discrepancy between the wording of the Spanish-language version of Article
         11(3) of Regulation No 562/and that of the other language versions.
      
In the Spanish-language version, that provision imposes an obligation, inasmuch as it provides that the competent authorities
         of the Member State ‘shall expel’, from the territory of that Member State, a third-country national if the presumption is
         not rebutted. By contrast, in all the other language versions, expulsion appears as an option for those authorities.
      
It must be borne in mind in this regard that, according to settled case-law, the necessity for uniform application and accordingly
         for uniform interpretation of a Community measure makes it impossible to consider one version of the text in isolation, but
         requires that it be interpreted on the basis of both the real intention of its author and the aim he seeks to achieve, in
         the light, in particular, of the versions in all languages (see, inter alia, Case 29/Stauder [1969] ECR 419, paragraph 3; Case 55/Moksel Import und Export [1988] ECR 3845, paragraph 15; Case C‑268/Jany and Others [2001] ECR I‑8615, paragraph 47; and Case C‑188/Junk [2005] ECR I‑885, paragraph 33).
      
It also follows from settled case-law that the wording used in one language version of a Community provision cannot serve
         as the sole basis for the interpretation of that provision, or be made to override the other language versions in that regard.
         Such an approach would be incompatible with the requirement of the uniform application of Community law (see Case C‑149/Institute of the Motor Industry [1998] ECR I‑7053, paragraph 16; Case C‑187/Endendijk [2008] ECR I‑2115, paragraph 23; and Case C‑239/Sabatauskas and Others [2008] ECR I‑7523, paragraph 38).
      
In the present cases, as the Spanish-language version of Article 11(3) of Regulation No 562/is the only one which diverges
         from the wording of the other language versions, it must be concluded that the real intention of the legislature was not to
         impose an obligation on the Member States concerned to expel, from their territory, third-country nationals in the event that
         they have not succeeded in rebutting the presumption referred to in Article 11(1), but to grant those Member States the option
         of so doing.
      
That interpretation is confirmed, as the Advocate General states in point of her Opinion, by the fact that the Spanish-language
         version of Article 6b of the CISA, the wording of which was repeated in Article of Regulation No 562/2006, accords with
         the other language versions as regards the discretionary nature of the power, for the Member States concerned, to expel a
         third-country national who does not succeed in rebutting the abovementioned presumption.
      
It remains to be examined whether, as the Austrian Government claims, it follows from Article of the CISA that the Member
         States must expel from their territory any third-country national who is unlawfully present there, unless there is a reason
         to grant that person asylum or international protection. That provision would then preclude the option for a Member State
         to replace an expulsion order with the imposition of a fine.
      
That interpretation of Article of the CISA cannot be upheld.
      
It should be pointed out, in that regard, that the wording of Article of the CISA does not mention an obligation to expel
         in such strict terms, in the light of the exceptions therein. 
      
First, Article 23(1), which forms part of Chapter 4, concerning the conditions governing the movement of aliens, under Title
         II on the abolition of checks at internal borders and movement of persons, favours the voluntary departure of a third-country
         national who does not fulfil, or no longer fulfils, the short-stay conditions applicable within the territory of the Member
         State concerned. 
      
The same applies for Article 23(2), according to which a third-country national who holds a valid residence permit or provisional
         residence permit issued by another Member State is required to go to the territory of that Member State immediately. 
      
Second, to the extent to which Article 23(3) of the CISA provides that, in certain circumstances, a third-country national
         must be expelled from a Member State on the territory of which he was apprehended, that consequence is subordinate to the
         conditions laid down in the national law of the Member State concerned. In the event that the application of that national
         law does not permit expulsion, that Member State may allow the person concerned to remain on its territory.
      
It is thus for the national law of each Member State to adopt, particularly with regard to the conditions under which expulsion
         may take place, the means for applying the basic rules established in Article of the CISA relating to third-country nationals
         who do not fulfil, or no longer fulfil, the short-stay conditions for its territory.
      
In the cases in the main proceedings, it is apparent from the information provided to the Court in the course of the written
         procedure that, under national law, a decision imposing a fine is not a permit for a third-country national who is unlawfully
         present in Spain to remain legally on Spanish territory. It is also apparent that, irrespective of whether that fine is paid
         or not, that decision is notified to the person concerned with a warning that he should leave the territory within days
         and, that, should he fail to comply, he may be prosecuted under Article 53(a) of the Law on Aliens and risks being expelled
         with immediate effect.
      
Consequently, the reply to the question referred is that Articles 6b and of the CISA and Article of Regulation No 562/must be interpreted as meaning that, where a third-country national is unlawfully present on the territory of a Member State
         because he or she does not fulfil, or no longer fulfils, the conditions of duration of stay applicable there, that Member
         State is not obliged to adopt a decision to expel that person. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the actions pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
Articles 6b and of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement of June between the Governments of the States
            of the Benelux Economic Union, the Federal Republic of Germany and the French Republic on the gradual abolition of checks
            at their common borders, signed at Schengen on June 1990, as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 2133/of December
            on the requirement for the competent authorities of the Member States to stamp systematically the travel documents of
            third-country nationals when they cross the external borders of the Member States and amending the provisions of the Convention
            implementing the Schengen Agreement and the common manual to this end, and Article of Regulation (EC) No 562/of the
            European Parliament and of the Council of March establishing a Community Code on the rules governing the movement
            of persons across borders (Schengen Borders Code) must be interpreted as meaning that, where a third-country national is unlawfully
            present on the territory of a Member State because he or she does not fulfil, or no longer fulfils, the conditions of duration
            of stay applicable there, that Member State is not obliged to adopt a decision to expel that person.
[Signatures]
* Language of the cases: Spanish.
      
Top  
 