
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Joined Cases C-53/and C-217/Commune de Braine-le-Château and Michel Tillieut and Others 
v
Région wallonne
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Conseil d’État (Belgium))
(Directives 75/442/EEC and 91/156/EEC – Waste – Management plans – Suitable sites and installations for waste disposal – Permit granted in the absence of a management plan containing a map specifying planned locations for disposal sites)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Environment – Waste – Directive 75/– Obligation on the competent authorities to draw up one or more waste management plans
            – Suitable disposal sites or installations – Obligation, for purposes of issuing a permit, to mark them on a geographical
            map or to determine location criteria which are sufficiently precise
(Council Directive 75/442, as amended by Council Directive 91/156, Arts and 9)
2.        Environment – Waste – Directive 75/– Obligation on Member States to draw up waste management plans within a reasonable
            period – Scope
(Council Directive 75/442, as amended by Directive 91/156, Art. 7(1) and Council Directive 91/156, Art.  2(1), first subpara.)
3.        Environment – Waste – Directive 75/– Failure to draw up within the prescribed period one or more waste management plans
            relating to suitable disposal sites or installations – Issue of individual operating permits – Whether permissible
(Council Directive 75/442, as amended by Directive 91/156, Arts 4, 5, and 9)
1.        Article of Directive 75/on waste, as amended by Directive 91/156,  must be interpreted to mean that the management plan
         or plans which the competent authorities of the Member States are required to draw up under that provision must include either
         a geographical map specifying the exact location of waste disposal sites or location criteria which are sufficiently precise
         to enable the competent authority responsible for issuing a permit under Article of the directive to determine whether the
         site or installation in question falls within the management framework provided for by the plan.
      
(see para. 35, operative part. 1)
2.        Article 7(1) of Directive 75/on waste, as amended by Directive 91/156,   must be interpreted as requiring Member States
         to draw up waste management plans within a reasonable period, which may go beyond the time-limit for transposing Directive
         91/laid down in the first subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the latter.
      
(see para. 38, operative part 2)
3.        Articles 4, and of Directive 75/on waste, as amended by Directive 91/156, read in conjunction with Article thereof,
         must be interpreted as not precluding a Member State which has not adopted, within the period prescribed, one or more waste
         management plans relating to suitable sites or installations for waste disposal from issuing individual permits to operate
         such sites and installations.
      
(see para. 46, operative part 3)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)April 2004(1)
(Directives 75/442/EEC and 91/156/EEC  –  Waste  –  Management plans  –  Suitable sites and installations for waste disposal  –  Permit granted in the absence of a management plan containing a map specifying planned locations for disposal sites)
 In Joined Cases C-53/and C-217/02,
             REFERENCES to the Court under Article EC by the Conseil d'État (Belgium) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending
            before that court between 
            
Commune de Braine-le-Château (C-53/02),Michel Tillieut and Others (C-217/02)
            
and 
Région wallonne, interveners:BIFFA Waste Services SA (C-53/02),Philippe Feron (C-53/02),Philippe De Codt (C-53/02)andPropreté, Assainissement, Gestion de l'environnement SA (PAGE) (C-217/02),
            
 on the interpretation of Council Directive 75/442/EEC of July on waste (OJ L 194, p. 39), as amended by Council
            Directive 91/156/EEC of March (OJ L 78, p. 32),
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
 composed of: C. Gulmann, acting for the President of the Sixth Chamber, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur), J.-P. Puissochet,
            R. Schintgen and F. Macken, Judges,
            
 Advocate General:  J. Mischo,Registrar:  M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator,
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
–
 the commune of Braine-le-Château, by P. Levert, avocat,
               
–
 Mr Tillieut and Others, by J. Sambon, avocat,
               
–
 the Région wallonne, by P. Lambert (C-53/02) and by E. Orban de Xivry and J.-F. Cartuyvels (C-217/02), avocats,
               
–
 BIFFA Waste Services SA, by B. Deltour, avocat,
               
–
 Mr Feron and Mr De Codt, by  J. Sambon,
               
–
 Propreté, Assainissement, Gestion de l'environnement SA (PAGE), by F. Haumont, avocat,
               
–
 the Netherlands Government, by N.A.J. Bel (C-53/02) and H.G. Sevenster (C-217/02), acting as Agents,
               
–
 the Austrian Government, by C. Pesendorfer, acting as Agent (C-53/02),
               
–
 the United Kingdom Government, by K. Manji, acting as Agent, and D. Wyatt QC (C-217/02),
               
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by C.-F. Durand and M. Konstantinidis, acting as Agents (C-53/and C-217/02),
               
after hearing the oral observations of the commune of Braine-le-Château, represented by L. Evrard, avocat; of Mr Tillieut
               and Others, represented by J. Sambon; of the Région wallonne, represented by E. Orban de Xivry and F. Krenc, avocat; of Mr Feron
               and Mr De Codt, represented by J. Sambon; of BIFFA Waste Services SA, represented by B. Deltour; of Propreté, Assainissement,
               Gestion de l'environnement SA (PAGE), represented by F. Haumont; of the French Government, represented by E. Puisais, acting
               as Agent; of the United Kingdom Government, represented by D. Wyatt; and of the Commission, represented by  C.-F. Durand and M.
               Konstantinidis, at the hearing on June 2003,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By orders dated February (C-53/02) and May (C-217/02), received at the Court on February and June
         2002, respectively, the Conseil d’État (Council of State) submitted to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC several questions on the interpretation of Council Directive 75/442/EEC of July on waste (OJ L 194, p. 39),
         as amended by Council Directive 91/156/EEC of March (OJ L 78, p. 32) (hereinafter ‘the Directive’). 
         
            
 Those questions arose in the course of actions brought by, respectively, the commune of Braine-le-Château (C-53/02) and Mr
         Tillieut, the association des habitants de Louvain-la-Neuve ASBL and Mr Grégoire (C-217/02; hereinafter ‘Mr Tillieut and Others’)
         against the Région wallonne (the Walloon Region) concerning permits to operate waste disposal sites. 
         
Legal framework
Community legislation
            
 It is apparent from Article 1(e) of the Directive in conjunction with Annex IIA  thereto that, for the purposes of the Directive,
         ‘disposal’ of waste means, among other operations, ‘tipping above or underground (e.g. landfill, etc.)’, ‘land treatment’,
         ‘deep injection’ or ‘surface impoundment’.
         
            
 Article 3(1) of the Directive provides:
         ‘Member States shall take appropriate measures to encourage: 
         
(a)
firstly, the prevention or reduction of waste production and its harmfulness, in particular by: 
–
the development of clean technologies more sparing in their use of natural resources, 
–
the technical development and marketing of products designed so as to make no contribution or to make the smallest possible
                     contribution, by the nature of their manufacture, use or final disposal, to increasing the amount or harmfulness of waste
                     and pollution hazards, 
                  
–
the development of appropriate techniques for the final disposal of dangerous substances contained in waste destined for recovery,
…’
         
            
 Article of the Directive states:
         ‘Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that waste is recovered or disposed of without endangering human
         health and without using processes or methods which could harm the environment, and in particular: 
         
–
without risk to water, air, soil and plants and animals, 
–
without causing a nuisance through noise or odours, 
–
without adversely affecting the countryside or places of special interest. 
 Member States shall also take the necessary measures to prohibit the abandonment, dumping or uncontrolled disposal of waste.’
         
            
 Article of the Directive provides:
         ‘1.     Member States shall take appropriate measures, in cooperation with other Member States where this is necessary or advisable,
         to establish an integrated and adequate network of disposal installations, taking account of the best available technology
         not involving excessive costs. The network must enable the Community as a whole to become self-sufficient in waste disposal
         and the Member States to move towards that aim individually, taking into account geographical circumstances or the need for
         specialised installations for certain types of waste. 
          2.       The network must also enable waste to be disposed of in one of the nearest appropriate installations, by means of the most
         appropriate methods and technologies in order to ensure a high level of protection for the environment and public health.’
         
            
 Article of the Directive is worded as follows:
         ‘1.     In order to attain the objectives referred to in Article 3, and 5, the competent authority or authorities referred to in
         Article shall be required to draw up as soon as possible one or more waste management plans. Such plans shall relate in
         particular to: 
         
–
the type, quantity and origin of waste to be recovered or disposed of, 
–
general technical requirements, 
–
any special arrangements for particular wastes, 
–
suitable disposal sites or installations. 
 Such plans may, for example, cover: 
         
–
the natural or legal persons empowered to carry out the management of waste, 
–
the estimated costs of the recovery and disposal operations, 
–
appropriate measures to encourage rationalisation of the collection, sorting and treatment of waste. 
 2.       Member States shall collaborate as appropriate with the other Member States concerned and the Commission to draw up such plans.
         They shall notify the Commission thereof. 
          3.       Member States may take the measures necessary to prevent movements of waste which are not in accordance with their waste management
         plans. They shall inform the Commission and the Member States of any such measures.’
         
            
 Article of the Directive provides:
         ‘1.     For the purposes of implementing Articles 4, and 7, any establishment or undertaking which carries out the operations specified
         in Annex IIA must obtain a permit from the competent authority referred to in Article 6. 
          Such permit shall cover: 
         
–
the types and quantities of waste, 
–
the technical requirements, 
–
the security precautions to be taken, 
–
the disposal site, 
–
the treatment method. 
 2.       Permits may be granted for a specified period, they may be renewable, they may be subject to conditions and obligations, or,
         notably, if the intended method of disposal is unacceptable from the point of view of environmental protection, they may be
         refused.’
         
            
 Pursuant to the first subparagraph of Article 2(1) of Directive 91/156, Member States were to bring into force the laws, regulations
         and administrative provisions necessary to comply with the Directive not later than April and forthwith to inform the
         Commission thereof.
         
            
 Council Directive 1999/31/EC of April on the landfill of waste (OJ L 182, p. 1) entered into force on July
         1999, and Member States were to adopt the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with it not
         later than two years after that date. Article 8(b) states:
         ‘Member States shall take measures in order that:
         ...
         (b)     the landfill project is in line with the relevant waste management plan or plans referred to in Article of Directive 75/442/EEC’.
         
         
National legislation
            
 According to Article of the Décret du juin relatif aux déchets (Decree of June on waste) (Moniteur belge of August 1996; hereinafter ‘the Decree’):
         ‘1.     The Government shall draw up a waste management plan in accordance with Articles to of the Decree of April on
         environmental planning with a view to sustainable development. That plan shall be a sectoral programme for the purposes of
         the Decree. It may comprise planning by type of waste or by sectoral activity. 
          The plan shall include in particular: 
         (1)     a description of the type, quantity and origin of the waste, of the methods employed in the management of the waste produced
         and transported each year, and of the installations currently in operation and the occupied sites;
         (2)     an inventory of the legislative and general measures in force which affect the management of waste;
         (3)     a description of likely trends in the sector and the objectives to be met as regards waste management;
         (4)     project and initiatives to be developed as regards prevention, recovery and disposal, recommended technical methods of waste
         management and the natural or legal persons authorised to undertake the management of waste.
          The plan shall be accompanied by information on its budgetary implications for the public authorities, its foreseeable general
         economic effects in the short, medium and long term and its expected effects on the environment. 
          2.       The Government shall establish, following the procedure laid down in Articles and 26, a plan for landfills which includes
         sites likely to be allocated for setting up and operating landfills, with the exception of those landfills reserved for the
         exclusive use of the producer of the waste.
          No landfills other than one intended for the exclusive use of the producer of waste may be authorised aside from those provided
         for in the plan referred to in this paragraph.’
         
            
 In order to implement Article 24(1) and (2) of the Decree, the Wallonia Government adopted on January the Wallonia
         waste plan ‘Horizon 2010’ (Moniteur belge of April 1998, p. 11806; hereinafter ‘Horizon 2010’) and, on April 1999, a plan for landfill sites (centres d’enfouissement
         technique) (Moniteur belge of July 1999, p. 26747; hereinafter ‘the CET’) which entered into force on July 1999. Both plans were notified to the
         Commission as part of the transposition of Article of the Directive.
         
            
 The first paragraph of Article of the Decree states:
         ‘Until such time as the landfill plan referred to in Article 24(2) has entered into force, applications for permits within
         the meaning of Article in order to set up and operate landfills and applications for building permits as provided for in
         Article 41(1) of the Wallonia Town and Country Planning and Heritage Code which were held to be admissible before this Decree
         was adopted by Parliament may result in a permit being granted in industrial, agricultural and extraction zones as defined
         in Articles 172, and of that code.’
         
The main proceedings and questions submitted for a preliminary rulingCase C-53/By decision of May 1999, the Wallonia Government granted BIFFA Waste Services SA (hereinafter ‘BIFFA’) a permit to extend
         and operate a landfill in Braine-le-Château (Belgium). That permit covered, inter alia, the extension of the Cour-au-Bois
         Nord waste disposal site to the neighbouring site of Cour-au-Bois Sud.
         
            
 The commune of Braine-le-Château, supported by Mr Feron and Mr De Codt, brought an action before the Conseil d’État for annulment
         of the permit issued on May 1999. In support of its application, it alleges, among other things, infringement of Articles
         4, 5, and of the Directive. It submits that, despite Article of the Directive and Article 24(2) of the Decree, the Wallonia
         Government had not adopted any waste management plan on the date when that permit was issued. First, Horizon does not
         constitute such a plan and, secondly, the CET was not yet in force on the aforementioned date. Braine-le-Château adds that
         the site at Cour-au-Bois Sud is not included in the CET and that, accordingly, the permit was issued for a site not listed
         in any plan for waste disposal sites.
         
            
 The Wallonia Government contends that Horizon contains spatial planning for the purposes of Article 7(1) of the Directive
         and includes the site at issue. BIFFA, an intervener in the main proceedings, contends that it is in no way established that
         Article of the Directive necessarily entails landfill planning such as that in the CET.
         
            
 In reply, Braine-le-Château points out, inter alia, that Horizon constitutes a general policy document which does not
         satisfy the requirements of Article of the Directive and that that plan repeats the list of existing controlled landfill
         sites, to the exclusion of potential sites, so that it includes the site at Cour-au-Bois Nord but not that at Cour-au-Bois
         Sud. Similarly, as regards the CET, only the site at Cour-au-Bois Nord is included in the list of authorised landfills, while
         that at Cour-au-Bois Sud is not mentioned in the list of new sites selected under the plan. Article of the Decree cannot
         in any way constitute the spatial planning required by the Directive, inasmuch as a provision of that kind does not amount
         to a determination of ‘suitable sites’ in accordance with the first subparagraph of Article 7(1) of the Directive: such a
         determination presupposes that the proposed site will be measured against the other requirements of the Directive, in particular
         the protection of human health and the environment.
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Conseil d’État decided to stay the proceedings and to  refer the following questions to the Court
         for a preliminary ruling:
         
‘1.
Does the obligation imposed on Member States by Article of Directive 75/442/EEC of July on waste, as amended by
               Directive 91/156/EEC of March 1991, to draw up one or more waste management plans relating in particular to “suitable disposal
               sites or installations” mean that the States to which the Directive is addressed are required to mark on a geographical map
               the precise locations of the planned waste disposal sites or to determine location criteria which are sufficiently precise
               to enable the competent authority responsible for issuing a permit under Article of the Directive to ascertain whether the
               site or installation falls within the management framework prescribed by the plan?
            
2.
Do Articles 4, and of Directive 75/442/EEC of July on waste, as amended by Directive 91/156/EEC of March 1991,
               whether or not read in conjunction with Article of Directive 75/442, preclude a Member State which has not adopted within
               the period prescribed one or more waste management plans relating to “suitable disposal sites or installations” from issuing
               individual permits to operate waste disposal installations, such as landfills?’
            
Case C-217/By Ministerial Order of December 1998, Propreté, Assainissement, Gestion de l’environnement SA (hereinafter ‘PAGE’) was
         issued a permit to continue to operate a landfill at ‘Les trois burettes’ in Mont‑Saint-Guibert (Belgium). That order lays
         down aftercare conditions and sets up a support committee and a scientific committee for the landfill.
         
            
 Mr Tillieut and Others and the association l’Épine blanche ASBL brought actions before the Conseil d’État for the annulment
         of the Ministerial Order. Since the causes of action were connected, the two cases were joined for the purpose of the decision
         on the merits. However, the association subsequently withdrew its application.
         
            
 Mr Tillieut and Others claim that the permit granted under the Order was issued for a site not listed in a plan for waste
         disposal sites, contrary to Articles 7(1) and of the Directive and Article 24(2) of the Decree. They in essence submit that
         Article of the Directive requires spatial planning of disposal sites, that the time-limit for transposition has been exceeded,
         that Horizon does not amount to the spatial planning required by the Directive and that the CET was only in draft form
         at the time the Order in question was adopted. They add that Article of the Decree does not satisfy the planning requirement
         laid down by the Directive, the implementation of which requires that ‘suitable sites’ be determined and that proposed sites
         be measured against the other requirements of the Directive, that is, the protection of human health and the environment.
         
            
 The Région wallonne contends that Articles and of the Directive do not have direct effect. In addition, waste management
         plans have no binding effect and the Directive leaves it to Member States to decide whether a plan must identify the sites
         chosen or whether it may simply set out the criteria which establish the suitability of sites. It also points out that Horizon
         includes various provisions relating to spatial planning which the site that is the subject-matter of the Ministerial
         Order of December satisfies. The Région wallonne also refers to the draft CET, provisionally adopted by order of April 1998, which takes account of the landfill at Mont-Saint-Guibert. Finally, it considers that by designating the zones
         in sectoral plans which can be used provisionally for landfill, Article of the Decree adequately transposes Article of
         the Directive.
         
            
 PAGE, the intervener in the main proceedings, takes the view that Article of the Directive does not entail spatial planning
         of waste management installations. That provision in fact refers to technical rather than geographical planning. The Directive
         does not specify the legal effect of waste management plans and PAGE infers from this, first, that those plans do not necessarily
         have a regulatory effect and, secondly, that the issue of a permit need not necessarily be made subject to compliance with
         any spatial planning. It also contends that the Decree complies with the requirement for spatial planning laid down in Article
         of the Directive and that the same is true as regards Horizon 2010. Finally, PAGE points to the absence of a time-limit
         for the transposition of Article of the Directive and the fact that the European Commission has not taken steps against
         the Kingdom of Belgium by way of infringement proceedings under the EC Treaty. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Conseil d’État decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court for
         a preliminary ruling:
         
‘1.
Does the obligation imposed on Member States by Article of Directive 75/442/EEC of July on waste, as amended by
               Directive 91/156/EEC of March 1991, to draw up one or more waste management plans relating in particular to “suitable disposal
               sites or installations” mean that the States to which the Directive is addressed are required to mark on a geographical map
               the precise locations of the planned waste disposal sites or to determine location criteria which are sufficiently precise
               to enable the competent authority responsible for issuing a permit under Article of the Directive to ascertain whether the
               site or installation falls within the management framework prescribed by the plan?
            
2.
Does Article of Directive 75/442, as amended by Directive 91/156, whether or not read in conjunction with Article of Directive
               75/or with any other provision of the same directive, preclude a Member State which has not adopted within the period
               prescribed one or more waste management plans relating to “suitable disposal sites or installations” from issuing individual
               permits to operate waste disposal installations, such as landfills?
            
3.
Does Article 7(1) of Directive 75/442, as amended by Directive 91/156, mean that the plan or plans relating inter alia to
               “suitable disposal sites or installations” must be drawn up not later than April 1993, or does it mean that they must be
               drawn up within a reasonable period, which may exceed the period prescribed for transposing the Directive into national law?’
            
            
 By order of the President of the Court of January 2003, the two cases were joined for the purposes of the oral procedure
         and the judgment.
         
Consideration of the questions referred for a preliminary rulingFirst question (Cases C‑53/and C‑217/02)
            
 By its first question, the national court in essence asks whether Article of the Directive must be interpreted to mean that
         the management plan or plans which the competent authorities of the Member States are required to draw up under that provision
         must include a geographical map which specifies the exact location of waste disposal sites or whether that provision merely
         requires those authorities to establish location criteria which are sufficiently precise to enable the competent authority
         responsible for issuing a permit under Article of the Directive to determine whether the site or installation in question
         falls within the management  framework provided for by the plan. 
         
            
 Pursuant to the first subparagraph of Article 7(1) of the Directive, the competent authorities of the Member States are required
         to draw up as soon as possible one or more waste management plans in order to attain the objectives referred to in Articles
         3, and of the Directive. That same paragraph states that such plans are to relate in particular to the type, quantity
         and origin of waste to be recovered or disposed of, general technical requirements, any special arrangements for particular
         wastes and suitable disposal sites or installations.
         
            
 Although the wording of that provision makes clear that management plans must relate to ‘suitable disposal sites or installations’
         for waste, it is nevertheless not possible, in the absence of any indication as to how those sites are designated, to infer
         from that wording that such plans must necessarily contain the precise location of waste disposal sites.
         
            
 Moreover, Article 9(1) of the Directive provides that individual permits issued to establishments or undertakings which carry
         out disposal operations specified in Annex IIA to the Directive are to cover, inter alia, the ‘disposal site’. That provision
         does not preclude that the precise location of such a site could be decided only at the stage when the individual permit is
         issued.
         
            
 In any event, management plans cannot in all cases be the only factor which determines the exact location of waste disposal
         sites, inasmuch as the final decision concerning location in some circumstances depends on the relevant rules relating to
         land-use planning and, in particular, the consultation and decision-making procedures implemented pursuant to Council Directive
         85/337/EEC of June on the assessment of the effects of certain public and private projects on the environment (OJ
         L 175, p. 40), as amended by Council Directive 97/11/EC of March (OJ L 73, p. 5), or Council Directive 96/61/EC
         of September concerning integrated pollution prevention and control (OJ L 257, p. 26).
         
            
 Nevertheless, the argument put forward by PAGE at the hearing that management plans need not even contain location criteria
         for disposal sites cannot be accepted if the first subparagraph of Article 7(1) of the Directive is not to be rendered redundant
         in so far as it provides that management plans are to relate in particular to ‘sites’ which are suitable for waste disposal,
         a term which implies a geographical dimension to such plans.
         
            
 In the absence of a geographical map specifying the location of future waste disposal sites, such location criteria must be
         chosen in the light of the objectives pursued by the Directive and be expressed with sufficient precision so that the authority
         to which an application for an individual permit under Article of the Directive is made may in due course clearly determine
         the site which best meets those objectives, in the light, inter alia, of the most recent scientific and technical knowledge
         and the specific technical processes chosen for disposal.
         
            
 Chief among those objectives is the protection of public health and the environment, which is the essence of Community legislation
         relating to waste              (Case C-292/Commission v France [2002] ECR I-4097, paragraph 44). Those objectives also include the establishment of an integrated and adequate network of
         disposal installations, taking account of the best available technology not involving excessive costs, a network which must
         also enable waste to be disposed of in one of the nearest appropriate installations (Article 5(1) and (2) of the Directive).
         
            
 As pointed out before the Court, the location criteria for disposal sites should therefore, where relevant, relate to geological
         and hydrogeological conditions, the distance of such sites from inhabited areas, the prohibition on establishing installations
         in the vicinity of sensitive areas or the existence of adequate infrastructure, such as connections to transport networks.
         
            
 In those circumstances, the answer to the first question must be that Article of the Directive must be interpreted to mean
         that the management plan or plans which the competent authorities of the Member States are required to draw up under that
         provision must include either a geographical map specifying the exact location of waste disposal sites or location criteria
         which are sufficiently precise to enable the competent authority responsible for issuing a permit under Article of the Directive
         to determine whether the site or installation in question falls within the management framework provided for by the plan.
         
Third question (Case C-217/02)
            
 By this question, the national court asks whether Article 7(1) of the Directive must be interpreted to mean that Member States
         may draw up waste management plans without being bound by the time-limit for transposition laid down in the first subparagraph
         of Article 2(1) of Directive 91/156.
         
            
 In that regard, the Court observed in paragraph of Commission v France, cited above, that the words ‘as soon as possible’ in Article 7(1) of the Directive are an indication that the time-limit
         laid down in the first subparagraph of Article 2(1) of Directive 91/for the transposition of that directive does not relate
         to the obligation to draw up waste management plans. If that were the case, the words would be meaningless. The Court accordingly
         inferred that the words ‘as soon as possible’ are to be interpreted as stipulating, in principle, a reasonable period for
         compliance by the competent authorities of each Member State with that particular obligation, that period being unconnected
         with the period laid down for transposition of Directive 91/156.
         
            
 The answer to the third question must therefore be that Article 7(1) of the Directive must be interpreted as requiring Member
         States to draw up waste management plans within a reasonable period, which may go beyond the time-limit for transposing Directive
         91/laid down in the first subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the latter.
         
Second question (Cases C-53/and C-217/02)
            
 By that question, the national court asks whether Articles 4, and of the Directive, read in conjunction with Article thereof, preclude a Member State which has not adopted, within the period prescribed, one or more waste management plans relating
         to suitable sites or installations for waste disposal from issuing individual permits to operate such sites and installations.
         
            
 The first subparagraph of Article 9(1) of the Directive states that it is ‘for the purposes of implementing Articles 4, and 7’ that any establishment or undertaking which carries out the disposal operations specified in Annex IIA to the Directive
         must obtain a permit from the competent authority.
         
            
 Those words denote that the implementation of management plans for the purpose of Article of the Directive is meant to be
         carried out by issuing individual permits consistent with those plans. It does not, however, follow that the failure to adopt
         such plans necessarily prevents the competent authority from issuing any individual permit.
         
            
 It is true that failure to draw up management plans may lead to an infringement procedure under Article EC against the
         Member State concerned, seeking to have the Court declare that the Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations  under
         Article of the Directive. The Court has indeed held that a failure to fulfil the obligation to draw up waste management
         plans must be regarded as serious (Commission v France, cited above, paragraph 44).
         
            
 Nevertheless, the fact that transposition of Article of the Directive may occur after the expiry of the time-limit laid
         down for the transposition of Articles 4, and of the Directive (see paragraphs and of this judgment) shows that
         an operating permit may be issued despite the failure to adopt a management plan beforehand. To require that an individual
         permit can be issued only after management plans which comply with the requirements of Article of the Directive have been
         drawn up would result in the implementation of other provisions of the Directive, in particular Articles and 5, being unduly
         delayed, to the detriment of achieving the objectives pursued by the Directive.
         
            
 Such a delay would be particularly unacceptable in that it could lead to a situation where the disposal of waste would be
         seriously compromised as the result of an inadequate number of lawfully available disposal sites. 
         
            
 It is true that Article 8(b) of Directive 1999/provides that a landfill permit may not be issued unless the landfill project
         is in line with the relevant waste management plan or plans referred to in Article of the Directive. None the less, Directive
         1999/is not applicable to the main proceedings, inasmuch as both the permit issued on May and the Ministerial Order
         of December were formalised before the time-limit for transposing that directive expired.
         
            
 In the light of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the second question must be that Articles 4, and of the Directive,
         read in conjunction with Article thereof, must be interpreted as not precluding a Member State which has not adopted, within
         the period prescribed, one or more waste management plans relating to suitable sites or installations for waste disposal from
         issuing individual permits to operate such sites and installations.
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the French, Netherlands, Austrian and United Kingdom Governments and by the Commission, which have submitted
         observations to the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step
         in the proceedings pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court.
         
On those grounds,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
 in answer to the questions referred to it by the Conseil d’État by orders of February and May 2002, hereby rules:
         
 
1.
Article of Council Directive 75/442/EEC of July on waste, as amended by Council Directive 91/156/EEC of March
                     1991, must be interpreted to mean that the management plan or plans which the competent authorities of the Member States are
                     required to draw up under that provision must include either a geographical map specifying the exact location of waste disposal
                     sites or location criteria which are sufficiently precise to enable the competent authority responsible for issuing a permit
                     under Article of the Directive to determine whether the site or installation in question falls within the management framework
                     provided for by the plan.
                  
 
2.
Article 7(1) of Directive 75/442, as amended by Directive 91/156, must be interpreted as requiring Member States to draw up
                     waste management plans within a reasonable period, which may go beyond the time-limit for transposing Directive 91/laid
                     down in the first subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the latter.
                  
 
3.
Articles 4, and of Directive 75/442, as amended by Directive 91/156, read in conjunction with Article thereof, must
                     be interpreted as not precluding a Member State which has not adopted, within the period prescribed, one or more waste management
                     plans relating to suitable sites or installations for waste disposal from issuing individual permits to operate such sites
                     and installations.
                  
Gulmann
Cunha Rodrigues
Puissochet
Schintgen
Macken
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on April 2004.
         
R. Grass
V. Skouris
Registrar
President
 –
            
Language of the case: French.
Top  
 