
Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber) of January – Commission v Luxembourg
(Case C-69/05)
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Regulation (EC) No 659/– State aid in the agricultural sector – Submission of annual reports during and – Guidelines for the assessment of State aid
1.                     State aid – Examination by the Commission – Guidelines adopted by the Commission and accepted by the Member States – Binding
            effect (Art. 88(1) EC) (see para. 9)
2.                     Member States – Obligations under Community law – Failure to fulfil obligations – Justification based on national considerations
            – Not permissible (Art. EC) (see para. 10)
3.                     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Examination of merits by the Court – Situation to be taken into consideration
            – Situation on expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion (Art. EC) (see para. 11)
Re:
Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations – Failure to communicate, before July and no later than June
                  2002, annual reports on all existing State aid schemes during and in the agricultural sector – Article 88(1) EC
                  and Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 659/of March laying down detailed rules for the application of Article
                  of the EC Treaty (now Article EC) (OJ L 83, p. 1) – Guidelines for State aid in the agriculture sector (2000/C/28/02)
                  (OJ C 28, p. 2; corrected version OJ C 232, p. 19)
               
Operative part:
The Court:
1.
Declares that, by failing to communicate, before July and no later than June 2002, annual reports on all State aid
                     schemes in the agricultural sector existing during and 2001, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has failed to fulfil its obligations
                     under Article 88(1) EC and Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 659/of March laying down detailed rules for
                     the application of Article [EC], as implemented by the Commission communication entitled ‘Community Guidelines for State
                     aid in the agriculture sector’, published in the Official Journal of the European Communities of February 2000;
                  
2.
Orders the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg to pay the costs.
Top  
 