
Case C-285/Heinrich Stefan Schneider
v
Land Rheinland-Pfalz
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Bundesverwaltungsgericht)
(Agriculture – Regulations (EC) Nos 1493/and 753/– Common organisation of the market in wine – Description, designation, presentation and protection of certain wine sector products – Protection of traditional terms – Translation into another language – Use for wines from another producing Member State)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Wine – Designation and presentation of wines – Regulations Nos 1493/and 753/(Council Regulation No 1493/1999, Art. 47(2)(c) and Annex VII, point B(1)(b), fifth indent, and (3); Commission Regulation
            No 753/2002, Arts 6(1) and 23)
2.        Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Wine – Designation and presentation of wines – Regulations Nos 1493/and 753/(Commission Regulation No 753/2002, Art. 24(2)(a), and Annex III)
3.        Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Wine – Designation and presentation of wines – Regulations Nos 1493/and 753/(Commission Regulation No 753/2002, Art. 24(2) and Annex III)
1.        Article 47(2)(c) of Regulation No 1493/on the common organisation of the market in wine, in conjunction with point (B)(3)
         of Annex VII thereto and Article 6(1) of Regulation No 753/laying down certain rules for applying Regulation No 1493/as regards the description, designation, presentation and protection of certain wine sector products, as amended by Regulation
         No 1512/2005, is to be interpreted as meaning that the use of a particular relating to the production or ageing method or
         the quality of a wine may be permitted under those provisions only if there is no risk that it will mislead the persons to
         whom it is addressed by creating confusion between that particular and the other traditional terms referred to in the fifth
         indent of point (B)(1)(b) of Annex VII to Regulation No 1493/and Article of Regulation No 753/2002. It is for the
         national court to assess whether the terms in issue in the main proceedings are likely to give rise to such a risk.
      
(see paras 28-29, 31-32, operative part 1)
2.        Article 24(2)(a) of Regulation No 753/laying down certain rules for applying Regulation No 1493/as regards the description,
         designation, presentation and protection of certain wine sector products, as amended by Regulation No 1512/2005, is to be
         interpreted as meaning that there may be imitation or evocation of a traditional term within the meaning of that provision
         where that term is translated into a language other than that in which that term is given in Annex III to that regulation,
         if that translation is likely to cause confusion or to mislead the persons to whom it is addressed. It is for the national
         court to examine whether that is the case in the dispute before it.
      
(see paras 39, 43-44, operative part 2)
3.        Article 24(2) of Regulation No 753/laying down certain rules for applying Regulation No 1493/as regards the description,
         designation, presentation and protection of certain wine sector products, as amended by Regulation No 1512/2005, is to be
         interpreted as meaning that a traditional term listed in Annex III to that regulation is protected both with regard to wines
         of the same category or categories from the same producer Member State as that traditional term and with regard to wines of
         the same category or categories from other producer Member States.
      
(see paras 53, 55-56, 58, operative part 3)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
March (*)
      
(Agriculture – Regulations (EC) Nos 1493/and 753/– Common organisation of the market in wine – Description, designation, presentation and protection of certain wine sector products – Protection of traditional terms – Translation into another language – Use for wines from another producing Member State)
In Case C‑285/06,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Bundesverwaltungsgericht (Germany), made by decision of March
         2006, received at the Court on July 2006, in the proceedings
      
Heinrich Stefan Schneider
v
Land Rheinland-Pfalz,
intervening party:
Vertreterin des Bundesinteresses beim Bundesverwaltungsgericht,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, G. Arestis, R. Silva de Lapuerta (Rapporteur), E. Juhász and T. von Danwitz,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: J. Swedenborg, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2007,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Mr Schneider, by H. Böckel and H. Uhlmann, Rechtsanwälte,
–        Land Rheinland-Pfalz, by M. Justen and C. Pause, acting as Agents,
–        the Greek Government, by S. Charitaki and S. Papaioannou, acting as Agents,
–        the Spanish Government, by J. Rodríguez Cárcamo, acting as Agent,
–        the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by M. Fiorilli, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by F. Jimeno Fernández and F. Erlbacher, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on October 2007,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Council Regulation (EC) No 1493/of May on the common organisation of the market in wine (OJ L 179, p. 1) and Commission Regulation (EC) No 753/of April
         laying down certain rules for applying Regulation No 1493/as regards the description, designation, presentation
         and protection of certain wine sector products (OJ L 118, p. 1), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1512/of September (OJ L 241, p. 15; ‘Regulation No 753/2002’).
      
The reference was made in the context of a dispute between Mr Schneider and Land Rheinland-Pfalz (Rhineland-Palatinate) regarding the use of the terms ‘Réserve’ and ‘Grande Réserve’ or ‘Reserve’ and ‘Privat-Reserve’
         for the marketing of wine. 
      
 Legal context
 Regulation No 1493/Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 1493/is worded as follows:
      
‘the description, designation and presentation of products covered by this Regulation can have significant effects on their
         marketability; this Regulation should therefore lay down rules in this connection which take into account the legitimate interests
         of consumers and producers and promote the smooth operation of the internal market and the production of quality products;
         the fundamental principles of these rules should provide for the obligatory use of certain terms so as to identify the product
         and provide consumers with certain important items of information and the optional use of other information on the basis of
         Community rules or subject to rules concerning the prevention of fraudulent practices’.
      
Article 47(1) and (2) of Regulation No 1493/states:
      
‘1.      Rules relating to the description, designation and presentation of certain products covered by this Regulation, and the protection
         of certain particulars and terms are set out in this Chapter and in Annexes VII and VIII. The rules shall take into account,
         in particular, the following objectives:
      
(a)       the protection of the legitimate interests of consumers;
(b)       the protection of the legitimate interests of producers;
(c)       the smooth operation of the internal market;
(d)       the promotion of the production of quality products.
2.       The rules mentioned in paragraph shall include, in particular, provisions:
(a)       making the use of certain terms compulsory;
(b)       permitting the use of certain terms, subject to conditions;
(c)       permitting the use of other terms, including information which may be useful for consumers;
(d)      governing protection and control arrangements for certain terms;
(e)      governing the use of geographical indications and traditional terms;
…’
Article of Regulation No 1493/provides: 
      
         ‘The description and presentation of the products referred to in this Regulation, and any form of advertising for such products,
         must not be incorrect or likely to cause confusion or to mislead the persons to whom they are addressed, particularly as regards:
      
–        the information provided for in Article 47. This shall apply even if the information is used in translation or with a reference
         to the actual provenance or with additions such as “kind”, “type”, “style”, “imitation”, “brand” or the like;
      
…’
Under the heading ‘Optional particulars’, point B of Annex VII of Regulation No 1493/states:
      
‘1.      The labelling of the products obtained in the Community may be supplemented by the following particulars, under conditions
         to be determined:
      
…
(b)      in the case of table wines with geographical indication and quality wines psr [produced in specified regions]:
…
–      other traditional terms in accordance with the provisions laid down by the Member State of production,
…
3.      In the case of the products referred to in paragraph of point A, the labelling may be supplemented by other particulars.
…’
 Regulation No 753/According to recitals and in the preamble to Regulation No 753/2002:
      
‘This Regulation should comply with the objectives of protecting the legitimate interests of consumers and producers, ensuring
         the smooth operation of the internal market and promoting the production of quality products as laid down in Article 47(1)
         of Regulation … No 1493/1999. …
      
…
The use and regulation of certain terms (other than designations of origin) to describe quality wine sector products is a
         long-established practice in the Community. Such traditional expressions can evoke in the minds of consumers a production
         or ageing method or a quality, colour or type of wine or a particular event linked to the history of the wine. So as to ensure
         fair competition and avoid misleading consumers, a common framework should be laid down for registering and protecting such
         traditional expressions.’
      
Article of Regulation 753/2002, entitled ‘Rules common to all particulars on labelling’, states:
      
‘1.      For the purposes of Annex VII(B)(3) to Regulation … No 1493/1999, the labelling of the products covered by that Annex may
         be supplemented by other particulars provided that there is no risk that such particulars might mislead those to whom they
         are addressed, particularly by creating confusion with the compulsory particulars referred to in paragraph A(1) or the optional
         particulars referred to in paragraph B(1) of that Annex.
      
2.      In the case of the products referred to in Annex VII(B)(3) to Regulation … No 1493/1999, an authority designated under Article 72(1)
         thereof may, provided that it acts in compliance with the general procedural rules adopted by the Member State, require bottlers,
         consignors or importers to provide proof of the accuracy of the wording used for the description as it relates to the nature,
         identity, quality, composition, origin or source of the product concerned or the products used to make it.
      
…’
Article of Regulation 753/2002, entitled ‘Definition of “other traditional terms”’, is worded as follows: 
      
‘For the purposes of the fifth indent of point B(1)(b) of Annex VII to Regulation … 1493/1999, “other traditional terms” means
         additional terms traditionally used in producer Member States to designate, in the case of wines referred to in this Title,
         the production or ageing method or the quality, colour, type of place, or a particular event linked to the history of the
         wine concerned and defined in a Member State’s legislation for the purposes of designating the wines concerned originating
         in its territory.’
      
Article of Regulation 753/2002, entitled ‘Protection of traditional terms’, states:
      
‘1.      For the purposes of this Article, “traditional terms” means the additional traditional terms referred to in Article 23, the
         terms referred to in Article and the traditional specific terms referred to in Article 14(1), first subparagraph, point
         (c), Article and Article 38(3).
      
2. The traditional terms listed in Annex III shall be reserved for the wines to which they are linked and shall be protected
         against:
      
(a)      all misuse, imitation or evocation, even if the protected term is accompanied by an expression such as “kind”, “type”, “style”,
         “imitation”, “brand” or similar;
      
(b)      any other unwarranted, false or misleading indication as to the nature or essential qualities of the wine on the inner or
         outer packaging, advertising material or any documents relating to it;
      
(c)      any other practice liable to mislead the public, in particular to give the impression that the wine qualifies for the protected
         traditional term.
      
3.      Trade marks used to describe a wine on its labelling may not contain traditional terms listed in Annex III unless the wine
         qualifies for such a traditional term.
      
…
4.      …
The protection of a traditional term shall apply only for the language(s) in which it appears in Annex III.
Each traditional term listed in Annex III shall be linked to one or more categories of wine. These categories are:
(a)      quality liqueur wines psr and liqueur wines with a geographical indication; in this case the protection of a traditional term
         shall apply only to the designation of liqueur wines;
      
(b)      quality sparkling wines psr (including quality sparkling wines psr of the aromatic type); in this case the protection of a
         traditional term shall apply only to the designation of sparkling wines and aerated sparkling wines;
      
(c)      quality semi-sparkling wines psr and semi-sparkling wines with a geographical indication; in this case the protection of a
         traditional term shall apply only to the designation of semi-sparkling wines and aerated semi-sparkling wines;
      
(d)      quality wines psr not covered by (a), (b) or (c) above and table wines with a geographical indication; in this case the protection
         of a traditional term shall apply only to the designation of wines other than liqueur wines, sparkling wines, aerated sparkling
         wines, semi-sparkling wines and aerated semi-sparkling wines;
      
(e)      grape must in fermentation intended for direct human consumption with a geographical indication; in this case the protection
         of a traditional term shall apply only to the designation of grape must in fermentation;
      
(f)      wine of overripe grapes with a geographical indication; in this case the protection of a traditional term shall apply only
         to the designation of wine of overripe grapes.
      
5.      To qualify for inclusion in Annex III(A), a traditional term must:
(a)      be specific in itself and precisely defined in the Member State’s legislation;
(b)      be sufficiently distinctive and/or enjoy an established reputation on the Community market;
(c)      have been traditionally used for at least years in the Member State in question;
(d)      be used for one or more Community wines or categories of Community wine.
…
7.      Member States shall notify to the Commission:
(a)      the facts justifying recognition of each term;
(b)      the traditional terms included in their legislation that meet the above requirements and the wines for which they are reserved;
(c)      any traditional terms that cease to be protected in the country of origin.
…’
Annex III to Regulation No 753/contains the list of traditional terms referred to in Article of that regulation. That
         annex includes, in particular:
      
–        for Greece, in Greek, the additional traditional terms: ‘Ειδικά Επιλεγμένος (Grand reserve)’, ‘Επιλογή ή Επιλεγμένος (Reserve)’
         and ‘Παλαιωθείς επιλεγμένος (Old reserve)’,
      
–        for Spain, in Spanish, the additional traditional terms ‘Gran Reserva’ and ‘Reserva’,
–        for Italy, in Italian, the additional traditional term ‘Riserva’,
–        for Austria, in German, the additional traditional term ‘Reserve’, and
–        for Portugal, in Portuguese, the additional traditional terms ‘Reserva’, ‘Reserva velha’ (or ‘grande reserva’) and ‘Super
         Reserva’.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred 
Mr Schneider is the owner of a vineyard in Rhineland-Pfalz, registered in the companies register under the name ‘Consulat
         des Weins’. 
      
An inspection carried out in November established that Mr Schneider produced eight types of wine with labelling bearing
         the company name of his vineyard and the terms ‘Grande Réserve’ for two wines in the highest price bracket, ‘Réserve’ for
         four average priced wines and ‘Terroir’ or ‘Terroir Palatinat’ for two wines in the lowest price bracket.
      
By decision of December the Aufsichts- und Dienstleistungsdirektion (Regional Inspectorate) Trier prohibited Mr Schneider
         from marketing the wine in question using the French terms ‘Réserve’ and ‘Grande Réserve’. 
      
By decision of May the Aufsichts- und Dienstleistungsdirektion Trier rejected Mr Schneider’s complaint in which he
         stated that he was prepared to use the German terms ‘Reserve’ or ‘Privat-Reserve’ as a substitute for the French equivalents.
         In a letter dated May the Aufsichts- und Dienstleistungsdirektion stated that the term ‘Privat-Reserve’ could not
         be accepted either.
      
By judgment of January the Verwaltungsgericht (Administrative Court) Neustadt an der Weinstraβe dismissed the appeal
         brought by Mr Schneider against those decisions. 
      
By judgment of September the Oberverwaltungsgericht (Higher Administrative Court) Rheinland-Pfalz dismissed the appeal
         brought by Mr Schneider against that judgment. 
      
Mr Schneider therefore lodged an appeal on a point of law (‘Revision’) before the referring court.
      
It is in that context that the Bundesverwaltungsgericht decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Is Article 47(2)(b) and (c) of Regulation … No 1493/in conjunction with the fifth indent of point (B)(1)(b) and point
         (B)(3) of Annex VII to that regulation and Article of Regulation … No 753/to be interpreted as meaning that a particular
         which refers to the production or ageing method or the quality of the wine is permitted only as a regulated ‘optional particular’
         in accordance with the fifth indent of point (B)(1)(b) of Annex VII to Regulation … No 1493/under the conditions provided
         for therein and in Article of Regulation … No 753/2002, and not as an ‘other particular’ in accordance with point (B)(3)
         of Annex VII to Regulation … No 1493/1999?
      
2.      Is Article 24(2)(a) of Regulation … No 753/to be interpreted as meaning that imitation or evocation exists only if it
         is in the same language as that of the protected traditional term?
      
3.      Is Article 24(2) of Regulation … No 753/to be interpreted as meaning that the traditional terms listed in Annex III are
         protected only with regard to wines from the same producer Member State as the protected traditional term?’
      
 The questions referred
 The first question
By its first question the national court essentially asks whether the use of a particular relating to the production or ageing
         method or the quality of a wine may be permitted only under Article 47(2)(b) of Regulation No 1493/in conjunction with
         the fifth indent of point (B)(1)(b) of Annex VII thereto and Article of Regulation No 753/2002, or whether the use of such
         a particular may also be permitted under Article 47(2)(c) in conjunction with point (B)(3) of Annex VII. 
      
Article 47(2)(a) to (c) of Regulation No 1493/provides that rules relating to the description, designation and presentation
         of certain products covered by that regulation, and the protection of certain particulars and terms are to include, in particular,
         provisions making the use of certain terms compulsory (compulsory particulars) and provisions permitting the use of certain
         terms, subject to conditions, and the use of other terms, including information which may be useful for consumers (optional
         particulars).
      
In that regard, the fifth indent of point (B)(1)(b) of Annex VII to that regulation states that, in the case of table wines
         with geographical indication and quality wines produced in specified regions, the labelling of the products obtained in the
         Community may be supplemented by other traditional terms under conditions to be determined and in accordance with the provisions
         laid down by the Member State of production. 
      
For the purposes of the application of that provision, Article of Regulation No 753/provides a definition of ‘other
         traditional terms’. 
      
It is apparent from the reference for a preliminary ruling that, in the view of the national court, the terms at issue in
         the main proceedings do not constitute other traditional terms within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 753/and the fifth indent of point (B)(1)(b) of Annex VII to Regulation No 1493/1999, since those terms have not been defined in
         the German legislation.
      
The question to be examined is therefore whether use of the terms at issue in the main proceedings may be permitted under
         point (B)(3) of Annex VII to Regulation No 1493/1999.
      
Under that provision, the labelling of certain wines may be supplemented by other particulars. 
      
As is apparent from Article 6(2) of Regulation No 753/2002, such particulars may relate to the nature, identity, quality,
         composition, origin or source of the product concerned or the products used to make it.
      
However, Article 6(1) thereof states that, although the labelling of the products covered may be supplemented by other particulars,
         that is subject to the proviso that there is no risk that such particulars might mislead those to whom they are addressed,
         particularly by creating confusion with the compulsory particulars referred to in paragraph A(1) of Annex VII to Regulation
         No 1493/or the optional particulars referred to in paragraph B(1) of that annex.
      
It follows that, although it is not excluded that the use of a particular relating to the production or ageing method or the
         quality of a wine may be permitted under point (B)(3) of Annex VII to Regulation No 1493/1999, that cannot be the case if
         there is a risk that it will mislead the persons to whom it is addressed by creating confusion between that particular and
         the other traditional terms referred to in the fifth indent of point (B)(1)(b) of Annex VII and Article of Regulation No
         753/2002. 
      
A contrary interpretation would amount to depriving the protection granted to traditional terms by Article of Regulation
         No 753/of all effectiveness.
      
It is for the national court to assess whether the terms in issue in the main proceedings are likely to give rise to such
         a risk.
      
Consequently, the answer to the first question must be that Article 47(2)(c) of Regulation No 1493/1999, in conjunction with
         point (B)(3) of Annex VII thereto and Article 6(1) of Regulation No 753/2002, is to be interpreted as meaning that the use
         of a particular relating to the production or ageing method or the quality of a wine may be permitted under those provisions
         only if there is no risk that it will mislead the persons to whom it is addressed by creating confusion between that particular
         and the other traditional terms referred to in the fifth indent of point (B)(1)(b) of Annex VII to Regulation No 1493/and Article of Regulation No 753/2002. It is for the national court to assess whether the terms in issue in the main proceedings
         are likely to give rise to such a risk. 
      
 The second question
By its second question the national court asks, in essence, whether imitation or evocation of a traditional term within the
         meaning of Article 24(2)(a) of Regulation No 753/exists only if the language used is the same as the language in which
         that term is given in Annex III to that regulation or whether that may also be the case where the term in question is translated
         into a language other than that in which the term is given in that annex. 
      
Under Article 47(2)(d) of Regulation No 1493/1999, rules relating to the description, designation and presentation of certain
         products covered by that regulation, and the protection of certain particulars and terms include, in particular, provisions
         governing protection and control arrangements for certain terms. 
      
The first indent of Article of Regulation No 1493/provides that the description and presentation of the products referred
         to in that regulation, and any form of advertising for such products, must not be incorrect or likely to cause confusion or
         to mislead the persons to whom they are addressed, particularly as regards the information provided for in Article of that
         regulation, and states that that provision is to apply even if the information is used in translation or with a reference
         to the actual provenance or with additions such as ‘kind’, ‘type’, ‘style’, ‘imitation’, ‘brand’ or the like. 
      
The traditional terms listed in Article 24(2)(a) of Regulation No 753/form part of such information and enjoy the protection
         provided for in that provision. 
      
Under Article 24(2)(a) of Regulation No 753/2002, the traditional terms listed in Annex III to that regulation are to be reserved
         for the wines to which they are linked and are to be protected against all misuse, imitation or evocation.
      
It is true that the second subparagraph of Article 24(4) states that the protection of a traditional term is to apply only
         for the language(s) in which it appears in Annex III. 
      
However, it cannot be ruled out that the translation of a traditional term into a language other than the one in which that
         term is given in Annex III may constitute an imitation or evocation of a traditional term, within the meaning of Article 24(2)(a)
         of Regulation No 753/2002, which might cause confusion or mislead the persons to whom that translation is addressed.
      
An interpretation to the contrary of Article 24(2)(a) of Regulation No 753/would risk disregarding the objective of protecting
         the legitimate interests of consumers laid down in Article 47(1) of Regulation No 1493/and would thus be contrary to
         the requirement set out in recital in the preamble to Regulation No 753/2002. 
      
In addition, such an interpretation would run counter to the actual wording of the first indent of Article of Regulation
         No 1493/1999, which provides expressly that that provision applies even if traditional terms are used in translation. 
      
In that case, it must be ensured, in particular, that such a translation is not likely to cause confusion or to mislead the
         persons to whom it is addressed. 
      
It is for the national court to examine whether that is the case in the dispute before it. 
      
Consequently, in answer to the second question, Article 24(2)(a) of Regulation No 753/is to be interpreted as meaning
         that there may be imitation or evocation of a traditional term within the meaning of that provision where that term is translated
         into a language other than that in which that term is given in Annex III to that regulation, if that translation is likely
         to cause confusion or to mislead the persons to whom it is addressed. It is for the national court to examine whether that
         is the case in the dispute before it. 
      
 The third question 
By its third question, the national court asks, in essence, whether a traditional term listed in Annex III of Regulation No
         753/is protected only with regard to wines from the same producer Member State as that traditional term, or whether that
         term is also protected with regard to wines from other producer Member States. 
      
According to recital in the preamble to Regulation No 1493/and Article 47(1)(a) and (c) thereof, rules relating to
         the description, designation and presentation of certain products covered by that regulation, and the protection of certain
         particulars and terms, laid down in the context of the common organisation of the market in wine, seek, inter alia, to ensure
         the protection of the legitimate interests of consumers and to promote the smooth operation of the internal market.
      
In accordance with recital in its preamble, Regulation No 753/should comply with those objectives. 
      
In that context, as is apparent from recital in the preamble thereto, that regulation lays down a common framework for
         registering and protecting certain traditional expressions so as to ensure fair competition and avoid misleading consumers.
         
      
Under Article 24(2) of Regulation No 753/2002, which is part of that common framework, the traditional terms listed in Annex
         III to that regulation are to be reserved for the wines to which they are linked. 
      
Article 24(3) states that trade marks used to describe a wine on its labelling may not contain traditional terms listed in
         Annex III unless the wine qualifies for such a traditional term.
      
The third subparagraph of Article 24(4) provides that each traditional term listed in Annex III is to be linked to one or
         more categories of wine.
      
Under Article 24(5)(d), to qualify for inclusion in the annex in question, a traditional term must be used for one or more
         Community wines or categories of Community wine. 
      
It is apparent from all of those provisions that the traditional terms referred to in Article of Regulation No 753/must be linked to one or more categories of wine and that those terms are reserved for the category or categories of wine
         to which they are linked. 
      
Those categories, which are listed in the third subparagraph of Article 24(4), are, as is apparent from the actual wording
         of Article 24(5)(d), categories of Community wine. 
      
On that basis, those categories cannot therefore be regarded as relating only to wine from a single producer Member State
         but must, on the contrary, be regarded as being used for wine from all of the producer Member States. 
      
In those circumstances, the protection of a traditional term within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 753/operates
         both with regard to wines of the same category/categories from the same producer Member State as that traditional term and
         with regard to wines of the same category/categories from other producer Member States. 
      
A contrary interpretation would amount to depriving the protection of traditional terms, guaranteed by Article 24(2), of its
         effectiveness, and would run counter to the objectives of the protection of the legitimate interests of consumers and the
         smooth operation of the internal market pursued by Regulations Nos 1493/and 753/2002. 
      
Consequently, the answer to the third question must be that Article 24(2) of Regulation No 753/is to be interpreted as
         meaning that a traditional term listed in Annex III to that regulation is protected both with regard to wines of the same
         category/categories from the same producer Member State as that traditional term and with regard to wines of the same category/categories
         from other producer Member States. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article 47(2)(c) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1493/of May on the common organisation of the market in wine,
            in conjunction with point (B)(3) of Annex VII thereto and Article 6(1) of Commission Regulation (EC) No 753/of April
            laying down certain rules for applying Regulation No 1493/as regards the description, designation, presentation
            and protection of certain wine sector products, as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1512/of September 2005,
            must be interpreted as meaning that the use of a particular relating to the production or ageing method or the quality of
            a wine may be permitted under those provisions only if there is no risk that it will mislead the persons to whom it is addressed
            by creating confusion between that particular and the other traditional terms referred to in the fifth indent of point (B)(1)(b)
            of Annex VII to Regulation No 1493/and Article of Regulation No 753/2002. It is for the national court to assess whether
            the terms in issue in the main proceedings are likely to give rise to such a risk.
2.      Article 24(2)(a) of Regulation No 753/2002, as amended by Regulation No 1512/2005, is to be interpreted as meaning that there
            may be imitation or evocation of a traditional term within the meaning of that provision where that term is translated into
            a language other than that in which that term is given in Annex III to that regulation, if that translation is likely to cause
            confusion or to mislead the persons to whom it is addressed. It is for the national court to examine whether that is the case
            in the dispute before it.
3.      Article 24(2) of Regulation No 753/2002, as amended by Regulation No 1512/2005, is to be interpreted as meaning that a traditional
            term listed in Annex III to that regulation is protected both with regard to wines of the same category/categories from the
            same producer Member State as that traditional term and with regard to wines of the same category/categories from other producer
            Member States. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 