
Case C-73/Brigitte and Marcus Klein
v
Rhodos Management Ltd
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Oberlandesgericht Hamm)
(Brussels Convention – Jurisdiction in proceedings regarding tenancies of immovable property – Time-share in immovable property)
Opinion of Advocate General Geelhoed delivered on April Judgment of the Court (First Chamber), October Summary of the Judgment
Convention on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments – Exclusive jurisdiction – Proceedings which have as their object
            tenancies of immovable property – Definition – Time-share in immovable property by virtue of a club membership contract –
            Exclusion
(Convention of September 1968, Art. 16(1)(a))
Article 16(1)(a) of the Convention of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial
         Matters, as amended by the Accession Conventions of 1978, and 1989, must be interpreted as meaning that it does not apply
         to a club membership contract which, in return for a membership fee which represents the major part of the total price, allows
         members to acquire a right to use on a time‑share basis immovable property of a specified type in a specified location and
         provides for the affiliation of members to a service which enables them to exchange their right of use.
      
(see para. 28, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Brussels Convention – Jurisdiction in proceedings regarding tenancies of immoveable property – Time-share in immoveable property)
In Case C-73/04,
REFERENCE to the Court for a preliminary ruling under the Protocol of June on the interpretation by the Court of Justice
         of the Convention of September on jurisdiction and the enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters, from
         the Oberlandesgericht Hamm (Germany), by decision of January 2004, received at the Court on February 2004, in the proceedings
         
      
Brigitte and Marcus Klein
v
Rhodos Management Ltd,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann (Rapporteur), President of Chamber, K. Schiemann, N. Colneric, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues and E. Levits, Judges,
Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed,
Registrar: R. Grass,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Mr and Mrs Klein, by M. Brinkmann, Rechtsanwalt,
–       the Federal Republic of Germany, by R. Wagner, acting as Agent,
–       the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, by C. Jackson and R. Caudwell, acting as Agents, and T. de la Mare,
         barrister,
      
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by A.‑M. Rouchaud-Joët and S. Grünheid, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 16(1)(a) of the Convention of September
         on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters (OJ L 304, p. 36), as amended by
         the Convention of October on the Accession of the Kingdom of Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
         and Northern Ireland (OJ L 304, p. 1, and – amended text — p. 77), by the Convention of October on the Accession
         of the Hellenic Republic (OJ L 388, p. 1) and by the Convention of May on the Accession of the Kingdom of Spain
         and the Portuguese Republic (OJ L 285, p. 1; ‘the Convention’). 
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings brought by Mr and Mrs Klein against Rhodos Management Ltd (‘Rhodos’) for
         the repayment of sums paid on the conclusion of a contract under the terms of which Mr and Mrs Klein acquired a right to use
         an apartment in Greece on a time-share basis.
      
 Law
The first paragraph of Article of the Convention provides:
‘If the defendant is not domiciled in a Contracting State, the jurisdiction of the courts of each Contracting State shall,
         subject to the provisions of Article 16, be determined by the law of that State.’
      
Article 16(1)(a) of the Convention provides:
‘The following courts shall have exclusive jurisdiction, regardless of domicile:
1(a)               in proceedings which have as their object rights in rem in, or tenancies of, immovable property, the courts of the Contracting
         State in which the property is situated;’.
      
 Factual background and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
In 1992, Mr and Mrs Klein, who live in Germany, concluded inter alia with Rhodos, a company established in the Isle of Man,
         a contract described as a ‘membership contract’ (Mitgliedschaftsvertrag), under the terms of which the parties, who were described
         as ‘buyers’ (Käufer), became members of a club.
      
Membership of that club was a requirement for the purchase of a right to use a holiday property on a time-share basis. Under
         the same contract, Mr and Mrs Klein acquired the right to the use of an apartment of a specified type and in a specified location
         in a hotel complex in Greece for the 13th calendar week of each year until the year 2031.
      
The fee for membership of the club was DEM out of the total price of DEM which Mr and Mrs Klein paid.
Membership of the club also gave access to a service for the coordination of exchanges of holiday periods and locations. Membership
         of that service was subject to a fee of DEM for three years. 
      
The hotel complex where the apartment at issue in the main proceedings was situated offered holders of time-share rights the
         same facilities as those provided for hotel guests.
      
Mr and Mrs Klein first paid a deposit of DEM and shortly afterwards transferred the full amount of the price without
         deducting the deposit.
      
In the main proceedings, Mr and Mrs Klein seek the repayment of the total amount paid of DEM 940.
On appeal, the Oberlandesgericht Hamm had doubts as to its international jurisdiction and decided to stay proceedings and
         refer the following questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
 ‘1.      Does the concept of proceedings “which have as their object … tenancies of immovable property” under Article 16(1)(a) of the
         Brussels Convention extend to proceedings concerning the right, for a particular week each year for almost years, to use
         an apartment in a hotel complex, differentiated according to its type and situation? Is this the case even if the contract
         provides for the simultaneous and obligatory membership of a club, the main purpose of which is to guarantee that its members
         may exercise their right to use the apartment? 
      
2.      If the answer to the first question is in the affirmative, the further question arises:
If so, does the exclusive competence resulting from Article 16(1)(a) of the Brussels Convention apply equally to rights which
         flow from such a lease but which, in fact and in law, do not concern the lease, and in particular to the right to reimbursement
         of a sum erroneously paid in excess of the amount demanded in consideration for use of the apartment and for membership of
         the club?’
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling 
 The first question
By its first question, the referring court essentially seeks to know whether Article 16(1)(a) of the Convention must be interpreted
         as meaning that it applies to a contract providing for membership of a club, the principal benefit of which consists in allowing
         its members to acquire and exercise a right to use on a time-share basis immoveable property of a type and in a location specified
         in the contract.
      
As a preliminary point, it must be observed that Article 16(1) of the Convention provides for the exclusive jurisdiction of
         the courts of the Contracting State where the property is situated, in proceedings which have as their object rights in rem
         in, or tenancies of, immovable property, by way of derogation from the general principle laid down by the first paragraph
         of Article of the Convention, which is that if the defendant is not domiciled in a Contracting State, each Contracting State
         is to apply its own rules of international jurisdiction. 
      
As an exception to the general rule of jurisdiction set out in the Convention, Article must not be given an interpretation
         broader than is required by its objective, since the article deprives the parties of the choice of forum which would otherwise
         be theirs and, in certain cases, results in their being brought before a court which is not that of the domicile of any of
         them (see Case 73/Sanders [1977] ECR 2383, paragraphs and 18; Case C-115/Reichert and Kockler [1990] ECR I-27, paragraph 9; Case C-292/Lieber [1994] ECR I-2535, paragraph 12; and Case C‑8/Dansommer [2000] ECR I-393, paragraph 21).
      
According to both the Jenard Report on the Brussels Convention (OJ C 59, p. 1, at p. 35) and the case-law, the essential
         reason for conferring exclusive jurisdiction on the courts of the Contracting State in which the property is situated is that
         the courts of the locus rei sitae are the best placed, for reasons of proximity, to ascertain the facts satisfactorily, by carrying out checks, inquiries and
         expert assessments on the spot, and to apply the rules and practices which are generally those of the State in which the property
         is situated (see, in particular, Sanders, paragraph 13, Reichert and Kockler, paragraph 10, and Dansommer, paragraph 27). That report also states, with specific regard to the rule of exclusive jurisdiction in the matter of tenancies
         of immovable property in Article 16(1), that the Convention draftsmen intended it to cover, inter alia, disputes over compensation
         for damage caused by tenants (Dansommer, cited above, paragraph 28).
      
However, that objective is not at issue in the case in the main proceedings, as the action brought by Mr and Mrs Klein, seeking
         repayment of the total amount they paid, can only be brought on the basis of a claim that the contract concluded with Rhodos
         is void.
      
The contract was described by the parties as a contract for membership of a club. As the referring court observed, the membership
         fee of DEM constituted the major part of the total price of DEM 300.
      
That membership enabled Mr and Mrs Klein to acquire, for an amount which, in the light of the information in the order for
         reference, can be put at about DEM 000, the right to use an apartment of a specified type in a specified location for one
         week of the year for a period of nearly years.
      
Thus, the value of the right to use the property is of only secondary economic importance, in the construction of the contract
         at issue, compared with the right to membership.
      
The Court has held that a contract which does not only concern the right to use a time-share apartment, but also concerns
         the provision of separate services of a value higher than that of the right to use the property, is not a contract for the
         rental of immoveable property within the meaning of Article 3(2)(a) of Council Directive 85/577/EEC of December to
         protect the consumer in respect of contracts negotiated away from business premises (OJ 372, p. 31) (Case C-423/Travel Vac [1999] ECR I-2195, paragraph 25).
      
Given the link between the Convention and the Community legal order (Case C-398/Mund & Fester [1994] ECR I‑467, paragraph 12, and Case C-7/Krombach [2000] ECR I-1935, paragraph 24), that interpretation must be taken into account for the purposes of the interpretation of
         the Convention.
      
The German and United Kingdom Governments observed that the principal benefit conferred by the club membership contract at
         issue in the main proceedings is the possibility of acquiring the right to use property on a time-share basis.
      
In that connection it must be observed that the property itself, which is defined only as being of a particular type within
         a hotel complex, is not specified or designated individually in the club membership contract. As the Commission pointed out,
         the right of use could relate to a different apartment each year.
      
That circumstance is compounded by the fact that, as Mr and Mrs Klein pointed out, that contract itself makes provision for
         the affiliation of its members to a service allowing them, on payment of an annual fee, initially payable for three years,
         to exchange their holiday accommodation.
      
In the light of all those circumstances, it appears that the link between the club membership contract at issue in the main
         proceedings and the property to be actually used by the member is not sufficiently close to warrant classifying it as a tenancy
         within the meaning of Article 16(1)(a) of the Convention which, as observed in paragraph of this judgment, must be interpreted
         strictly.
      
That finding is borne out by the fact that the membership contract in question provides for the provision of services which
         are made available to club members on the same terms as those offered to clients of the hotel complex. As the Commission observed,
         those additional services go beyond the transfer of a right of use which constitutes the subject‑matter of a tenancy agreement.
         Although the content and nature of the services at issue in the main proceedings are not specified in the order for reference,
         it must none the less be observed that a complex contract concerning a range of services provided in return for a lump sum
         paid by the customer is outside the scope within which the exclusive jurisdiction laid down by Article 16(1) of the Convention
         finds its raison d’être and cannot constitute a tenancy as such within the meaning of that article (Case C-280/Hacker [1992] ECR I‑1111, paragraph 15). 
      
Accordingly, the answer to the first question must be that on a proper construction, Article 16(1)(a) of the Convention does
         not apply to a club membership contract which, in return for a membership fee which represents the major part of the total
         price, allows members to acquire a right to use on a time-share basis immoveable property of a specified type in a specified
         location and provides for the affiliation of members to a service which enables them to exchange their right of use.
      
 The second question
In view of the reply to the first question, the second question no longer serves any purpose.
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
On a proper construction of Article 16(1)(a) of the Convention of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of
            Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters, as amended by the Convention of October on the Accession of the Kingdom
            of Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, by the Convention of October on
            the Accession of the Hellenic Republic and by the Convention of May on the Accession of the Kingdom of Spain and the
            Portuguese Republic, that Article does not apply to a club membership contract which, in return for a membership fee which
            represents the major part of the total price, allows members to acquire a right to use on a time-share basis immoveable property
            of a specified type in a specified location and provides for the affiliation of members to a service which enables them to
            exchange their right of use.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 