
Case C-292/Irini Lechouritou and Others
v
Dimosio tis Omospondiakis Dimokratias tis Germanias
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Efetio Patron)
(Brussels Convention − First sentence of the first paragraph of Article − Scope − Civil and commercial matters − Meaning
         − Action for compensation brought in a Contracting State, by the successors of the victims of war massacres, against another
         Contracting State on account of acts perpetrated by its armed forces)
      
Opinion of Advocate General Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer delivered on November Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), February Summary of the Judgment
Convention on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments – Scope – Civil and commercial matters – Meaning of ‘civil and
            commercial matters’
(Convention of September 1968, Art. 1, first para., first sentence)
On a proper construction of the first sentence of the first paragraph of Article of the Convention of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters, as amended by the 1978, and Accession
         Conventions, ‘civil matters’ within the meaning of that provision does not cover a legal action brought by natural persons
         in a Contracting State against another Contracting State for compensation in respect of the loss or damage suffered by the
         successors of the victims of acts perpetrated by armed forces in the course of warfare in the territory of the first State.
      
The term ‘Civil and commercial matters’ does not cover disputes resulting from the exercise of public powers by one of the
         parties to the case, as it exercises powers falling outside the scope of the ordinary legal rules applicable to relationships
         between private individuals and there is all the more reason for such an assessment as regards a legal action for compensation
         deriving from operations conducted by armed forces, as such operations are one of the characteristic emanations of State sovereignty,
         in particular inasmuch as they are decided upon in a unilateral and binding manner by the competent public authorities and
         appear as inextricably linked to States’ foreign and defence policy.
      
The question as to whether or not the acts carried out in the exercise of public powers that constitute the basis for such
         proceedings are lawful concerns the nature of those acts, but not the field within which they fall. Since that field as such
         must be regarded as not falling within the scope of the Convention, the unlawfulness of such acts cannot justify a different
         interpretation.
      
(see paras 34-37, 41-44, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
February (*)
      
(Brussels Convention − First sentence of the first paragraph of Article − Scope − Civil and commercial matters − Meaning
         − Action for compensation brought in a Contracting State, by the successors of the victims of war massacres, against another
         Contracting State on account of acts perpetrated by its armed forces)
      
In Case C-292/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under the Protocol of June on the interpretation by the Court of Justice of the
         Convention of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters, from the
         Efetio Patron (Greece), made by decision of June 2005, received at the Court on July 2005, in the proceedings
      
Irini Lechouritou,
Vasilios Karkoulias,
Georgios Pavlopoulos,
Panagiotis Bratsikas,
Dimitrios Sotiropoulos,
Georgios Dimopoulos
v
Dimosio tis Omospondiakis Dimokratias tis Germanias,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, R. Schintgen (Rapporteur), J. Klučka, R. Silva de Lapuerta and J.
         Makarczyk, Judges,
      
Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,
Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2006,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Ms Lechouritou, Mr Karkoulias, Mr Pavlopoulos, Mr Bratsikas, Mr Sotiropoulos and Mr Dimopoulos, by I. Stamoulis, dikigoros,
         and J. Lau, Rechtsanwalt,
      
–       the German Government, by R. Wagner, acting as Agent, assisted by Professor B. Heß,
–       the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by G. Aiello, avvocato dello Stato,
–       the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster and M. de Grave, acting as Agents,
–       the Polish Government, by T. Nowakowski, acting as Agent,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by M. Condou-Durande and A.-M. Rouchaud-Joët, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on November 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling relates to the interpretation of Article of the Convention of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters (OJ L 304, p. 36), as amended by the
         Convention of October on the Accession of the Kingdom of Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
         Northern Ireland (OJ L 304, p. 1, and – amended version – p. 77), by the Convention of October on the Accession
         of the Hellenic Republic (OJ L 388, p. 1) and by the Convention of May on the Accession of the Kingdom of Spain
         and the Portuguese Republic (OJ L 285, p. 1) (‘the Brussels Convention’).
      
The reference was made in proceedings between Ms Lechouritou, Mr Karkoulias, Mr Pavlopoulos, Mr Bratsikas, Mr Sotiropoulos
         and Mr Dimopoulos, Greek nationals resident in Greece who are the plaintiffs in those proceedings, and the Federal Republic
         of Germany concerning compensation for the financial loss and non-material damage which the plaintiffs have suffered on account
         of acts perpetrated by the German armed forces and of which their parents were victims at the time of the occupation of Greece
         during the Second World War.
      
 Legal context
Article of the Brussels Convention, which constitutes Title I thereof, headed ‘Scope’, provides:
‘This Convention shall apply in civil and commercial matters whatever the nature of the court or tribunal. It shall not extend,
         in particular, to revenue, customs or administrative matters.
      
The Convention shall not apply to:
1.      the status or legal capacity of natural persons, rights in property arising out of a matrimonial relationship, wills and succession;
2.      bankruptcy, proceedings relating to the winding-up of insolvent companies or other legal persons, judicial arrangements, compositions
         and analogous proceedings;
      
3.      social security;
4.      arbitration.’
The rules on jurisdiction laid down by the Brussels Convention are set out in Articles to 24, which constitute Title II
         of the Convention.
      
Article 2, which forms part of Section (‘General provisions’) of Title II, sets out in its first paragraph the basic rule
         of the Brussels Convention in the following terms:
      
‘Subject to the provisions of this Convention, persons domiciled in a Contracting State shall, whatever their nationality,
         be sued in the courts of that State.’
      
The first paragraph of Article of the Brussels Convention, which appears in the same section, is worded as follows:
‘Persons domiciled in a Contracting State may be sued in the courts of another Contracting State only by virtue of the rules
         set out in Sections to of this Title.’
      
Articles to of the Brussels Convention, which form Sections to of Title II, lay down rules governing special, mandatory
         or exclusive jurisdiction.
      
Article 5, which appears in Section (‘Special jurisdiction’) of Title II, provides:
‘A person domiciled in a Contracting State may, in another Contracting State, be sued:
…
3.      in matters relating to tort, delict or quasi-delict, in the courts for the place where the harmful event occurred;
4.      as regards a civil claim for damages or restitution which is based on an act giving rise to criminal proceedings, in the court
         seised of those proceedings, to the extent that that court has jurisdiction under its own law to entertain civil proceedings;
      
…’.
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
It is apparent from the documents sent to the Court by the referring court that the main proceedings have their origins in
         the massacre of civilians by soldiers in the German armed forces which was perpetrated on December and of which inhabitants of the municipality of Kalavrita (Greece) were victims.
      
In the plaintiffs in the main proceedings brought an action before the Polimeles Protodikio Kalavriton (Court of First
         Instance, Kalavrita) for compensation from the Federal Republic of Germany in respect of the financial loss, non-material
         damage and mental anguish caused to them by the acts perpetrated by the German armed forces.
      
In the Polimeles Protodikio Kalavriton, before which the Federal Republic of Germany did not enter an appearance, dismissed
         the action on the ground that the Greek courts lacked jurisdiction to hear it because the defendant State, which was a sovereign
         State, enjoyed the privilege of immunity in accordance with Article 3(2) of the Greek Code of Civil Procedure.
      
In January the plaintiffs in the main proceedings appealed against that judgment to the Efetio Patron (Court of Appeal,
         Patras) (Greece) which, after holding in that the appeal was formally admissible, stayed proceedings until the Anotato
         Idiko Dikastirio (Superior Special Court) (Greece) had ruled, in a parallel case, on the interpretation of the rules of international
         law concerning immunity of sovereign States from legal proceedings and on their categorisation as rules generally recognised
         by the international community. More specifically, that case concerned, first, whether Article of the European Convention
         on State Immunity – signed at Basle on May 1972, but to which the Hellenic Republic is not a party – according to which
         ‘a Contracting State cannot claim immunity from the jurisdiction of a court of another Contracting State in proceedings which
         relate to redress for injury to the person or damage to tangible property, if the facts which occasioned the injury or damage
         occurred in the territory of the State of the forum, and if the author of the injury or damage was present in that territory
         at the time when those facts occurred’, is to be regarded as a generally recognised rule of international law. Second, the
         further question was raised as to whether this exception to the immunity of the Contracting States covers, in accordance with
         international custom, claims for compensation in respect of wrongful acts which, while committed at the time of an armed conflict,
         adversely affected persons in a specific group or a particular place who had no connection with the armed clashes and did
         not participate in the military operations.
      
In the Anotato Idiko Dikastirio held in the case brought before it that, ‘as international law currently stands, a generally
         recognised rule of international law continues to exist, according to which it is not permitted that a State be sued in a
         court of another State for compensation in respect of a tort or delict of any kind which took place in the territory of the
         forum and in which armed forces of the State being sued are involved in any way, whether in wartime or peacetime’, so that
         the State being sued enjoys immunity in that instance.
      
In accordance with Article 100(4) of the Greek Constitution, decisions of the Anotato Idiko Dikastirio are ‘irrevocable’.
         Also, under Article 54(1) of the Code on the Anotato Idiko Dikastirio, a decision by it determining whether a rule of international
         law is to be regarded as generally recognised ‘applies erga omnes’, so that a decision of the Anotato Idiko Dikastirio which
         has removed doubt as to whether a particular rule of international law is to be regarded as generally recognised, and the
         assessment in that regard set out in the decision, bind not only the court which referred the matter to it or the litigants
         who made the application which is at the origin of the decision, but also every court and body of the Hellenic Republic before
         which the same legal issue is raised.
      
After the plaintiffs in the main proceedings had pleaded the Brussels Convention, in particular Article 5(3) and (4) which,
         in their submission, abolished States’ right of immunity in all cases of torts and delicts committed in the State of the court
         seised, the Efetio Patron had doubts, however, as to whether the proceedings brought before it fell within the scope of that
         Convention, observing in this regard that the question whether the defendant State enjoyed immunity and, consequently, the
         Greek courts lacked jurisdiction to hear the case before it turned on the answer to disputed questions of law.
      
It was in those circumstances that the Efetio Patron decided to stay proceedings and to refer to the Court the following questions
         for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Do actions for compensation which are brought by natural persons against a Contracting State as being liable under civil law
         for acts or omissions of its armed forces fall within the scope ratione materiae of the Brussels Convention in accordance
         with Article thereof where those acts or omissions occurred during a military occupation of the plaintiffs’ State of domicile
         following a war of aggression on the part of the defendant, are manifestly contrary to the law of war and may also be considered
         to be crimes against humanity?
      
(2)      Is it compatible with the system of the Brussels Convention for the defendant State to put forward a plea of immunity, with
         the result, should the answer be in the affirmative, that the very application of the Convention is neutralised, in particular
         in respect of acts and omissions of the defendant’s armed forces which occurred before the Convention entered into force,
         that is to say during the years 1941-1944?’
      
 Procedure before the Court
By letter lodged at the Court Registry on November 2006, the plaintiffs in the main proceedings made observations on the
         Opinion of the Advocate General and requested the Court to ‘decide that the present case “is of exceptional importance” and
         refer it to the full Court or a Grand Chamber, in accordance with Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice’.
      
It must be pointed out at the outset that neither the Statute of the Court of Justice nor its Rules of Procedure make provision
         for the parties to submit observations in response to the Advocate General’s Opinion. The Court has therefore held that applications
         to that effect must be rejected (see, in particular, the order in Case C‑17/Emesa Sugar [2000] ECR I-665, paragraphs and 19).
      
Also, under the third paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, ‘the Court shall sit in a Grand Chamber
         when a Member State or an institution of the Communities that is party to the proceedings so requests’.
      
It is apparent from the very wording of the third paragraph of Article that individuals do not have standing to make such
         a request, and in the present instance the request that the case be referred to a Grand Chamber was not made by a Member State
         or an institution of the Communities that is party to the proceedings.
      
In addition, apart from the cases listed in the fourth paragraph of Article 16, it is the Court alone which, pursuant to the
         fifth paragraph thereof, has the power to decide, after hearing the Advocate General, to refer a case to the full Court, where
         it considers that case to be of exceptional importance.
      
Here, the Court holds that there is no good reason for it to make such a reference.
Accordingly, the request as set out in paragraph of this judgment must necessarily be refused.
It must be added that the same conclusion would be necessary if the request by the plaintiffs in the main proceedings should
         be regarded as seeking the reopening of the procedure.
      
The Court may, of its own motion, on a proposal from the Advocate General or at the request of the parties order the reopening
         of the oral procedure under Article of its Rules of Procedure, if it considers that it lacks sufficient information or
         that the case must be dealt with on the basis of an argument which has not been debated between the parties (see, inter alia
         Case C-309/Wouters and Others [2002] ECR I‑1577, paragraph 42; Case C-309/Radlberger Getränkegesellschaft and S. Spitz [2004] ECR I‑11763, paragraph 22; and Case C‑308/P SGL Carbon v Commission [2006] ECR I-5977, paragraph 15).
      
However, the Court, after hearing the Advocate General, finds that in the present case it has before it all the information
         and arguments necessary to reply to the questions referred by the national court and that that material has been debated before
         it. 
      
 Consideration of the questions
 Question By its first question, the referring court essentially asks whether, on a proper construction of the first sentence of the
         first paragraph of Article of the Brussels Convention, ‘civil matters’ within the meaning of that provision covers a legal
         action brought by natural persons in a Contracting State against another Contracting State for compensation in respect of
         the loss or damage suffered by the successors of the victims of acts perpetrated by armed forces in the course of warfare
         in the territory of the first State.
      
It must be stated at the outset that while the Brussels Convention, in accordance with the first sentence of the first paragraph
         of Article 1, lays down the principle that its scope is limited to ‘civil and commercial matters’, it does not define the
         meaning or the scope of that concept.
      
It is to be remembered that, in order to ensure, as far as possible, that the rights and obligations which derive from the
         Brussels Convention for the Contracting States and the persons to whom it applies are equal and uniform, the terms of that
         provision should not be interpreted as a mere reference to the internal law of one or other of the States concerned. It is
         thus clear from the Court’s settled case-law that ‘civil and commercial matters’ must be regarded as an independent concept
         to be interpreted by referring, first, to the objectives and scheme of the Brussels Convention and, second, to the general
         principles which stem from the corpus of the national legal systems (see, inter alia, Case 29/LTU [1976] ECR 1541, paragraphs and 5; Case 814/Rüffer [1980] ECR 3807, paragraph 7; Case C‑271/Baten [2002] ECR I-10489, paragraph 28; Case C-266/Préservatrice foncière TIARD [2003] ECR I-4867, paragraph 20; and Case C-343/ČEZ [2006] ECR I-4557, paragraph 22).
      
According to the Court, that interpretation results in the exclusion of certain legal actions and judicial decisions from
         the scope of the Brussels Convention, by reason either of the legal relationships between the parties to the action or of
         the subject-matter of the action (see LTU, paragraph 4; Rüffer, paragraph 14; Baten, paragraph 29; Préservatrice foncière TIARD, paragraph 21; ČEZ, paragraph 22; and Case C‑167/Henkel [2002] ECR I-8111, paragraph 29).
      
Thus, the Court has held that, although certain actions between a public authority and a person governed by private law may
         come within the scope of the Brussels Convention, it is otherwise where the public authority is acting in the exercise of
         its public powers (see LTU, paragraph 4; Rüffer, paragraph 8; Henkel, paragraph 26; Baten, paragraph 30; Préservatrice foncière TIARD, paragraph 22; and Case C-172/Sonntag [1993] ECR I‑1963, paragraph 20).
      
It is pursuant to this principle that the Court has held that a national or international body governed by public law which
         pursues the recovery of charges payable by a person governed by private law for the use of its equipment and services acts
         in the exercise of its public powers, in particular where that use is obligatory and exclusive and the rate of charges, the
         methods of calculation and the procedures for collection are fixed unilaterally in relation to the users (LTU, paragraph 4).
      
Similarly, the Court has held that the concept of ‘civil and commercial matters’ within the meaning of the first sentence
         of the first paragraph of the Brussels Convention does not include an action brought by the State as agent responsible for
         administering public waterways against a person having liability in law in order to recover the costs incurred in the removal
         of a wreck, in performance of an international obligation, carried out by or at the instigation of that administering agent
         in the exercise of its public authority (Rüffer, paragraphs and 16).
      
Disputes of that nature do result from the exercise of public powers by one of the parties to the case, as it exercises powers
         falling outside the scope of the ordinary legal rules applicable to relationships between private individuals (see, to this
         effect, Sonntag, paragraph 22; Henkel, paragraph 30; Préservatrice foncière TIARD, paragraph 30; and Case C-265/Frahuil [2004] ECR I‑1543, paragraph 21).
      
There is all the more reason for such an assessment in a case such as the main proceedings.
The legal action for compensation brought by the plaintiffs in the main proceedings against the Federal Republic of Germany
         derives from operations conducted by armed forces during the Second World War.
      
As the Advocate General has observed in points to of his Opinion, there is no doubt that operations conducted by armed
         forces are one of the characteristic emanations of State sovereignty, in particular inasmuch as they are decided upon in a
         unilateral and binding manner by the competent public authorities and appear as inextricably linked to States’ foreign and
         defence policy.
      
It follows that acts such as those which are at the origin of the loss and damage pleaded by the plaintiffs in the main proceedings
         and, therefore, of the action for damages brought by them before the Greek courts must be regarded as resulting from the exercise
         of public powers on the part of the State concerned on the date when those acts were perpetrated.
      
Having regard to the case-law recalled in paragraph of this judgment, a legal action such as that brought before the referring
         court therefore does not fall within the scope ratione materiae of the Brussels Convention as defined in the first sentence
         of the first paragraph of Article thereof.
      
Such an interpretation cannot be affected by the line of argument, set out in greater detail by the plaintiffs in the main
         proceedings, that, first, the action brought by them before the Greek courts against the Federal Republic of Germany is to
         be regarded as constituting proceedings to establish liability that are of a civil nature and, moreover, covered by Article
         5(3) and (4) of the Brusssels Convention, and second, that acts carried out iure imperii do not include illegal or wrongful actions.
      
First of all, the Court has already held that the fact that the plaintiff acts on the basis of a claim which arises from an
         act in the exercise of public powers is sufficient for his action, whatever the nature of the proceedings afforded by national
         law for that purpose, to be treated as being outside the scope of the Brussels Convention (see Rüffer, paragraphs and 15). The fact that the proceedings brought before the referring court are presented as being of a civil
         nature in so far as they seek financial compensation for the material loss and non-material damage caused to the plaintiffs
         in the main proceedings is consequently entirely irrelevant.
      
Second, the reference made to the rules governing jurisdiction which are specifically set out in Article 5(3) and (4) of the
         Brussels Convention is immaterial, because the issue as to whether the Convention falls to apply to the main proceedings logically
         constitutes a prior question which, if answered in the negative as here, entirely relieves the court before which the case
         has been brought of the need to examine the substantive rules laid down by the Convention.
      
Finally, the question as to whether or not the acts carried out in the exercise of public powers that constitute the basis
         for the main proceedings are lawful concerns the nature of those acts, but not the field within which they fall. Since that
         field as such must be regarded as not falling within the scope of the Brussels Convention, the unlawfulness of such acts cannot
         justify a different interpretation.
      
In addition, the proposition put forward in this regard by the plaintiffs in the main proceedings, if accepted, would be such
         as to raise preliminary questions of substance even before the scope of the Brussels Convention can be determined with certainty.
         Such difficulties would without doubt be incompatible with the broad logic and the objective of that Convention, which – as
         is apparent from its preamble and from the Jenard Report on the Brussels Convention (OJ C 59, p. 1) – is founded on the
         mutual trust of the Contracting States in their legal systems and judicial institutions, and seeks to ensure legal certainty
         by laying down uniform rules concerning conflict of jurisdiction in the civil and commercial field and to simplify formalities
         with a view to the rapid recognition and enforcement of judicial decisions made in the Contracting States.
      
Furthermore, in the same field of judicial cooperation in civil matters, Regulation (EC) No 805/of the European Parliament
         and of the Council of April creating a European Enforcement Order for uncontested claims (OJ L 143, p. 15), which
         likewise provides, in Article 2(1), that it applies in ‘civil and commercial matters’, specifies in that provision that ‘it
         shall not extend … to … the liability of the State for acts and omissions in the exercise of State authority (“acta iure imperii”)’, without drawing a distinction in that regard according to whether or not the acts or omissions are lawful. The same is
         true of Article 2(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1896/of the European Parliament and of the Council of December creating
         a European order for payment procedure (OJ L 399, p. 1).
      
Having regard to all of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the first question must be that, on a proper construction
         of the first sentence of the first paragraph of Article of the Brussels Convention, ‘civil matters’ within the meaning of
         that provision does not cover a legal action brought by natural persons in a Contracting State against another Contracting
         State for compensation in respect of the loss or damage suffered by the successors of the victims of acts perpetrated by armed
         forces in the course of warfare in the territory of the first State.
      
 Question In view of the reply given to the first question, there is no need to answer the second question.
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the referring court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
On a proper construction of the first sentence of the first paragraph of Article of the Convention of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters, as amended by the Convention of October
            on the Accession of the Kingdom of Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, by
            the Convention of October on the Accession of the Hellenic Republic and by the Convention of May on the Accession
            of the Kingdom of Spain and the Portuguese Republic, ‘civil matters’ within the meaning of that provision does not cover a
            legal action brought by natural persons in a Contracting State against another Contracting State for compensation in respect
            of the loss or damage suffered by the successors of the victims of acts perpetrated by armed forces in the course of warfare
            in the territory of the first State.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Greek.
      
Top  
 