
Case C-441/Roquette Frères
v
Ministre de l’Agriculture, de l’Alimentation, de la Pêche et de la Ruralité
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
cour administrative d’appel de Douai)
(Common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector – Isoglucose – Determination of the basic quantities used for the allocation of production quotas – Isoglucose produced as an intermediate product – Article 24(2) of Regulation (EEC) No 1785/– Article 27(3) of Regulation (EC) No 2038/– Article of Regulation (EC) No 2073/– Article 11(2) of Regulation (EC) No 1260/– Article of Regulation (EC) No 1745/– Article of Regulation (EC) No 1739/– Illegality of a Community measure raised before the national court – Reference for a preliminary ruling on validity – Admissibility – Conditions – Inadmissibility of an action for annulment of the Community measure)
Opinion of Advocate General Kokott delivered on October Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), March Summary of the Judgment
1.     Plea of illegality – Preliminary in nature – Legality of provisions of a regulation concerning isoglucose production quotas
            challenged before the national court
(Arts EC and EC)
2.     Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar – Isoglucose – Production quotas 
(Council Regulation No 1111/77, as amended by Regulation No 387/81, Art. 9(1); Commission Regulation No 1471/77, Art. 1)
1.     Article EC expresses a general principle of law under which an applicant must, in proceedings brought under national law
         against the rejection of his application, be able to plead the illegality of a Community measure on which the national decision
         adopted in his regard is based, and the question of the validity of that Community measure may thus be referred to the Court
         in proceedings for a preliminary ruling.
      
However, this general principle, which has the effect of ensuring that every person has or will have had the opportunity to
         challenge a Community measure which forms the basis of a decision adversely affecting him, does not in any way preclude a
         regulation from becoming definitive as against an individual in regard to whom it must be considered to be an individual decision
         and who could undoubtedly have sought its annulment under Article EC, a fact which prevents that individual from pleading
         the illegality of that regulation before the national court.
      
In that regard, an isoglucose producer cannot be directly concerned, for the purposes of the fourth paragraph of Article EC, by the allocation of basic isoglucose production quantities to the Member States as effected at Community level in the
         context of the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector. 
      
In a scheme whereunder it is for the Member States to distribute the basic production quantities allocated to them among producers,
         with the possibility to transfer quotas between them, each producer has its quotas directly and definitively set by decision
         of the Member State in which it is established. 
      
Therefore, a producer could not undoubtedly have brought an admissible action, on the basis of Article EC, to annul the
         contested provisions. Therefore, such a person may, in proceedings brought under national law, plead the illegality of those
         provisions, even though it has not brought an action for annulment of those provisions before the Community Courts within
         the time‑limit laid down in Article EC.
      
(see paras 39-40, 43, 45, 47-48, operative part 1)
2.     The fact that, in the provisions of the regulations on the allocation of basic isoglucose production quantities to the Member
         States, the Council fixed maximum isoglucose production quantities for a Member State on the basis of the initial basic quotas,
         without taking account of isoglucose produced in that Member State during the reference period from November to April 1979, as an intermediate product used in the final manufacture of other products intended for sale, cannot in itself
         have the consequence of rendering those provisions invalid.
      
The initial quotas for the period July to June had been set, in accordance with Article 9(1) of Regulation
         No 1111/laying down common provisions for isoglucose as amended by Regulation No 387/81, on the basis of the producers’
         production as determined in the reference period, and that determination was based on the information that those undertakings
         themselves had transmitted to the Member States which, after taking note of them and carrying out any checks, had communicated
         them to the Commission in accordance with Article of Regulation No 1471/on information from the Member States concerning
         isoglucose. Since the Council had decided to use those quotas as a basis, it did not have to collect that information again
         when it adopted the contested regulations. 
      
(see paras 57-58, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
March (*)
      
(Common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector – Isoglucose – Determination of the basic quantities used for the allocation of production quotas – Isoglucose produced as an intermediate product – Article 24(2) of Regulation (EEC) No 1785/– Article 27(3) of Regulation (EC) No 2038/– Article of Regulation (EC) No 2073/– Article 11(2) of Regulation (EC) No 1260/– Article of Regulation (EC) No 1745/– Article of Regulation (EC) No 1739/– Illegality of a Community measure raised before the national court – Reference for a preliminary ruling on validity – Admissibility – Conditions – Inadmissibility of an action for annulment of the Community measure)
In Case C-441/05, 
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, by the Cour administrative d’appel, Douai (France), made by decision
         of December 2005, received at the Court on December 2005, in the proceedings
      
Roquette Frères
v
Ministre de l’Agriculture, de l’Alimentation, de la Pêche et de la Ruralité,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, R. Schintgen, P. Kūris, R. Silva de Lapuerta and L. Bay Larsen (Rapporteur),
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: M.-A. Gaudissart, Head of Unit,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2006,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Roquette Frères, by N. Coutrelis, avocat,
–       the French Government, by G. de Bergues and J.‑C. Niollet, acting as Agents,
–       the Council of the European Union, by A. Gregorio Merino and A. Westerhof Löfflerová, acting as Agents,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by M. Nolin, acting as Agent,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on October 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the validity of:
–       Article 24(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 1785/of June on the common organisation of the markets in the sugar
         sector (OJ L 177, p. 4);
      
–       Article 27(3) of Council Regulation (EC) No 2038/of September on the common organisation of the markets in the
         sugar sector (OJ L 252, p. 1);
      
–       Article of Commission Regulation (EC) No 2073/of September reducing, for the 2000/marketing year, the guaranteed
         quantity under the production quotas scheme for the sugar sector and the presumed maximum supply needs of sugar refineries
         under the preferential import arrangements (OJ L 246, p. 38);
      
–       Article 11(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1260/of June on the common organisation of the markets in the sugar
         sector (OJ L 178, p. 1);
      
–       Article of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1745/of September reducing, for the 2002/marketing year, the guaranteed
         quantity under the production quotas scheme for the sugar sector and the presumed maximum supply needs of sugar refineries
         under the preferential import arrangements (OJ L 263, p. 31); and
      
–       Article of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1739/of September reducing, for the 2003/marketing year, the guaranteed
         quantity under the production quotas for the sugar sector and the presumed maximum supply needs of sugar refineries under
         preferential imports (OJ L 249, p. 38).
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between Roquette Frères (‘Roquette’), the sole isoglucose producer established
         in metropolitan France, and the Ministre de l’Agriculture, de l’Alimentation, de la Pêche et de la Ruralité (Minister for
         Agriculture, Food, Fisheries and the Countryside) (‘the Minister’), concerning the production quotas for isoglucose allocated
         to Roquette under the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector.
      
 Legal background
 Regulation (EEC) No 1111/77, as amended by Regulation (EEC) No 1293/Under Article of Council Regulation (EEC) No 1111/of May laying down common provisions for isoglucose (OJ L 134, p. 4), as amended by Council Regulation (EEC) No 1293/of June (OJ L 162, p. 10):
      
‘1.      A basic quota shall be allotted to each isoglucose producing undertaking established in the Community, for the period [from
         July to June 1980].
      
… the basic quota of each such undertaking shall be equal to twice its production as determined, under this Regulation, during
         the period November to April 1979.
      
2.      To each undertaking having a basic quota, there shall also be allotted a maximum quota equal to its basic quota multiplied
         by a coefficient …
      
…’
Pursuant to Article 9(4), the basic quotas were allotted to each of the undertakings concerned by name. Annex II to Regulation
         No 1111/77, as amended by Regulation No 1293/79, provided that the basic quota for Roquette was set at t expressed
         as dry matter.
      
As a result of an action brought by Roquette, Regulation No 1293/was annulled by the Court by reason of infringement of
         essential procedural requirements (Case 138/Roquette Frères v Council [1980] ECR 3333).
      
 Regulations (EEC) No 387/and No 388/As a consequence of the annulment of Regulation No 1293/the Council adopted Regulation (EEC) No 387/of February amending Regulation No 1111/(OJ L 44, p. 1), which re-established in particular the quotas scheme with retrospective
         effect for the period July to June 1980, by means of a reference to the provisions in Regulation No 1111/77.
      
Subsequently, Council Regulation (EEC) No 388/of February amending Regulation (EEC) No 1592/on the application
         of the system of production quotas in the sugar and isoglucose sectors during the period July to June (OJ L 44, p. 4) extended the basic quotas scheme for the period from July to June 1981.
      
 Regulation No 1785/Regulation No 1111/was repealed and replaced by Regulation No 1785/81. In the latter regulation the isoglucose production
         quotas were no longer determined for each producer by name but on a regional basis.
      
According to the 14th recital in the preamble to Regulation No 1785/81:
‘… there are good reasons for giving Member States, in the form of rules and special Community criteria, in addition to the
         power to allocate the quotas on the basis of … isoglucose producing undertakings, the power to amend subsequently the quotas
         of existing undertakings by subtracting them from a total amount which may not, however, exceed, for all the periods from
         July to June 1986, 10% of quotas laid down initially according to the criteria concerned, and to reallocate to other
         undertakings the quantities of quotas withdrawn …’.
      
Regulation No 1785/was originally applicable to the marketing years 1981/to 1985/86. Article provided:
‘1.      Member States shall, under the conditions of this Title, allocate an A quota and a B quota to … each isoglucose-producing
         undertaking established in their territory which … had, during the period July to June 1981, a basic quota as defined
         … by Regulation (EEC) No 1111/…
      
…
3.      The A quota of each … isoglucose-producing undertaking shall be equal to the basic quota allocated to it for the period July to June 1981.
      
…
5.      The B quota of each isoglucose-producing undertaking shall be equal to 23.55% of its A quota as determined in accordance with
         … paragraph …
      
…’.
Under Article 24(2) the basic quantities for the allocation of those quotas for France (metropolitan) were set at t
         (Basic Quantity A) and t (Basic Quantity B), referring to tonnes of dry matter.
      
Finally, Article of Regulation No 1785/permitted the transfer and reduction of A quotas and B quotas under the following
         conditions:
      
‘1.      Member States may transfer A quotas and B quotas between undertakings under the conditions laid down in this Article, taking
         into consideration the interests of each of the parties concerned …
      
2.      Member States may reduce the A quota and the B quota of … each isoglucose-producing undertaking situated in their territories
         by a total quantity not exceeding … 10% of the A quota or of the B quota …
      
…
3.      The withdrawn quantities of A quotas and B quotas shall be allocated by the Member States to one or more other undertakings,
         whether or not in possession of a quota, situated in the same region within the meaning of Article 24(2) excluding the undertakings
         from which these quantities were withdrawn.
      
…’
 Regulations No 2038/and No 2073/By Regulation No 2038/1999, the Council adopted a new common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector by codifying
         Regulation No 1785/which was repealed.
      
The first subparagraph of Article 26(5) of Regulation No 2038/stated:
‘The guarantees for the disposal of … isoglucose … produced under quota may be reduced for one or more marketing years in
         order to comply with the Community’s commitments under the Agricultural Agreement concluded under Article 300(2) [EC].’
      
Article 27(1) of Regulation No 2038/provided:
‘Under the conditions of this chapter, the Member States shall allocate an A and B quota … to each undertaking producing isoglucose
         which is established on its territory and has:
      
… been provided with an A and B quota during the 1994/marketing year 
…’.
The basic quantities for the allocation of the A and B quotas, as laid down in Article 27(3), were identical to those previously
         determined in the marketing years 1981/to 1985/in Article 24(2) of Regulation No 1785/81.
      
Finally, Article of Regulation No 2038/provided for the transfer and reduction of A and B quotas under conditions
         comparable to those previously set out in Article of Regulation No 1785/81.
      
Regulation No 2073/2000, adopted on the basis of Article 26(5) of Regulation No 2038/1999, was intended to reduce the quotas
         allocated by the latter for the marketing year 2000/01. Article 1(2) and (3) of Regulation No 2073/provided:
      
‘2.      The difference referred to in paragraph [t] shall be allocated by product and by region in accordance with Annex
         I.
      
Once reduced by this difference, the basic quantities used to allocate the production quotas to producer undertakings for
         the 2000/marketing year shall be those set out in Annex II.
      
3.      The Member States shall establish … the specific difference for each producer undertaking to which a production quota for
         the 2000/marketing year has been assigned, and also each undertaking’s A and B quotas adjusted in accordance with this
         difference ...’.
      
 Regulations No 1260/2001, No 1745/and No 1739/Regulation No 1260/was applicable to the marketing years 2001/to 2005/06.
It appears from Articles 10(2) and 11(2) of that regulation that the basic quantities for isoglucose production for metropolitan
         France were 747.t (Basic Quantity A) and 098.t (Basic Quantity B), referring to tonnes of dry matter.
      
Article 11(3) of Regulation 1260/stated:
‘Without prejudice to Article 10(3), (4), (5) and (6) and Article 12, the A and B quotas of … undertakings producing isoglucose
         … shall be those assigned by the Member States for the 2000/marketing year before application of Article 26(5) of Regulation
         (EC) No 2038/…’.
      
Article 10(3) of Regulation No 1260/2001, like Article 26(5) of Regulation No 2038/1999, permitted a reduction in the guaranteed
         quantities under the production quotas scheme in order to comply with international commitments.
      
Finally, like Articles of Regulation No 1785/and of Regulation No 2038/1999, Article of Regulation No 1260/provided that the Member States could transfer A and B quotas between undertakings.
      
On the basis of Article of Regulation No 1260/2001, the Commission adopted Regulation No 1745/2002, which sought to reduce
         the guaranteed quantities under the production quotas system for the marketing year 2002/03. Article 1(2) and (3) provided:
      
‘2.      The reduction referred to in paragraph [t] shall be allocated by product and by region in accordance with Annex
         I.
      
Once reduced, the basic quantities used to allocate the production quotas to producer undertakings for the 2002/marketing
         year shall be those set out in Annex II.
      
3.      The Member States shall establish … the specific reduction for each producer undertaking to which a production quota for the
         2002/marketing year has been assigned, and also each undertaking’s A and B quotas adjusted in accordance with this reduction.’
      
Finally, a further reduction of the isoglucose production quotas was made on the basis of Article of Regulation No 1739/for the marketing year 2003/04.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
By decision of June 2000, the Director of Economic and International Policy of the Ministry of Agriculture confirmed to
         Roquette the level of annual production quotas for isoglucose which had been assigned to it under Regulations No 1785/and
         No 2038/since the marketing year 1981/82, that is t for isoglucose A and t for isoglucose B. 
      
Subsequently, by decree of October 2000, the Minister reduced the quotas assigned to Roquette on the basis of Regulation
         No 2073/by 606.t of isoglucose A and 157.t of isoglucose B, thereby setting the quotas for the marketing year 2000/at 280.t and 977.t respectively.
      
By decree of July 2001, adopted in accordance with Regulation No 1260/2001, the Minister set Roquette’s production quotas
         for the marketing years 2001/to 2005/at 747.t for isoglucose A and 098.t for isoglucose B.
      
By decree of October 2002, adopted in accordance with Regulations No 1745/and No 1739/2003, the Minister ‘declassified’
         048.t of isoglucose A and t of isoglucose B for the marketing year 2002/03, thereby setting the production quotas
         for Roquette at 698.t and 825.t respectively. In the same way, by decree of October he ‘declassified’ 262.t of isoglucose A and 68.t of isoglucose B for the marketing year 2003/04, thereby fixing the quotas for that marketing
         year at t and 030.t respectively.
      
Roquette brought proceedings before the Tribunal administratif de Lille (Adminstrative Court, Lille) seeking annulment of
         the decision of June and the four decrees cited above, pleading that the six regulations on which the decision and
         the decrees are based are unlawful.
      
After joining the five actions the Tribunal administratif dismissed them, by judgment of March 2004, on the ground that
         Roquette should have brought an action for annulment before the Community Courts against Regulation No 1785/and the five
         subsequent regulations.
      
The applications were thus dismissed in their entirety without any examination of the merits, since the Tribunal administratif
         applied the case-law of the Court resulting from the judgment in Case C-239/Nachi Europe [2001] ECR I-1197, according to which an applicant cannot plead as a defence before the national court the illegality of
         a Community measure which it has not directly challenged before the Community Courts within the time‑limit laid down for bringing
         proceedings.
      
Roquette appealed against that judgment to the Cour administrative d’appel de Douai (Administrative Appeal Court, Douai).
In those circumstances, the Cour administrative d’appel de Douai decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following questions
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Could Roquette Frères undoubtedly have mounted an admissible challenge directly before [the Court of Justice] to the legality
         of Article 24(2) of Regulation No 1785/81, Article 27(3) of Regulation No 2038/1999, Article of Regulation No 2073/2000,
         Article 11(2) of Regulation No 1260/2001, Article of Regulation No 1745/and Article of Regulation No 1739/2003[?]
         
      
2.      If Roquette Frères can admissibly plead the illegality of those provisions [before the national courts], are Article 24(2)
         of Regulation No 1785/81, Article 27(3) of Regulation No 2038/1999, Article of Regulation No 2073/2000, Article 11(2) of
         Regulation No 1260/2001, Article of Regulation No 1745/and Article of Regulation No 1739/valid inasmuch as they
         set maximum basic quantities of isoglucose production for metropolitan France without taking into account the isoglucose produced
         in that Member State between November and April as an intermediate product used in the manufacture of other
         products intended for sale [?]’
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 The first question
By its first question, the national court asks essentially whether a natural or legal person such as Roquette, in factual
         and legal circumstances such as those of the main proceedings, could undoubtedly have brought an admissible action, on the
         basis of Article EC, to annul the provisions referred to in the question (‘the contested provisions’).
      
For the national court, it is in fact a matter of being sure, having regard to the case-law resulting, inter alia, from the
         judgment in Nachi Europe, that Roquette may plead the illegality of the contested provisions before the court, even though it has not brought an action
         for annulment of those provisions before the Community Courts within the time‑limit laid down in Article EC.
      
In that connection, the French Government and the Commission of the European Communities argue that Roquette could without
         any doubt have brought an action for annulment of the contested provisions, in so far as they were of direct and individual
         concern to it, particularly on account of the fact that it was the sole producer of isoglucose in France and, on that basis,
         it was assigned all the basic quantities allocated to metropolitan France.
      
Conversely, Roquette and the Council of the European Union take the view that the contested provisions were not of direct
         and individual concern to the applicant in the main proceedings and that, in any event, there is still some doubt as to whether
         it had locus standi to bring an action for annulment of those provisions. Therefore, the case-law deriving from the judgment in Nachi Europe is not applicable in this case, so that the applicant in the main proceedings is able to rely on the invalidity of the contested
         provisions and, therefore, it is necessary for the Court to make an assessment of their validity. 
      
It must be recalled, first of all, that Article EC expresses a general principle of law under which an applicant must,
         in proceedings brought under national law against the rejection of his application, be able to plead the illegality of a Community
         measure on which the national decision adopted in his regard is based, and the question of the validity of that Community
         measure may thus be referred to the Court in proceedings for a preliminary ruling (Nachi Europe, paragraph 35, and the case-law cited).
      
However, this general principle, which has the effect of ensuring that every person has or will have had the opportunity to
         challenge a Community measure which forms the basis of a decision adversely affecting him, does not in any way preclude a
         regulation from becoming definitive as against an individual in regard to whom it must be considered to be an individual decision
         and who could undoubtedly have sought its annulment under Article EC, a fact which prevents that individual from pleading
         the illegality of that regulation before the national court (Nachi Europe, paragraph 37).
      
Therefore, the question arises as to whether an action by Roquette challenging the contested provisions under the fourth paragraph
         of Article EC would undoubtedly have been admissible, since they are of direct and individual concern to it (see, to that
         effect, Case C-241/Accrington Beef and Others [1996] ECR I‑6699, paragraph 15).
      
In that connection, it must be held that the regulations from which those provisions derive put in place, inter alia, a scheme
         for basic production quantities allocated to the Member States, which are responsible for distributing them among the various
         producers established on their territory.
      
In such a scheme, in which it is for the Member States to distribute the basic production quantities allocated to them among
         producers, with the possibility to transfer quotas between them, it must be stated that each producer has its quotas directly
         and definitively set by decision of the Member State in which it is established.
      
Furthermore, it must be recalled that, under that scheme, the Member States had some room for manoeuvre, since they were able,
         under the conditions laid down by the Community rules, to redistribute the quotas among producers in order, in particular,
         to enable new entrants to commence isoglucose production.
      
Therefore, a producer cannot, in principle, be directly concerned, for the purpose of the fourth paragraph of Article EC, by the allocation of basic production quantities to the Member States as effected at Community level by the contested
         provisions.
      
Finally, the fact that Roquette was the only isoglucose producer established in metropolitan France and, on that basis, it
         was assigned the entire basic production quantity allocated to the latter, does nothing to change that finding since, in the
         absence of a national decision to that effect, nothing actually guaranteed that undertaking such a level of quotas solely
         on the basis of the Community regulations, since part of its quotas could have been reallocated by the Member State concerned,
         in particular to any new isoglucose producer.
      
It follows from the foregoing that an undertaking such as Roquette was not able to be regarded as directly concerned, for
         the purpose of the fourth paragraph of Article EC, by the contested provisions. Consequently, it cannot be argued that
         it could undoubtedly have brought an admissible action to annul those provisions before the Community Courts.
      
Therefore, the answer to the first question must be that a natural or legal person such as Roquette, in factual and legal
         circumstances such as those of the main proceedings, could not undoubtedly have brought an admissible action, on the basis
         of Article EC, to annul the contested provisions. Therefore, such a person may, in proceedings brought under national
         law, plead the illegality of those provisions, even though it has not brought an action for annulment of those provisions
         before the Community Courts within the time‑limit laid down in Article EC.
      
 The second question
By this question, the national court asks the Court to assess the validity of the contested provisions, in as far as they
         set maximum basic quantities of isoglucose production for metropolitan France without taking account of the isoglucose produced
         in that Member State between November and April (‘the reference period’) as an intermediate product used in
         the final manufacture of other products intended for sale. 
      
In that connection, Roquette argues that the contested provisions are invalid. It submits that the initial determination of
         the isoglucose quotas under Regulation No 1111/77, as amended by Regulation No 387/81, was unlawful having regard to the case-law
         deriving from the judgment in Case C-210/Roquette Frères [1992] ECR I-731, in so far as the quantities of isoglucose produced as an intermediate product were not counted in the production
         for the reference period, which was used to determine the initial quotas according to which the basic production quantities
         allocated to the Member States were subsequently determined by the contested provisions.
      
As regards the information relating to the reference period, Roquette takes the view that there was no indication in the legislation
         then in force as to the need to include, in the information that producers were obliged to transmit to the competent authorities,
         the quantities of isoglucose produced as an intermediate product. That uncertainty was fuelled by the conduct of the Member
         States and, ultimately, by that of the Commission, which simply requested that the information relating to the production
         capacities of isoglucose producers be transmitted to it, without providing any further instructions. Roquette concludes that
         it cannot therefore be criticised for having failed to count the quantities of isoglucose produced as an intermediate product
         in the information which was used to determine the initial quotas.
      
Conversely, the French Government, the Council and the Commission take the view that the contested provisions are valid. They
         submit, inter alia, that it is the very absence, in the legislation then applicable, of a distinction as to the intended use
         of the isoglucose production which should have prompted Roquette not to make any distinction and, therefore, to transmit all
         the information concerning the production of isoglucose including that relating to isoglucose produced as an intermediate
         product. Therefore, it cannot be accepted that the Council made a manifest error of assessment when it determined the basic
         quantities under the contested provisions.
      
As a preliminary point, it must be recalled that the Council, by Regulation No 1111/as amended by Regulation No 387/81,
         assigned an initial basic quota to Roquette for the period from July to June 1980. As is clear from the wording
         of the second subparagraph of Article 9(1) of that regulation, that quota was to be twice its production as determined during
         the reference period.
      
In order to determine the production of each of the undertakings concerned during that period, the Commission used the information
         relating to their production in each calendar month transmitted by the Member States in accordance with Article of Commission
         Regulation (EEC) No 1471/of June on information from the Member States concerning isoglucose (OJ L 162, p.
         13). That information was obtained by the Member States by way of declarations made by the producers themselves.
      
On that basis, the Council, in a table inserted in Annex II to Regulation No 1111/as amended by Regulation No 387/81, set
         the basic quota for Roquette at t expressed as dry matter, that is twice its production as determined in the reference
         period in accordance with the procedure described in the preceding paragraph of this judgment. In that connection, it is common
         ground that Roquette had not counted the quantities of isoglucose produced as an intermediate product in the information on
         production transmitted to the competent national authorities.
      
It is clear from the contested provisions that, subsequently, the basic quantities were set at the same level as the basic
         quotas initially allocated, subject to the reductions resulting from international commitments undertaken by the Community.
      
In that connection, it must be observed that the initial quotas for the period July to June had been set, in
         accordance with Article 9(1) of Regulation No 1111/as amended by Regulation No 387/81, on the basis of the producers’ production
         as determined in the reference period, and that determination was based on the information that those undertakings themselves
         had transmitted to the Member States which, after taking note of them and carrying out any checks, had communicated them to
         the Commission in accordance with Article of Regulation No 1471/77. Since the Council had decided to use those quotas as
         a basis, it did not have to collect that information again when it adopted the regulations at issue in the main proceedings.
      
Therefore, the fact that, in the contested measures, the Council continued to rely on the initial basic quotas cannot, in
         itself, result in the contested measures being invalid.
      
In any event, it must be observed that, since Roquette could clearly have mounted an admissible challenge, in respect of the
         calculation of the basic quotas, to Regulation No 1111/as amended by Regulation No 387/81, before the Community Courts
         on the basis of Article EC, it cannot challenge the validity of that regulation in the context of the main proceedings.
      
In the light of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the second question referred must be that the examination of that
         question has not revealed any factor such as to affect the validity of the contested provisions.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      A natural or legal person such as Roquette Frères, in factual and legal circumstances such as those of the main proceedings,
            could not undoubtedly have brought an admissible action on the basis of Article EC to annul:
–       Article 24(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 1785/of June on the common organisation of the markets in the sugar
            sector;
–       Article 27(3) of Council Regulation (EC) No 2038/of September on the common organisation of the markets in the
            sugar sector;
–       Article of Commission Regulation (EC) No 2073/of September reducing, for the 2000/marketing year, the guaranteed
            quantity under the production quotas scheme for the sugar sector and the presumed maximum supply needs of sugar refineries
            under the preferential import arrangements;
–       Article 11(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1260/of June on the common organisation of the markets in the sugar
            sector;
–       Article of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1745/of September reducing, for the 2002/marketing year, the guaranteed
            quantity under the production quotas scheme for the sugar sector and the presumed maximum supply needs of sugar refineries
            under the preferential import arrangements, and 
–       Article of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1739/of September reducing, for the 2003/marketing year, the guaranteed
            quantity under the production quotas for the sugar sector and the presumed maximum supply needs of sugar refineries under
            preferential imports.
Therefore, such a person may, in proceedings brought under national law, plead the illegality of those provisions even though
            it has not brought an action for annulment of those provisions before the Community Courts within the time‑limit laid down
            in Article EC.
2.      The examination of the second question has not revealed any factor such as to affect the validity of Article 24(2) of Regulation
            No 1785/81, Article 27(3) of Regulation No 2038/1999, Article of Regulation No 2073/2000, Article 11(2) of Regulation No
            1260/2001, Article of Regulation No 1745/or Article of Regulation No 1739/2003.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 