
Case C-89/United Utilities plc
v
Commissioners of Customs & Excise
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the House of Lords)
(Sixth VAT Directive – Article 13B(f) – Exemption for games of chance – Scope – Activity of a ‘call centre’)
Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), July Summary of the Judgment
Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax – Exemptions provided for in the
            Sixth Directive 
(Council Directive 77/388, Art. 13B(f))
Article 13B(f) of Sixth Directive 77/on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes
         must be interpreted as meaning that the provision of call centre services to a telephone bookmaking organiser, which entails
         the staff of the supplier of those services accepting bets on behalf of the organiser, does not constitute a betting transaction
         within the meaning of that provision and cannot, therefore, qualify for the exemption from value added tax laid down by that
         provision.
      
In contrast to the betting transaction referred to in that provision, that activity alone cannot in any way be said to be
         characterised by the offer to customers placing bets of a chance of winning in consideration for accepting the risk of having
         to pay for winnings and cannot, therefore, be classified as a betting transaction within the meaning of that provision. 
      
(see paras 26, 29, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Sixth VAT Directive – Article 13B(f) – Exemption for games of chance – Scope – Activity of a call centre)
In Case C-89/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, from the House of Lords (United Kingdom), made by decision of November
         2004, received at the Court on February 2005, in the proceedings
      
United Utilities plc
v
Commissioners of Customs & Excise,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, R. Schintgen (Rapporteur), R. Silva de Lapuerta, G. Arestis and J. Klučka,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: C. Stix-Hackl,
Registrar: K. Sztranc, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on February 2006,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       United Utilities plc, by D. Goy QC and C. McDonnell, Barrister, instructed by P. Drinkwater, Solicitor,
–       the Commissioners of Customs & Excise, by R. Hill, Barrister,
–       the United Kingdom Government, by C. White and T. Harris, acting as Agents, and K. Parker QC and R. Hill, Barrister
–       the Portuguese Government, by L. Fernandes and A. Matos Barros, acting as Agents,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by R. Lyal, acting as Agent,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 13B(f) of Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC
         of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes - Common system of value added
         tax: uniform basis of assessment (OJ L 145, p. 1) (‘the Sixth Directive’).
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between United Utilities plc (‘United Utilities’) and the Commissioners
         of Customs & Excise (‘the Commissioners’), who are responsible for the collection of value added tax (‘VAT’) in the United
         Kingdom, on the question of whether the services provided by Vertex Data Science Ltd (‘Vertex’) to Littlewoods Promotions
         Ltd (‘Littlewoods’), which organises telephone bookmaking, are subject to VAT. 
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
Article of the Sixth Directive, which constitutes Title II thereof, entitled ‘Scope’, provides:
‘The following shall be subject to value added tax:
(1)      the supply of goods or services effected for consideration within the territory of the country by a taxable person acting
         as such;
      
...’
Under Article 13B(f) of the Sixth Directive, the Member States are to exempt from VAT ‘betting, lotteries and other forms
         of gambling, subject to conditions and limitations laid down by each Member State’.
      
 National legislation
Article 13B(f) of the Sixth VAT Directive was transposed into national law in Group of Schedule of the Value Added Tax
         Act 1994, which exempts from VAT the provision of any facilities for the placing of bets or the playing of any games of chance.
      
 The main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
United Utilities is the representative member of a group of companies treated as a single taxable person within the meaning
         of the second subparagraph of Article 4(4) of the Sixth Directive. Vertex is also a member of that group.
      
Littlewoods organises telephone bookmaking under the name of ‘Bet Direct’. Its customers can bet on the outcome of sporting
         events or other random events, such as meteorological events. The bets are placed exclusively by telephone. In 1999, Littlewoods
         decided to outsource part of its operations and, for that purpose, entered into a contract with Vertex for the provision of
         call centre services. Pursuant to that contract, Vertex, which is also authorised to act as Littlewood’s agent, is required
         to provide the staff, premises and telephone and computer equipment necessary to take the bets in question. 
      
Littlewoods selects sporting or other events on which bets may be placed, fixes the odds, appraises the bets and manages the
         revenue and expenditure relating to the bets. 
      
For its part, Vertex merely receives telephone calls and records the bets in accordance with the conditions stipulated by
         Littlewoods. In that respect, Vertex has no discretion. Moreover, at no stage do Vertex employees disclose to customers placing
         bets that they are dealing with Vertex and not with Littlewoods. In addition, the name ‘Vertex’ does not appear in any documentation
         intended for customers.
      
Vertex’s fee consists of a fixed element and a variable element. The variable element is based on the number of call minutes
         for telephone calls received by Vertex. Various penalties are provided for if Vertex makes a mistake in the performance of
         its duties. The fee takes no account of either the number or value of bets recorded, or the odds on those bets. Vertex bears
         no financial risk in relation to the bets offered by Littlewoods.
      
United Utilities takes the view that the services provided by Vertex fall within the scope of Article 13B(f) of the Sixth
         Directive and must accordingly qualify for the exemption from VAT provided for by that provision.
      
In support of its position, United Utilities submits, firstly, that Article 13B(f) of the Sixth Directive is intended to exempt
         the activity of providing the framework within which gambling can take place. The provision of the framework, that is, the
         facilities, within which or by means of which gambling can take place is, therefore, an activity that may be exempted from
         charge. 
      
Further, it is clear from Case C-2/SDC [1997] ECR I-and Case C-235/CSC Financial Services [2001] ECR I-that the exemption at issue in the main proceedings should apply to the services of an agent so long as
         the agent is instrumental in the gambling transaction itself. On any other interpretation, that exemption would apply only
         to certain of the elements which make up the framework within which a gambling transaction is carried on.
      
United Utilities then submits that it is clear from the case-law of the Court relating to the exemption from VAT of financial
         services (SDC Case C 349/CPP [1999] ECR I-973, and CSC Financial Services, cited above) that, where an agent undertakes a transaction on behalf of a principal, then, for the purposes of exemption
         from VAT, the agent’s supply to the principal is to be analysed by reference to its precise role in the underlying transaction
         between the principal and the end customer. Only if the agent carries out an ‘essential act which alters the legal or financial
         situation between the parties’, in a transaction falling within one of the exempt categories, will that agent’s supply be
         exempt. It is irrelevant whether that agent is an agent for the principal or an agent for the customer. 
      
That case‑law applies, mutatis mutandis, to the exemption from VAT of betting and gambling. Thus, entering into the betting
         contract is the specific essential function of gambling or betting as it alters the legal and financial situation between
         the parties. Since Vertex’s oral acceptance of bets is sufficient to establish a legal relationship between customers placing
         bets and Littlewoods, Vertex performs the specific essential function of betting organiser.
      
Lastly, United Utilities maintains that the interpretation it puts forward is not affected by the fact that Vertex does not
         have any discretion whether or not to accept bets on behalf of Littlewoods, since entering into a contract could never constitute
         an administrative act. 
      
The Commissioners do not share that view and consider that the exemption provided for in Article 13B(f) of the Sixth Directive
         does not apply to the services provided by Vertex as they are merely physical, technical or administrative services supplied
         to the betting organiser. 
      
The VAT and Duties Tribunal, the High Court of Justice and the Court of Appeal, in turn, rejected United Utilities’ arguments.
In those circumstances, the House of Lords, before which the matter was brought, decided to stay the proceedings and refer
         the following question to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Does the exemption for betting laid down in Article 13B(f) of the … Sixth … Directive … apply where a person (‘the agent’)
         provides services on behalf of another person (‘the principal’) of accepting bets from customers and communicating their acceptance
         by the principal to customers where:
      
(a) the actions of the agent perform a necessary step in creating the legal relationship of a bet between the principal and
         its customer and thereby consummate the betting transaction; but 
      
(b) the agent makes no decisions as to the setting of odds, the odds being set by the principal or in some cases determined
         by third parties under the rules of the sport in question; and 
      
(c) the agent decides whether or not to accept bets on behalf of the principal in accordance with criteria laid down by the
         principal so that the agent has no discretion?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
By its question, the national court asks, in essence, whether Article 13B(f) of the Sixth Directive is to be interpreted as
         meaning that the provision of call centre services to a telephone bookmaking organiser, which entails the staff of the supplier
         of those services accepting bets on behalf of the organiser, constitutes a betting transaction within the meaning of that
         provision and may, therefore, qualify for the exemption from VAT laid down by that provision.
      
In order to answer that question, it is to be noted at the outset that the terms used to specify the exemptions provided for
         by Article of the Sixth Directive are to be interpreted strictly, since they constitute exceptions to the general principle
         that VAT is to be levied on all services supplied for consideration by a taxable person (see, inter alia, SDC, cited above, paragraph 20, and Case C-472/Arthur Andersen [2005] ECR I-1719, paragraph 24).
      
Moreover, the interpretation of the terms used in that provision must be consistent with the objectives pursued by those exemptions
         and comply with the requirements of the principle of fiscal neutrality inherent in the common system of VAT (Case C‑45/Dornier [2003] ECR I-12911, paragraph 42).
      
More particularly, it should be noted that the exemption from which betting, lotteries and other forms of gambling benefit
         is based on practical considerations, gambling transactions not lending themselves easily to the application of VAT (Case
         C-86/Freemans [2001] ECR I-4167, paragraph 30) and not, as is the case with certain public interest services supplied in the social sector,
         on a desire to afford those activities more advantageous VAT treatment. 
      
It is in the light of those considerations that it is necessary to examine whether an activity such as that at issue in the
         main proceedings constitutes a betting transaction within the meaning of Article 13B(f) of the Sixth Directive which may,
         as such, be exempt from VAT.
      
The order for reference states that the services supplied by Vertex involve providing the staff, premises and telephone and
         computer equipment necessary to take bets, whilst the subject‑matter of the bets and the odds are fixed by the recipient of
         that supply, namely, Littlewoods.
      
Clearly, in contrast to the betting transaction referred to in Article 13B(f) of the Sixth Directive, that activity alone
         cannot in any way be said to be characterised by the offer to customers placing bets of a chance of winning in consideration
         for accepting the risk of having to pay for winnings and cannot, therefore, be classified as a betting transaction within
         the meaning of that provision.
      
For the same reason, that interpretation is not affected by the fact that the acceptance of bets, in this case by Vertex staff,
         is a stage, however important , in the placing of those bets, since it is as a result of that acceptance that a legal relationship
         between Littlewoods and its customers is brought about.
      
Further, case-law to the effect that the change in the legal and financial relationship between a supplier of services and
         its customer is a specific aspect of transactions concerning transfers (SDC, cited above, paragraph 66, and CSC Financial Services, paragraph 26) cannot be applied, mutatis mutandis, to the activities referred to in Article 13B(f) of the Sixth Directive
         since the objectives on which exemptions for transactions concerning transfers under Article 13B(d) of that directive are
         founded are not the same as those on which the exemption in Article 13B(f) of that directive are based.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the question referred must be that Article 13B(f) of the Sixth Directive must
         be interpreted as meaning that the provision of call centre services to a telephone bookmaking organiser, which entails the
         staff of the supplier of those services accepting bets on behalf of the organiser, does not constitute a betting transaction
         within the meaning of that provision and cannot, therefore, qualify for the exemption from VAT laid down by that provision.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
Article 13B(f) of Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States
            relating to turnover taxes - Common system of value added tax: uniform basis of assessment, must be interpreted as meaning
            that the provision of call centre services to a telephone bookmaking organiser, which entails the staff of the supplier of
            those services accepting bets on behalf of the organiser, does not constitute a betting transaction within the meaning of
            that provision and cannot, therefore, qualify for the exemption from VAT laid down by that provision.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 