
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Joined Cases C-4/and C-5/Hilde SchönheitvStadt Frankfurt am Main and Silvia BeckervLand Hessen(References for a preliminary ruling from the Verwaltungsgericht Frankfurt am Main)
         
«(Social policy – Equal pay for men and women – Applicability of Article of the EC Treaty (Articles to of the EC Treaty have been replaced by Articles EC
               to EC) and Article 141(1) and (2) EC and of Directive 86/378/EEC or Directive 79/7/EEC – Meaning of pay – Civil service pension scheme – Calculation of the old-age pension for part-time civil servants – Discriminatory treatment as compared with full-time workers – Indirect discrimination based on sex – Conditions governing justification for objective reasons unrelated to any discrimination on grounds of sex – Protocol concerning Article of the EC Treaty (now Protocol concerning Article EC) – Temporal effects)»
            
Opinion of Advocate General Geelhoed delivered on May I - Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber), October I - Summary of the Judgment
1..
Social policy – Men and women – Equal pay – Pay – Meaning – Scheme for retirement pensions for civil servants provided to them by reason of their employment relationship – Included – Legislation which may entail a reduction in the pension of civil servants who have worked part-time for at least a part of
                     their working life – Reduction principally affecting female civil servants – Not permitted in the absence of objective justification  
                  (EC Treaty, Art. (Articles to of the EC Treaty have been replaced by Articles EC to EC); Art. 141(1) and
                  (2) EC) 
2..
Social policy – Men and women – Equal pay – National law principally affecting female workers – Not permitted in the absence of objective justification – Appraisal of the national court – Criteria – Budgetary considerations – Not included – Objective justification – Legislation whose result is to reduce the amount of a worker's retirement pension in a proportion greater than that represented
                     by his or her periods of part-time work – No justification  
                  (EC Treaty, Art. (Articles to of the EC Treaty have been replaced by Articles EC to EC); Art. 141(1) and
                  (2) EC) 
3..
Social policy – Men and women – Equal pay – Article of the Treaty (Articles to of the Treaty have been replaced by Articles EC to EC) and Article
                     141(1) and (2) EC – Applicability to benefits provided by an occupational social security scheme – Benefits payable in respect of periods of employment prior to May – Excluded by Protocol No concerning Article of the Treaty (now Protocol concerning Article EC) – Exception  
                  (EC Treaty, Art. (Articles to of the EC Treaty have been replaced by Articles EC to EC); Protocol No concerning Article (now Protocol concerning Article EC)) 
1.
 A retirement pension paid under a scheme such as the one established by the Gesetz über die Versorgung der Beamten und Richter
         in Bund und Ländern (German Law on pensions for officials and judges at national and regional level) of August 1976, in
         the version published on March 1999, which introduced a pension abatement applicable to civil servants who had taken unpaid
         leave or worked shorter hours for reasons of family policy or by virtue of the provisions on special leave, falls within the
         scope of Article of the Treaty (Articles to of the Treaty have been replaced by Articles EC to EC) and
         of Article 141(1) and (2) EC. Since such a pension concerns only a particular category of workers, is directly related to the period of service completed
         and its amount is calculated by reference to the public servant's final salary, it satisfies the three criteria which characterise
         the employment relationship, criteria which are decisive for the purpose of ascertaining whether a retirement pension falls
         within the scope of Article of the Treaty and, as of May 1999, that of Article 141(1) and (2) EC. Those provisions preclude legislation, such as that deriving from Paragraph of the abovementioned law in conjunction with
         the old version of Paragraph thereof, which may entail a reduction in the pension of civil servants who have worked part-time
         for at least a part of their working life, where that category of civil servants includes a considerably higher number of
         women than men, unless the legislation is justified by objective factors unrelated to any discrimination on grounds of sex.
         see paras 58, 63, 74, operative part 2.
 It is for the national court, which has sole jurisdiction to assess the facts and interpret the national legislation, to determine
         whether and to what extent a legislative provision which, though applying independently of the sex of the worker, actually
         affects a considerably higher percentage of women than men is justified by objective factors unrelated to any discrimination
         on grounds of sex. In that regard, restricting public expenditure is not an objective which may be relied on to justify different treatment on
         grounds of sex. However, the different treatment of men and women may be justified, depending on the circumstances, by reasons other than
         those put forward at the time when the measure introducing the difference in treatment was introduced. National legislation which has the effect of reducing a worker's retirement pension by a proportion greater than that resulting
         when his periods of part-time work are taken into account cannot be regarded as objectively justified by the fact that the
         pension is in that case consideration for less work or on the ground that its aim is to prevent civil servants employed on
         a part-time basis from being placed at an advantage in comparison with those employed on a full-time basis. see para. 97, operative part 3.
 Protocol No concerning Article of the Treaty establishing the European Community (now Protocol concerning Article EC) is to be interpreted as precluding the application of Article of the Treaty (Articles to of the EC Treaty
         have been replaced by Articles EC to EC) and, since May 1999, the application of Article 141(1) and (2) EC to benefits
         provided under an occupational social security scheme payable in respect of periods of employment prior to May 1990, subject
         to the exception for workers or those claiming under them who have before that date initiated legal proceedings or raised
         an equivalent claim under the applicable national law. see para. 104, operative part JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)October (1)
((Social policy – Equal pay for men and women – Applicability of Article of the EC Treaty (Articles to of the EC Treaty have been replaced by Articles EC
                  to EC) and Article 141(1) and (2) EC and of Directive 86/378/EEC or Directive 79/7/EEC – Meaning of pay – Civil service pension scheme – Calculation of the old-age pension for part-time civil servants – Discriminatory treatment as compared with full-time workers – Indirect discrimination based on sex – Conditions governing justification for objective reasons unrelated to any discrimination on grounds of sex – Protocol concerning Article of the EC Treaty (now Protocol concerning Article EC) – Temporal effects))
               
In Joined Cases C-4/and C-5/02, 
            REFERENCES to the Court under Article EC by the Verwaltungsgericht Frankfurt am Main (Germany) for a preliminary ruling
            in the proceedings pending before that court between
            
 Hilde Schönheit
and
 Stadt Frankfurt am Main (C-4/02) ,
            
and between Silvia Becker
and
 Land Hessen (C-5/02) ,
            
on the interpretation of Article of the EC Treaty (Articles to of the EC Treaty have been replaced by Articles
            EC to EC), of the Protocol concerning Article of the EC Treaty, annexed to the EC Treaty by the Treaty on European
            Union (now the Protocol concerning Article EC), of Article 141(1) and (2) EC, of Council Directive 79/7/EEC of December
            on the progressive implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women in matters of social security
            (OJ L 6, p. 24), of Council Directive 86/378/EEC of July on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment
            for men and women in occupational social security schemes (OJ L 225, p. 40), as amended by Council Directive 96/97/EC
            of December (OJ L 46, p. 20), and of Council Directive 97/80/EC of December on the burden of proof in
            cases of discrimination based on sex (OJ L 14, p. 6),
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),,
composed of: A. La Pergola (Rapporteur), acting as President of the Fifth Chamber, P. Jann and S. von Bahr, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed, Registrar: H.A. Rühl, Principal Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
Ms Schönheit, by A. Fischer, Rechtsanwalt (C-4/02), 
               
─
Ms Becker, by A. Kähler, Rechtsanwalt (C-5/02), 
               
─
the German Government, by W.-D. Plessing and M. Lumma, acting as Agents (C-4/and C-5/02), 
               
─
the Commission of the European Communities, by N. Yerrell and H. Kreppel, acting as Agents (C-4/and C-5/02), 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of Ms Becker, represented by Mr Schröder, Justiziar, and Ms Kähler, and the Commission,
               represented by F. Hoffmeister, acting as Agent, at the hearing on March 2003,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
By orders of November 2001, received at the Court on January (Case C-4/02) and January (Case C-5/02), the
         Verwaltungsgericht (Administrative Court) Frankfurt am Main, referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article
         EC eleven questions on the interpretation of Article of the EC Treaty (Articles to of the EC Treaty have been
         replaced by Articles EC to EC), of the Protocol concerning Article of the EC Treaty, annexed to the EC Treaty
         by the Treaty on European Union (now the Protocol concerning Article EC), of Article 141(1) and (2) EC, of Council Directive
         79/7/EEC of December on the progressive implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women in matters
         of social security (OJ L 6, p. 24), of Council Directive 86/378/EEC of July on the implementation of the principle
         of equal treatment for men and women in occupational social security schemes (OJ L 225, p. 40), as amended by Council
         Directive 96/97/EC of December (OJ L 46, p. 20:  
         Directive 86/378), and of Council Directive 97/80/EC of December on the burden of proof in cases of discrimination based on sex (OJ
         L 14, p. 6). 
         
            
Those questions were raised in proceedings between (i) Ms Schönheit and the City of Frankfurt am Main (C-4/02) and (ii) Ms
         Becker and the  
          Land  Hesse (C-5/02) concerning the determination of the applicants' pension entitlement. 
         
Legal background
Community legislation
         The EC Treaty
         
            
The first and second paragraphs of Article of the Treaty state: Each Member State shall during the first stage ensure and subsequently maintain the application of the principle that men
         and women should receive equal pay for equal work.For the purpose of this article,  
         pay means the ordinary basic or minimum wage or salary and any other consideration, whether in cash or in kind, which the worker
         receives, directly or indirectly, in respect of his employment from his employer.
         
            
Since May 1999, when the Treaty of Amsterdam entered into force, Article EC has provided: 
         
1.
 Each Member State shall ensure that the principle of equal pay for male and female workers for equal work or work of equal
         value is applied.
         
2.
 For the purpose of this article,  
         pay means the ordinary basic or minimum wage or salary and any other consideration, whether in cash or in kind, which the worker
         receives directly or indirectly, in respect of his employment, from his employer.
         ...
         
            
Article 141(1) and the first subparagraph of Article 141(2) EC are therefore essentially identical to the first and second
         paragraphs of Article of the Treaty. 
         
            
The Protocol concerning Article EC states: For the purposes of Article of this Treaty, benefits under occupational social security schemes shall not be considered
         as remuneration if and in so far as they are attributable to periods of employment prior to May 1990, except in the case
         of workers or those claiming under them who have before that date initiated legal proceedings or introduced an equivalent
         claim under the applicable national law.
         
            
The Protocol concerning Article EC is, apart from the replacement of the reference to Article of the Treaty with a
         reference to Article EC, identical to Protocol No concerning Article of the Treaty establishing the European Community,
         annexed to the Treaty on European Union of February (
         Protocol No 2). 
         Directive 79/Directive 79/applies, under Article 3(1)(a) thereof, to statutory schemes which provide protection for, inter alia, old
         age. 
         
            
Article 4(1) of Directive 79/provides: The principle of equal treatment means that there shall be no discrimination whatsoever on ground of sex either directly,
         or indirectly by reference in particular to marital or family status, in particular as concerns:
         
─
the scope of the schemes and the conditions of access thereto, 
         
─
the obligation to contribute and the calculation of contributions,
         
─
the calculation of benefits including increases due in respect of a spouse and for dependants and the conditions governing
            the duration and retention of entitlement to benefits.
         
Directive 86/Article 2(1) of Directive 86/provides: Occupational social security schemes means schemes not governed by Directive 79/7/EEC whose purpose is to provide workers, whether employees or self-employed,
         in an undertaking or group of undertakings, area of economic activity, occupational sector or group of sectors with benefits
         intended to supplement the benefits provided by statutory social security schemes or to replace them, whether membership of
         such schemes is compulsory or optional.
         
            
Article of Directive 86/provides: This directive shall apply to:
         
(a)
occupational schemes which provide protection against the following risks: 
         ...
         
─
old age, including early retirement, 
         
.... Article 5(1) of Directive 86/provides: Under the conditions laid down in the following provisions, the principle of equal treatment implies that there shall be no
         discrimination on the basis of sex, either directly or indirectly, by reference in particular to marital or family status,
         especially as regards:...
         
─
the calculation of benefits ...
         
. 
         
            
Article 6(1) of Directive 86/provides: Provisions contrary to the principle of equal treatment shall include those based on sex, either directly or indirectly, in
         particular by reference to marital or family for:...
         
(h)
setting different levels of benefit, except in so far as may be necessary to take account of actuarial calculation factors
         which differ according to sex in the case of defined-contribution schemes. In the case of funded defined-benefit schemes, certain elements (examples of which are annexed) may be unequal where the inequality
         of the amounts results from the effects of the use of actuarial factors differing according to sex at the time when the scheme's
         funding is implemented; 
         ....
         Directive 97/Under Article 2(2) of Council Directive 97/80: For [the] purposes of the principle of equal treatment referred to in paragraph 1, indirect discrimination shall exist where
         an apparently neutral provision, criterion or practice disadvantages a substantially higher proportion of the members of one
         sex unless that provision, criterion or practice is appropriate and necessary and can be justified by objective factors unrelated
         to sex.
         
            
Article of Directive 97/provides: 1. Member States shall take such measures as are necessary, in accordance with their national judicial systems, to ensure
         that, when persons who consider themselves wronged because the principle of equal treatment has not been applied to them establish,
         before a court or other competent authority, facts from which it may be presumed that there has been direct or indirect discrimination,
         it shall be for the respondent to prove that there has been no breach of the principle of equal treatment.2. This directive shall not prevent Member States from introducing rules of evidence which are more favourable to plaintiffs.3. Member States need not apply paragraph to proceedings in which it is for the court or competent body to investigate the
         facts of the case.
         National legislation
         
            
The Fünftes Gesetz zur Änderung dienstrechtlicher Vorschriften (the fifth Law amending provisions concerning the civil service)
         of July (BGBl. I, p. 998;  
         the amending law) introduced in the second clause of the first sentence of Paragraph 14(1),  
         Amount of pension, of the Gesetz über die Versorgung der Beamten und Richter in Bund und Ländern (Law on pensions for officials and judges
         at national and regional level) of August (BGBl. I, p. 3839;  
         the BeamtVG) a pension abatement applicable to civil servants who had taken unpaid leave or worked shorter hours for reasons of family
         policy or by virtue of the provisions on special leave (
         the pension abatement). 
         
            
Under Paragraph 14(1) of the BeamtVG, as amended by the amending law, which applied from August until December
         (
         the old version of Paragraph of the BeamtVG): On completion of ten years' pensionable service the pension shall amount to 35% and shall rise with every further year of
         service by 2% until completion of the twenty-fifth year of service, and thereafter by 1% of pensionable service, subject to
         a maximum of seventy-five percent ... ; in the case of part-time work, leave or reduced working time, the rate of pension
         which would have been attained hereunder but for these departures from full-time work, and before application of the maximum
         rate, shall be reduced in such proportion as actual pensionable service bears to the period of time which but for the departures
         from full-time work would have been completed but shall be not less than 35% or more than 75%; ....
         
            
The pension abatement introduced by the amending law, applied on the regressive pension scale of the old version of Paragraph
         of the BeamtVG, was abolished by Paragraph 14, point 16, of the Fünftes Gesetz zur Änderung besoldungsrechtlicher Vorschriften
         (Fifth Law amending regulations concerning remuneration) of May 1990, which entered into force on January (BGBl.
         I, p. 967;  
         the amending law on remuneration). 
         
            
Furthermore, the regressive pension scale under the old version of Paragraph of the BeamtVG was replaced by a linear system
         of pension entitlement. 
         
            
Thus, Paragraph of the BeamtVG,  
         Amount of pension, provides in the version applying with effect from January (
         the new version of Paragraph of the BeamtVG): (1) In respect of each year of pensionable service the pension shall amount to 1.875% of pensionable remuneration, subject,
         however, to a maximum amount of 75% ....
         
            
Paragraph of the BeamtVG,  
         Rates of pension for officials in service as at December 1991, as amended by the amending law on remuneration, provides: (1) Where on December the person concerned already had the status of an official, the rate of pension acquired by
         that date shall be maintained. In that connection calculation of pensionable service and rate of pension shall be determined
         in accordance with the law applicable up to December 1991. The second and third clauses of the first sentence of Paragraph
         14(1) shall not apply. The rate of pension resulting from the first and second sentences shall rise with each year which from
         January onwards is completed as pensionable service under the law applicable as from that date by one percent of the
         pensionable remuneration up to a maximum rate of 75% ... ....(4) The rate of pension under paragraphs (1), (2) or (3) shall be used as the basis for calculating the pension if such rate
         is higher than the rate of pension resulting under this law for the whole period of pensionable service. The rate of pension
         under paragraph (1) may not exceed the rate of pension which would result from calculation under the law applicable until
         December 1991.....
         
            
Entitled  
         Normal pensionable service, Paragraph of the BeamtVG, in the version published on March (BGBl. I, p. 322, 847, 2033), provides: (1) Pensionable service is the period of service completed by the official from the date of appointment as an official in
         the service of a public-law employer within national territory. That does not include periods...
         
5.
 of unpaid leave
         ...Periods of part-time employment are pensionable only in such proportion as the reduced working time bears to normal working
         time; ... .
         The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary rulingCase C-4/Ms Schönheit, who was born on July 1939, began working for the City of Frankfurt am Main on April as a social worker,
         initially as a contractual employee and then, from January 1984, as an official. 
         
            
Until June 1992, Ms Schönheit worked on a full-time basis. From July until December she worked part-time.
         After six months' unpaid leave, from January to June 1996, she resumed work on a part-time basis. She was subsequently
         given early retirement, at her request, with effect from August 1999, by her employer's decision of July 1999. 
         
            
By another decision also adopted on July 1999, the City of Frankfurt am Main awarded her a pension of 65.8% of her final
         pensionable salary. 
         
            
That rate of pension was calculated as follows. 
         
            
First, the City of Frankfurt am Main calculated Ms Schönheit's normal pensionable service under Paragraph of the BeamtVG
         (
         actual service) and multiplied that service by the factor of 1.875% provided for by the new version of Paragraph of the BeamtVG, which
         resulted in a rate of pension of 56.99%. 
         
            
Second, Ms Schönheit's employer, in compliance with the first sentence of Paragraph 85(4) of the BeamtVG ─ since Ms Schönheit
         was already an official on December ─ calculated the rate of pension which could be awarded to her applying the method
         of calculation found in Paragraph 85(1) of the BeamtVG. That method of calculation resulted in a rate of pension of 70.79%.
         
         
            
Third, pursuant to the second sentence of Paragraph 85(4) of the BeamtVG, Ms Schönheit's employer calculated the rate of pension
         which would have been applicable to her under the provisions which were in force until December 1991, that is, under the
         old version of Paragraph of the BeamtVG, including the pension abatement. To that end, it started by calculating the rate
         of pension to which Ms Schönheit would have been entitled had she not taken various leaves of absence during her period of
         employment (
         the notional rate of pension), that is to say, as if she had worked full-time throughout the whole of that period (
         notional service).  Her notional service would have entitled Ms Schönheit to a notional rate of pension of 74%. The City of Frankfurt am Main
         subsequently reduced that rate in accordance with the proportion borne by actual service to notional service, which resulted
         in a rate of 65.8%. 
         
            
That was the rate applied in the decision adopted on July by the City of Frankfurt am Main under the second sentence
         of Paragraph 85(4) of the BeamtVG, since that rate was lower than the rate calculated under Paragraph 85(1). 
         
            
On August 1999, Ms Schönheit raised an objection to the decision of July determining her pension. 
         
            
The City of Frankfurt am Main dismissed her objection by decision of January 2000. 
         
            
Ms Schönheit then brought an action on February before the Verwaltungsgericht Frankfurt am Main for annulment of the
         City's decisions of July and January concerning the determination of her pension entitlement. Ms Schönheit
         also claimed that her rate of pension should be set at at least 70.79%. 
         
            
In its order for reference, the Verwaltungsgericht Frankfurt am Main considers that the pension abatement provided for by
         the old version of Paragraph of the BeamtVG, which was applied when Ms Schönheit's rate of pension was determined by the
         contested decisions, is incompatible with Article EC since it gives rise, to her detriment, to indirect discrimination
         based on sex which is not justified by objective reasons. 
         
            
It is of the view that the pension abatement at issue affects only part-time workers, whose pension it reduces, whilst a considerably
         smaller percentage of men than women work on a part-time basis in the Hesse provincial administration. According to official
         figures relating to staff working directly and indirectly for the  
          Land  of Hesse, for municipalities and associations of municipalities in that  
          Land , in 1993, 92.05% of the part-time staff were women. According to other official sources, in of the employees
         of the provincial administration of Hesse, were employed on a part-time basis, of which were women (87.9%) as
         against men (12.1%). 
         
            
The referring court considers there to be no objective reason to justify such differential treatment. The aim of limiting
         public expenditure put forward by the public authorities at the time when the pension abatement was introduced could not,
         in the referring court's opinion, justify the differential treatment concerned. 
         
            
However, the case-law of the Bundesverwaltungsgericht (Federal Administrative Court) is at variance with that analysis. A
         number of recent judgments of that court confirm that a reduction of the pension  
          pro rata temporis  in the case of part-time work and unpaid leave does not amount to unlawful indirect discrimination against women. Such a
         reduction is justified on objective grounds by the fact that the pension is in that case consideration for less work. 
         
            
According to that case-law, the second clause of the first sentence of the old version of Paragraph 14(1) of the BeamtVG merely
         served to offset the comparatively more favourable treatment enjoyed by officials who were not employed full-time, which derived
         from the regressive pension scale laid down by the earlier version of Paragraph of the BeamtVG. 
         
            
In those circumstances the Verwaltungsgericht Frankfurt am Main, taking the view that the interpretation of the Community
         provisions relevant for the outcome of the main proceedings was not clear, decided by order of November to stay proceedings
         and to refer to the Court for a preliminary ruling the following nine questions: 
         
1.
 Is the grant of an old-age pension under the BeamtVG subject to Article of the EC Treaty, now superseded by Article 141(1)
         and (2) EC, in conjunction with Directive 86/378/EEC or the provisions of Directive 79/7/EEC? 
         
2.
 Do benefits under the BeamtVG constitute a scheme under Article 6(1)(h) of Directive 86/378/EEC with the consequence that,
         irrespective of their being financed by budgetary resources, it is legitimate to take into account actuarial factors or analogous
         matters in order to differentiate levels of benefit? 
         
3.
 Are the factors required to justify indirect discrimination on the ground of sex provided for by Article 2(2) of Directive
         97/80/EC applicable in the case of Article of the EC Treaty and Article 141(1) and (2) EC, as well as Directive 86/378/EEC,
         irrespective of whether a question arises in judicial proceedings as to relaxation of the burden of proof or whether that
         question is of no significance under the principle applicable to judicial proceedings of official establishment of facts?
         
         
4.
 Is an apparently neutral criterion in a legal provision to be judged as to its necessity solely on the basis of the intention
         of the legislature and the grounds for enactment which are apparent from the legislative process, in particular where the
         existence of such intentions and grounds is documented in the procedure leading to adoption of the legislation and demonstrably
         constituted the relevant reason for the enactment? 
         
5.
 In so far as, in parallel with or addition to those intentions and grounds (see Question 4), regard may also be had to other
         legitimate aims of the legislation as justificatory factors within the meaning of Article 2(2) of Directive 97/80/EC, or the
         case-law of the Court of Justice on establishing the existence of indirect discrimination on the ground of sex, can a national
         court in that connection establish of its own motion the existence of legitimate aims for a provision of law and, where appropriate,
         use them to justify a distinguishing criterion, in particular where its reasoning in that regard is founded on considerations
         inherent in the scheme of the law? Can it also do so where such considerations are not discernibly reflected in the grounds
         for the enactment documented in the course of the legislative procedure? 
         
6.
 Can the discrimination initially apparent in the calculation of the pensions of older female part-time civil servants as a
         proportion of final salary be justified on the ground that it is necessary to achieve a legitimate aim where that discrimination
         is intended, as it were, to offset a minimum pension acquired during the first years of service with no account being taken
         of the reduced working time, although civil servants' pension benefits are met solely from general budgetary resources without
         any contribution by female officials?  As justification for such necessity, if appropriate on an ancillary basis, can reference
         be made to the fact that pension benefits are in the nature of maintenance support and to their characteristic as a traditional
         principle of the professional civil service under Article 33(5) of the Grundgesetz (Basic Law)? 
         
7.
 If such discrimination is deemed necessary under Question 6, is a reduction in the rate of pension for older female and male
         officials with entitlement to benefits far above the minimum pension in respect of at least reckonable years of service,
         applicable by virtue of their previous part-time service, still reasonable (proportionate) if the amount of such reduction
         is calculated by reference not only to the extent of the reduced working time on a linear basis but also, to the detriment
         of those concerned, to the duration of full-time employment in relation to that of part-time employment ─ even though for
         older female and male civil servants the possibly disproportionately favourable grant of a minimum pension irrespective of
         the reduction of their working time is no longer possible?  Would it not in this context be (more) appropriate to abandon
         the disproportionate reduction in the rate of pension for older and longer-serving female and male officials and instead for
         there merely to be a proportionate reduction in the minimum pension? 
         
8.
 Where the numbers of budgetary and established posts remain unchanged, can additional personnel costs incurred in the recruitment
         of additional persons by an expansion of part-time employment, in contrast to the hitherto predominant full-time employment,
         justify the necessity of passing these costs on to part-time employees by way of a disproportionate reduction in their rate
         of pension, as occurred under the second and third clauses of the first sentence of Paragraph 14(1) of the BeamtVG in the
         version thereof applicable until December 1991? 
         
9.
 Is it reasonable for such costs to be taken into account as a matter of necessity (Question 8) if the additional costs are
         passed on solely to earlier part-time employees, so that women, for by far the most part, must bear them, even though the
         expansion of part-time employment opportunities at the time of the legislative amendment in that regard principally pursued
         the objective of reducing general unemployment by the partial absorption of surplus male and female applicants to the civil
         service?
         
Case C-5/Ms Becker, who was born on July 1951, has been employed by the  
          Land  of Hesse as a teacher with civil-servant status since August 1971. Between August and July she worked on
         a part-time basis. From August until July she was absent on unpaid leave and between August and January
         she again worked part-time. As of February 2000, the  
          Land  of Hesse retired Ms Becker early on grounds of invalidity. 
         
            
By decision of January 2000, the Regierungspräsidium (local government) in Darmstadt (Germany) awarded Ms Becker a pension
         of 52.18% of her final pensionable salary.    That rate of pension was calculated as follows. 
         
            
First, the Regierungspräsidium Darmstadt calculated Ms Becker's normal pensionable service under Paragraph of the BeamtVG
         and multiplied that by the factor of 1.875% provided for by the new version of Paragraph of the BeamtVG, which resulted
         in a rate of pension of 47.31%. 
         
            
Second, Ms Becker's employer, in compliance with the first sentence of Paragraph 85(4) of the BeamtVG ─ since Ms Becker was
         already an official on December ─ calculated the rate of pension which could be awarded to her applying the method
         of calculation found in Paragraph 85(1) of the BeamtVG. That method of calculation resulted in a rate of pension of 57.94%.
         
         
            
Third, pursuant to the second sentence of Paragraph 85(4) of the BeamtVG, Ms Becker's employer calculated the rate of pension
         which would have been applicable to her under the provisions in force until December 1991, that is, under the old version
         of Paragraph of the BeamtVG, including the pension abatement. To that end, it started by calculating the notional rate
         of pension on the basis of her notional service. That service would have entitled Ms Becker to a notional rate of pension
         of 72%. The Regierungspräsidium Darmstadt then reduced that rate in accordance with the proportion borne by actual service
         to notional service, which resulted in a rate of 52.18%. 
         
            
That was the rate applied in the decision adopted on January by the Regierungspräsidium Darmstadt under the second
         sentence of Paragraph 85(4) of the BeamtVG, since that rate was lower than the rate calculated under Paragraph 85(1). 
         
            
On February Ms Becker raised an objection to the decision of January determining the amount of her pension.
         
         
            
The Regierungspräsidium Darmstadt dismissed that objection by decision of November 2000. 
         
            
Ms Becker then brought an action on December before the Verwaltungsgericht Frankfurt am Main for annulment of the
         decisions of the Regierungspräsidium Darmstadt of January and November concerning the determination of her
         pension entitlement. Ms Becker also claimed that her rate of pension should be set at at least 57.94%. 
         
            
In its order for reference, the Verwaltungsgericht Frankfurt am Main set out the reasons, identical to those put forward in
         its order for reference in Case C-4/02, why it considered that the outcome of the main proceedings turned on an interpretation
         of the relevant Community provisions. 
         
            
Thus, by order of November 2001, the Verwaltungsgericht Frankfurt am Main decided to stay proceedings and to refer to the
         Court for a preliminary ruling eleven questions, the first nine of which are identical to those referred in Case C-4/02. 
         
            
In the order for reference concerning Case C-5/02, the Verwaltungsgericht Frankfurt am Main specifically sets out some observations
         concerning the temporal effects of Protocol No 2. It suggests in that regard that it might appear to be a breach of good faith
         to apply the Protocol in the main proceedings when, prior to May 1990, German State employers, including the  
          Land  of Hesse, were already aware that the provision concerning the pension abatement could place part-time workers at a considerable
         and disproportionate disadvantage, which is why it was abolished by the amending law on remuneration, which, although
         it was published on May 1990, had been approved by the Parliament on and May 1990. 
         
            
Those considerations prompt the Verwaltungsgericht Frankfurt am Main to refer to the Court in Case C-5/two further questions,
         in addition to the first nine questions identical to those referred in Case C-4/02: 
         
10.
 Does the Protocol concerning Article of the EC Treaty as part of the Treaty on European Union of (OJ C 191,
         p. 68) generally preclude examination under Article 141(1) and (2) EC (ex Article of the EC Treaty) of the detailed rules
         for the inclusion of periods of employment prior to May 1990? Does the prohibition on such examination also apply where
         after May the provisions relevant to the inclusion of periods of employment completed before the relevant date of
         May have been amended but those amendments effect only a partial adjustment to meet the requirements of Article of the EC Treaty and, for certain categories, effect no such favourable adjustment? 
         
11.
 In determining adherence to the relevant date of May in the enactment of laws is the date of publication in the official
         gazette decisive, or is the matter determined by the conclusion of deliberations in the legislative bodies ─ even where the
         assent of the Federal Government is required by law?
         
            
By order of the President of the Court of February 2002, Cases C-4/and C-5/were joined for the purposes of the written
         procedure, the oral procedure and the judgment.  The first and second questions (C-4/and C-5/02)
            
By its first and second questions, which it is appropriate to consider together, the referring court is essentially asking
         whether a pension paid under a scheme such as that established by the BeamtVG falls within the scope of Article of the
         Treaty and Article 141(1) and (2) EC and also within the scope of directives relating to the implementation of the principle
         of equal treatment for men and women and, if it does, whether those provisions must be interpreted in such a way as to preclude
         legislation, such as that deriving from Paragraph of the BeamtVG in conjunction with the old version of Paragraph thereof,
         which entails a reduction in the pension of civil servants who have worked part-time for at least a part of their working
         life. 
         
            
In that regard, it is appropriate to bear in mind that, in order to ascertain whether a retirement pension falls within the
         scope of Article of the Treaty and, with effect from May 1999, within that of Article 141(1) and (2) EC, the only possible
         decisive criterion is whether the pension is paid to the worker by reason of the employment relationship between him and his
         former employer, that is to say the criterion of employment based on the wording of the abovementioned provisions (see, to
         that effect, Case C-7/Beune  [1994] ECR I-4471, paragraph 43; Case C-147/Evrenopoulos  [1997] ECR I-2057, paragraph 19; Case C-366/Griesmar  [2001] ECR I-9383, paragraph 28; and Case C-351/Niemi  [2002] ECR I-7007, paragraph 45). 
         
            
Admittedly, the employment criterion cannot be regarded as exclusive, since pensions paid by statutory social security schemes
         may reflect, wholly or in part, pay in respect of work (
          Beune , paragraph 44,  
          Evrenopoulos , paragraph 20,  
          Griesmar , paragraph 29, and  
          Niemi , paragraph 46). Such pensions do not constitute  
         pay for the purposes of Article of the Treaty or Article EC (see, to that effect,  
          Beune , paragraphs and 44,  
          Griesmar , paragraph 27, and  
          Niemi , paragraph 39). 
         
            
However, considerations of social policy, of State organisation, of ethics, or even the budgetary concerns which influenced
         or may have influenced the establishment of a scheme by the national legislature cannot prevail if the pension concerns only
         a particular category of workers, if it is directly related to the period of service completed and if its amount is calculated
         by reference to the public servant's final salary (
          Beune , paragraph 45,  
          Evrenopoulos , paragraph 21,  
          Griesmar , paragraph 30, and  
          Niemi , paragraph 47). The pension paid by the public employer is in that case entirely comparable to that paid by a private employer
         to his former employees (
          Beune , paragraph 45,  
          Griesmar , paragraph 30, and  
          Niemi , paragraph 47). 
         
            
Therefore, in order to determine whether a pension paid under a scheme such as that established by the BeamtVG falls within
         the scope of Article of the Treaty and that of Article 141(1) and (2) EC, it is appropriate to consider whether the pension
         satisfies the three criteria mentioned above. 
         
            
In that regard, the first point to make is that the Court has already held that civil servants who benefit under a pension
         scheme must be regarded as constituting a particular category of workers. They are distinguished from employees grouped within
         an undertaking or group of undertakings, in a particular sector of the economy or in an occupational sector or group of sectors,
         only by reason of the specific features governing their employment relationship with the State, or with other public employers
         or bodies (
          Griesmar , paragraph 31, and  
          Niemi , paragraph 48). 
         
            
Second, as regards the criterion that the pension must be directly related to the period of service completed, the Court notes
         that it is clear from the provisions of the BeamtVG that the level of the pension paid under that law is determined by reference
         to how long the official has worked. 
         
            
Third, under the BeamtVG, the amount of pension is calculated by reference to the official's final pensionable salary. 
         
            
It follows that a pension paid under a scheme such as that established by the BeamtVG, which satisfies the three criteria
         which characterise the employment relationship, falls within the scope of Article of the Treaty and, as of May 1999,
         that of Article 141(1) and (2) EC. 
         
            
Therefore, such a pension is not a pension paid by a statutory social security scheme and consequently the scheme established
         by the BeamtVG does not fall within the scope of Directive 79/7. 
         
            
Although a scheme such as that established by the BeamtVG is in fact an occupational social security scheme within the meaning
         of Directive 86/378, there is no need to inquire as to the effects the directive may have in a case in which sex discrimination
         in the matter of pensions can be directly identified by reference to the constitutive elements of the pay in question and
         the criteria laid down in Article of the Treaty and Article 141(1) and (2) EC (see, to that effect,  
          Beune , paragraph 64). The same is true of the provisions of Directive 97/80. 
         
            
Therefore, it is appropriate to consider whether that is the case in this instance. 
         
            
In that regard, it must be borne in mind that Article of the Treaty and Article 141(1) and (2) EC set out the principle
         that men and women should receive equal pay for equal work. That principle precludes not only the application of provisions
         leading to direct sex discrimination, but also the application of provisions which maintain different treatment between men
         and women at work as a result of the application of criteria not based on sex where those differences of treatment are not
         attributable to objective factors unrelated to sex discrimination (see Joined Cases C-399/92, C-409/92, C-425/92, C-34/93,
         C-50/and C-78/Helmig and Others  [1994] ECR I-5727, paragraph 20, and Case C-167/Seymour-Smith and Perez  [1999] ECR I-623, paragraph 52). 
         
            
It is common ground that the provisions of the BeamtVG at issue do not entail discrimination directly based on sex.  It is
         therefore necessary to ascertain whether they can amount to indirect discrimination contrary to Article of the Treaty
         and Article 141(1) and (2) EC. 
         
            
To establish whether there is indirect discrimination, it is necessary to ascertain whether the provisions at issue have a
         more unfavourable impact on women than on men (see inter alia, on this point,  
          Seymour-Smith and Perez , paragraph 58). 
         
            
In that connection, it is not disputed that where the pension abatement provisions are applied with the regressive scale,
         the result is likely to be that, for the same number of hours worked, the pension paid in respect of part-time employment
         will be lower than that paid in respect of full-time employment. 
         
            
Therefore it is necessary to determine whether the statistics available indicate that a considerably higher percentage of
         women than men is affected by the provisions of the BeamtVG entailing a reduction in the pensions of civil servants who have
         worked part-time for at least a part of their career. Such a situation would be evidence of apparent discrimination on grounds
         of sex unless the provisions at issue were justified by objective factors unrelated to any discrimination based on sex. 
         
            
In this instance, it is apparent from the orders for reference that a considerably higher percentage of female than male civil
         servants works part-time and is therefore affected by the relevant provisions of the BeamtVG.  
         
            
In those circumstances, it must be held, on the basis of the information provided in this regard by the referring court, that
         provisions such as those at issue in the main proceedings may result in discrimination against women by comparison with men
         in breach of the principle of equal pay for men and women for equal work, unless the provisions are justified by objective
         factors unrelated to any discrimination on grounds of sex. 
         
            
In light of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the first and second questions must be that a retirement pension paid
         under a scheme such as the one established by the BeamtVG falls within the scope of Article of the Treaty and of Article
         141(1) and (2) EC. Those provisions preclude legislation, such as that deriving from Paragraph of the BeamtVG in conjunction
         with the old version of Paragraph thereof, which may entail a reduction in the pension of civil servants who have worked
         part-time for at least a part of their working life, where that category of civil servants includes a considerably higher
         number of women than men, unless the legislation is justified by objective factors unrelated to any discrimination on grounds
         of sex.  The third to ninth questions (C-4/and C-5/02)
            
By its third to ninth questions, which it is appropriate to examine together, the referring court is essentially asking, should
         the first and second questions be answered in the affirmative, in what conditions legislation such as that deriving from Paragraph
         of the BeamtVG in conjunction with the old version of Paragraph thereof could be regarded as justified by objective
         factors unrelated to any discrimination on grounds of sex. 
         Observations submitted to the Court
         
            
Ms Becker submits that there are no objective reasons capable of providing justification for the discriminatory effect of
         the pension abatement, the result of which is that a public servant employed on a part-time basis who overall has carried
         out the same amount of work as an official employed on a full-time basis, the work simply being spread over a longer period,
         is none the less awarded a lower rate of pension. It is true that it has sometimes been asserted that this unequal treatment
         can be justified on financial grounds, since the pension abatement is, on this view, designed to offset additional financial
         burdens falling on public authorities as a result of the introduction of opportunities for part-time work. However, in Ms
         Becker's submission, such justification cannot be accepted. 
         
            
In the German Government's submission, reasons other than restricting public expenditure, which was the reason stated in the
         explanatory memorandum to the national legislation, are also capable of justifying indirect discrimination, the national court
         also being required to take into account reasons deriving from the broad logic of the provisions at issue. 
         
            
The German Government concludes that in the present case the Verwaltungsgericht Frankfurt am Main must ascertain whether there
         are reasons justifying the pension abatement other than those advanced in the explanatory memorandum to the law and which
         may be gleaned from a comprehensive examination of the German law on civil service pensions applying at the material time.
         
         
            
In that regard, the German Government submits that it is possible to conclude from the national legislation concerned that
         the pension abatement was a corrective mechanism inherent in the pension system, the aim of which was to prevent civil servants
         who had not worked full-time throughout their career from being placed at an advantage as a result of the operation of the
         earlier regressive pension scale. Because the earlier pension system was regressive, the advantageous situation of civil servants
         who had not worked on a full-time basis throughout their career could not be counterbalanced by merely taking account proportionally
         of periods of part-time employment. The regressive nature of the earlier pension system instead called for a different sort
         of adjustment, the pension abatement. The pension abatement mechanism is thus merely a corrective to ensure that the civil
         service pension scheme is equitable as between its members. 
         
            
The Commission submits that unequal pay for men and women, such as that resulting from the relevant provisions of the BeamtVG,
         which is solely founded on budgetary considerations, is contrary to Article EC. In that regard, it cites Case C-343/Roks and Others  [1994] ECR I-571, paragraphs to 37. 
         
            
The Commission adds that it is ultimately for the national court to determine whether and to what extent a legislative provision
         which, though applying independently of the sex of the worker, actually affects a considerably higher percentage of women
         than men is justified by objective reasons unrelated to any discrimination on grounds of sex. In the Commission's submission,
         the Court may, however, give the national court guidance to enable it to determine whether there is an objective criterion
         which justifies the national legislation concerned, taking account of the overall legal and factual situation set out in the
         order for reference. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
The first point to note is that it is ultimately for the national court, which has sole jurisdiction to assess the facts and
         interpret the national legislation, to determine whether and to what extent a legislative provision which, though applying
         independently of the sex of the worker, actually affects a considerably higher percentage of women than men is justified by
         objective reasons unrelated to any discrimination on grounds of sex (see, inter alia, Case 171/Rinner-Kühn  [1989] ECR 2743, paragraph 15, and  
          Seymour-Smith and Perez , paragraph 67). 
         
            
However, although in preliminary ruling proceedings it is for the national court to establish whether such objective factors
         exist in the particular case before it, the Court of Justice, which is called on to provide answers of use to the national
         court, may provide guidance based on the documents relating to the main proceedings and on the written and oral observations
         which have been submitted to it, in order to enable the national court to give judgment (Case C-278/Freers and Speckmann  [1996] ECR I-1165, paragraph 24,  
          Seymour-Smith and Perez , paragraph 68, and Case C-187/Kutz-Bauer  [2003] ECR I-2741, paragraph 52). 
         
            
It must be observed at the outset that the aim of restricting public expenditure, which, according to the national court,
         was invoked by the State when the pension abatement first become part of national law, cannot be relied on for the purpose
         of justifying a difference in treatment on grounds of sex. 
         
            
The Court has already held that budgetary considerations cannot justify discrimination against one of the sexes. To concede
         that such considerations may justify a difference in treatment between men and women which would otherwise constitute indirect
         discrimination on grounds of sex would mean that the application and scope of a rule of Community law as fundamental as that
         of equal treatment between men and women might vary in time and place according to the state of the public finances of Member
         States (
          Roks , paragraphs and 36; Case C-226/Jørgensen  [2000] ECR I-2447, paragraph 39; and  
          Kutz-Bauer , paragraphs and 60). 
         
            
However, a difference in treatment between men and women may be justified, depending on the circumstances, by reasons other
         than those put forward when the measure introducing the differential treatment was adopted. 
         
            
It is for the Member State which has introduced such a measure, or the party to the main proceedings who invokes it, to establish
         before the national court that there are objective reasons unrelated to any discrimination on grounds of sex such as to justify
         the measure concerned (see, to that effect,  
          Seymour-Smith and Perez , paragraph 69, and  
          Kutz-Bauer , paragraph 62), and they are not bound in that respect by the intention expressed when the measure was adopted. 
         
            
The German Government submits that the pension abatement introduced in the BeamtVG is a corrective mechanism inherent in the
         pension scheme, whose aim is to prevent civil servants employed on a part-time basis from being placed at an advantage by
         comparison with those employed on a full-time basis as a result of the operation of the earlier regressive pension scale.
         
         
            
Furthermore, it is clear from the orders for reference that if the case-law of the Bundesverwaltungsgericht is followed, the
         pension abatement reduces the pension proportionately in cases of part-time work and unpaid leave and is thus not a measure
         entailing indirect discrimination contrary to the principle of equal pay for men and women safeguarded by Community law. Such
         a reduction can be objectively justified by the fact that the pension is in this case consideration for less work. 
         
            
In that regard, it should be stated at the outset that, as the Advocate General has noted at point of his Opinion, Community
         law does not preclude a retirement pension being calculated  
          pro rata temporis  in the case of part-time employment. 
         
            
The fact that, in addition to the number of years spent working in the civil service, an official's actual period of service
         during those years, as compared with the actual period of service of an official who has worked on a full-time basis throughout
         his career, is also taken into account is an objective criterion unrelated to any discrimination on grounds of sex, allowing
         his pension entitlement to be reduced proportionately. 
         
            
Paragraph of the BeamtVG, pursuant to which periods of part-time employment are pensionable only in such proportion as the
         reduced working time bears to normal working time, gives effect to an objective criterion of that kind. 
         
            
By contrast, a measure which has the effect of reducing a worker's retirement pension by a proportion greater than that resulting
         when his periods of part-time work are taken into account cannot be regarded as objectively justified on the ground that the
         pension is in that case consideration for less work. 
         
            
In this case, as the Advocate General explains at points to of his Opinion, applying the pension abatement provided
         for by the old version of Paragraph of the BeamtVG to an official who has worked part-time in the course of his career
         entails a reduction in the rate of his pension which is higher than the reduction, proportionate to the actual time worked,
         obtaining when Paragraph of the BeamtVG is applied. 
         
            
Such an outcome cannot be vindicated by the argument, put forward by the German Government, that a pension abatement of that
         kind is justified by the objective of ensuring equal treatment as between part-time and full-time officials where the regressive
         pension scale applies. 
         
            
The pension abatement does not actually ensure that that objective is achieved. As is clear from points to and point
         of the Advocate General's Opinion, where, over their careers as a whole, a part-time official and a full-time official
         have worked the same number of hours, application to the part-time official of the pension abatement rule is liable to result
         in his being awarded a lower rate of pension than that awarded to the full-time official under the old version of Paragraph
         of the BeamtVG. In fact, the effect of introducing the pension abatement was to curtail the advantages for part-time officials
         of the regressive pension scale, whilst full-time officials continued to be able to enjoy those advantages, particularly if
         they liquidated their pension rights after the first years of service, giving higher annual pension entitlements than those
         awarded over subsequent years. 
         
            
It follows from the foregoing considerations that the third to ninth questions must be answered as follows: 
         
─
it is for the national court, which has sole jurisdiction to assess the facts and interpret the national legislation, to determine
            whether and to what extent a legislative provision which, though applying independently of the sex of the worker, actually
            affects a considerably higher percentage of women than men is justified by objective factors unrelated to any discrimination
            on grounds of sex; 
         
─
restricting public expenditure is not an objective which may be relied on to justify different treatment on grounds of sex;
            
         
─
the different treatment of men and women may be justified, depending on the circumstances, by reasons other than those put
            forward when the measure introducing the difference in treatment was introduced; 
         
─
national legislation, such as that deriving from Paragraph of the BeamtVG in conjunction with the old version of Paragraph
            thereof, which has the effect of reducing a worker's retirement pension by a proportion greater than that resulting when
            his periods of part-time work are taken into account cannot be regarded as objectively justified by the fact that the pension
            is in that case consideration for less work or on the ground that its aim is to prevent civil servants employed on a part-time
            basis from being placed at an advantage in comparison with those employed on a full-time basis. 
         
 The tenth and eleventh questions (C-5/02)
            
By its tenth and eleventh questions, which it is appropriate to examine together, the national court is essentially asking
         whether Protocol No and the Protocol concerning Article EC should be interpreted in such a way as to preclude generally
         the application of Article of the Treaty and Article 141(1) and (2) EC respectively to benefits provided under an occupational
         social security scheme, which are payable in respect of periods of employment prior to May 1990, or whether, in that respect,
         account should be taken of the fact that the national rules applicable in respect of those periods of employment were amended
         by national legislation which was adopted prior to that date, but published thereafter, and which preserves in some cases
         discriminatory treatment contrary to those Treaty provisions. 
         
            
In that regard, the first point to be made is that the Court held, in paragraphs and of its judgment in Case C-262/Barber  [1990] ECR I-1889, that overriding considerations of legal certainty preclude legal situations which have exhausted all their
         effects in the past from being called in question where that might upset retroactively the financial balance of many pension
         schemes.  As a result, the direct effect of Article of the Treaty may not be relied upon in order to claim entitlement
         to a pension with effect from a date prior to that of the  
          Barber  judgment, except in the case of individuals who have taken action in good time in order to safeguard their rights. 
         
            
As the Court stated in paragraphs and of its judgment in Case C-109/Ten Oever  [1993] ECR I-4879, by virtue of the  
          Barber  judgment, the direct effect of Article of the Treaty may be relied on, for the purpose of claiming equal treatment in
         the matter of occupational pensions, only in relation to benefits payable in respect of periods of employment subsequent to
         May (the date of the judgment in that case), subject to the exception in favour of workers or those claiming under
         them who have before that date initiated legal proceedings or raised an equivalent claim under the applicable national law
         (Case C-246/Magorrian and Cunningham  [1997] ECR I-7153, paragraph 25). 
         
            
That limitation also appears in Protocol No 2, which is clearly linked to the  
          Barber  judgment, since it refers inter alia to the same date, May 1990. While extending  the limitation to all benefits payable
         under occupational social security schemes and incorporating it into the Treaty, Protocol No essentially adopted the same
         interpretation of the  
          Barber  judgment as did the  
          Ten Oever  judgment (Case C-57/Vroege  [1994] ECR I-4541, paragraph 41). 
         
            
The limitation is also reiterated in the Protocol concerning Article EC, whose wording is identical to that of Protocol
         No 2. 
         
            
As the Advocate General has stated in point of his Opinion, there is nothing in the  
          Barber  judgment, Protocol No or the Protocol concerning Article EC to suggest that exceptions should be allowed, other than
         the one they expressly provide for, to the rule that the direct effect of Article of the Treaty or of Article 141(1) and
         (2) EC may be relied on for the purpose of claiming equal treatment in the matter of occupational pensions only in relation
         to benefits payable in respect of periods of employment subsequent to May 1990. 
         
            
Therefore, the answer to the tenth and eleventh questions must be that Protocol No and the Protocol concerning Article EC are to be interpreted as precluding the application of Article of the Treaty and Article 141(1) and (2) EC respectively
         to benefits provided under an occupational social security scheme payable in respect of periods of employment prior to May 1990, subject to the exception for workers or those claiming under them who have before that date initiated legal proceedings
         or raised an equivalent claim under the applicable national law. 
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the German Government and by the Commission, which have submitted observations to the Court, are not
         recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main action, a step in the proceedings pending before the
         national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
in answer to the questions referred to it by the Verwaltungsgericht Frankfurt am Main by orders of November 2001, hereby
         rules: 
         
1.
 A retirement pension paid under a scheme such as the one established by the Gesetz über die Versorgung der Beamten und Richter
            in Bund und Ländern of August 1976, in the version published on March 1999, falls within the scope of Article of
            the EC Treaty (Articles to of the EC Treaty have been replaced by Articles EC to EC) and of Article 141(1)
            and (2) EC.  Those provisions preclude legislation, such as that deriving from Paragraph of the abovementioned law in conjunction
            with the old version of Paragraph thereof, which may entail a reduction in the pension of civil servants who have worked
            part-time for at least a part of their working life, where that category of civil servants includes a considerably higher
            number of women than men, unless the legislation is justified by objective factors unrelated to any discrimination on grounds
            of sex. 
            
2.
 It is for the national court, which has sole jurisdiction to assess the facts and interpret the national legislation, to determine
            whether and to what extent a legislative provision which, though applying independently of the sex of the worker, actually
            affects a considerably higher percentage of women than men is justified by objective factors unrelated to any discrimination
            on grounds of sex. Restricting public expenditure is not an objective which may be relied on to justify different treatment on grounds of sex.
            The different treatment of men and women may be justified, depending on the circumstances, by reasons other than those put
            forward at the time when the measure introducing the difference in treatment was introduced. National legislation, such as that deriving from Paragraph of the Gesetz über die Versorgung der Beamten und Richter in
            Bund und Ländern in conjunction with the old version of Paragraph thereof, which has the effect of reducing a worker's
            retirement pension by a proportion greater than that resulting when his periods of part-time work are taken into account cannot
            be regarded as objectively justified by the fact that the pension is in that case consideration for less work or on the ground
            that its aim is to prevent civil servants employed on a part-time basis from being placed at an advantage in comparison with
            those employed on a full-time basis. 
            
3.
 Protocol No concerning Article of the Treaty establishing the European Community and the Protocol concerning Article
            EC annexed to the EC Treaty are to be interpreted as precluding the application of Article of the Treaty and Article
            141(1) and (2) EC respectively to benefits provided under an occupational social security scheme payable in respect of periods
            of employment prior to May 1990, subject to the exception for workers or those claiming under them who have before that
            date initiated legal proceedings or raised an equivalent claim under the applicable national law. 
            
La Pergola
Jann
von Bahr
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on October 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
V. Skouris  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: German.
Top  
 