
Case C-393/Emanuela Sbarigia
v
Azienda USL RM/A and Others 
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Tribunale amministrativo regionale per il Lazio)
(National legislation governing opening times and closing days of pharmacies – Exemption – Power of decision of the competent authorities)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Preliminary rulings – Admissibility – Limits
(Art. EC)
2.        Preliminary rulings – Jurisdiction of the Court
(Art. EC)
3.        Competition – Community rules – Obligations of the Member States
(Arts EC, EC and EC)
1.        It is solely for the national court before which the dispute has been brought, and which must assume responsibility for the
         subsequent judicial decision, to determine in the light of the particular circumstances of the case both the need for a preliminary
         ruling in order to enable it to deliver judgment and the relevance of the questions it submits to the Court. Consequently,
         when the questions submitted concern the interpretation of European Union law, the Court is, in principle, bound to give a
         ruling. It follows that questions relating to European Union law enjoy a presumption of relevance. The Court may thus refuse
         to rule on a question referred by a national court only where it is quite obvious that the interpretation of European Union
         law that is sought bears no relation to the actual facts of the main action or its purpose, where the problem is hypothetical,
         or where the Court does not have before it the factual or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions
         submitted to it.
      
(see paras 19-20)
2.        When, in the context of a reference for a preliminary ruling, all aspects of the case before the referring court are confined
         within one Member State, an answer may nevertheless be useful to the referring court, in particular if its national law were
         to require it to allow a national of that Member State to enjoy the same rights as those which a national of another Member
         State would derive from European Union law in the same situation.
      
The situation evoked in the above paragraph applies to the rights that a national of another Member State could derive from
         European Union law if he were in the same situation as the applicant, running a pharmacy in a specific municipal area and
         faced with a decision of the competent national authorities applying national legislation to an application which in no way
         calls in question the general system of rules on opening times and holidays for pharmacies laid down by that legislation,
         but seeks merely to obtain, as an exception to that general system, exemption from any period of closure.
      
Therefore, in the light of the specific circumstances of the main proceedings, it is quite obvious that the interpretation
         of Article EC, requested by the referring court in its order, is not relevant for the outcome of the main proceedings.
      
(see paras 23-25)
3.        The provisions of Community law relating to competition, in particular Articles EC to EC, are manifestly inapplicable
         to national legislation relating to the possible grant of an exemption in relation to the opening periods of a pharmacy located
         in a specific municipal area. Such legislation cannot, in itself or by its application, affect trade between Member States
         within the meaning of Articles EC and EC.
      
(see paras 29, 32)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
July (*)
      
(National legislation governing opening times and closing days of pharmacies – Exemption – Power of decision of the competent authorities)
In Case C‑393/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Tribunale amministrativo regionale per il Lazio (Italy),
         made by decision of May 2008, received at the Court on September 2008, in the proceedings
      
Emanuela Sbarigia
v
Azienda USL RM/A,
Comune di Roma,
Assiprofar – Associazione Sindacale Proprietari Farmacia,
Ordine dei Farmacisti della Provincia di Roma,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of A. Tizzano, President of the Chamber, E. Levits (Rapporteur), A. Borg Barthet, J.-J. Kasel and M. Berger, Judges,
Advocate General: N. Jääskinen,
Registrar: R. Şereş, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on December 2009,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Ms Sbarigia, by V. Cerulli Irelli and M. Di Giandomenico, avvocati,
–        the Comune di Roma, by R. Murra, avvocato,
–        Assiprofar – Associazione Sindacale Proprietari Farmacia, by M. Luciani and I. Perego, avvocati,
–        the Ordine dei Farmacisti della Provincia di Roma, by S. Cicciotti, avvocato,
–        the Italian Government, by G. Palmieri, acting as Agent, and M. Russo, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Greek Government, by S. Spyropoulos, Z. Chatzipavlou and V. Karra, acting as Agents,
–        the Netherlands Government, by C.M. Wissels and D.J.M. de Grave, acting as Agents,
–        the Austrian Government, by C. Pesendorfer and T. Kröll, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by E. Traversa and C. Cattabriga, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling relates to the interpretation of Articles EC, EC to EC, EC and EC.
      
The reference has been made in the context of proceedings between Ms Sbarigia, owner of a pharmacy, and the Azienda Unità
         Sanitaria Locale ‘Roma A’ (the local health office for Rome A, ‘the ASL RM/A’), the competent authority of the municipality
         of Rome, concerning the decision of the ASL RM/A rejecting the applications made by Ms Sbarigia for exemption from closing
         times and periods, in particular the annual closure period for summer 2006.
      
 Legal context
The legislation applicable in the main proceedings is Lazio Regional Law No of July 2002, which lays down rules on opening
         times, duty rotas and holidays for pharmacies open to the public (Legge Regionale Lazio n. del juglio 2002, Disciplina
         dell’orario, dei turni e delle ferie delle farmacie aperte al pubblico, Bollettino Ufficiale della Regione Lazio No 23, ordinary supplement No of August 2002, and GURI No 24, special series No of June (‘the L.R. 26/02’)).
      
Articles to of the L.R. 26/determine the opening times, voluntary duty-pharmacy service, weekly closing and annual
         holidays of pharmacies. They impose in particular maximum opening hours, the obligation to close on Sundays, a half-day per
         week and on public holidays, and a minimum period of annual holidays.
      
Article of the L.R. 26/is worded as follows:
      
‘1.      For the municipality of Rome, each [local health office (“USL”)] shall adopt the measures provided for in this Law falling
         within its competence, with the agreement of the other USLs concerned.
      
2.      For outlets situated in specific municipal areas, the weekly public opening times, holidays for urban pharmacies and the weekly
         half-day rest period … may be modified by decision of the USL responsible for the area in question, in agreement with the
         mayor of the municipality concerned, the provincial order of pharmacists and the provincial professional organisations most
         representative of public and private pharmacies.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Ms Sbarigia is the owner of a pharmacy located in an area in the historic centre of Rome called ‘Tridente’. This neighbourhood,
         entirely pedestrianised, is situated in the heart of the city’s tourist area. 
      
Because of this location and the significant increase in the number of customers during July and August, on May the
         applicant in the main proceedings made an application on the basis of Article 10(2) of the L.R. 26/to the ASL RM/A, which
         is responsible for that area, for exemption from the holiday closure period for summer 2006. That application was rejected
         by decision of June 2006, and Ms Sbarigia brought an action against that decision before the referring court.
      
Pending the outcome of those proceedings, by a second application, of October 2006, Ms Sbarigia sought more broadly an
         exemption from closure for annual holidays and on public holidays and an extension of the weekly opening hours throughout
         the year. In that regard, Ms Sbarigia claimed that a similar authorisation had been granted on September to another
         pharmacy, located near the ‘Termini’ railway station, with the same specific type of clientele as her own pharmacy.
      
That second application was also rejected by the ASL RM/A by Decision No 119945/P of March 2007, against which Ms Sbarigia
         lodged additional submissions by way of appeal and requested suspensory measures.
      
By order of June 2007, the referring court granted the application for suspension of operation of the decision of March
         2007, so as to permit the ASL RM/A to re-examine it.
      
The ASL RM/A subsequently adopted Decision No of August 2007, by which it once again rejected the application of the
         applicant in the main proceedings, pursuant to Article 10(2) of the L.R. 26/02, on the basis of the unfavourable opinion of
         the Comune di Roma, the Ordine dei Farmacisti della Provincia di Roma (Order of Pharmacists of the Province of Rome) and the
         professional associations Assiprofar – Associazione Sindicale Proprietari Farmacia (‘Assiprofar’) and Confservizi.
      
Ms Sbarigia brought an action against that decision, invoking further submissions by way of appeal in the context of the proceedings
         pending before the referring court.
      
According to the Tribunale amministrativo regionale per il Lazio (Lazio Regional Administrative Court), the classification
         of pharmacy services as a public service intended to protect the health of consumers does not suffice to justify the restrictive
         provisions relating to the opening times of pharmacies. A liberalisation of the timetables and opening times for all outlets
         – which was moreover advocated in a report issued on February by the Autorità garante della concorrenza e del mercato
         (national authority responsible for upholding competition and the market) – would make it possible to broaden supply as a
         whole (with the rules on location guaranteeing a balanced geographical spread of pharmacies) for the benefit of customers.
      
The provisions of the L.R. 26/would also seem to be excessive and unjustified. The public interest and the needs relating
         to pharmacy services would no doubt be better protected by measures liberalising the opening times of pharmacies, promoting
         the development of competition.
      
Thus, the referring court is uncertain as to the compatibility of the restrictions at issue in the main proceedings with the
         principles of Community law regarding the freedom of competition of undertakings, and with the action of the European Union
         seeking to improve and protect health. In particular, it asserts that, contrary to that aim, the legislation concerning the
         organisation of pharmacy services currently in force in the Lazio Region prevents an effective contribution to the protection
         of public health.
      
In those circumstances, the Tribunale amministrativo regionale per il Lazio decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the
         following two questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Is it compatible with the Community principles upholding freedom of competition and freedom to provide services, laid down
         inter alia in Articles [EC and] [EC to] [EC], to impose on pharmacies the abovementioned prohibitions – whereby they
         are not allowed either to decline to take an annual holiday or to remain open whenever they so desire, beyond the maximum
         limits at present allowed under the abovementioned provisions of [the L.R. 26/02] – and the concomitant additional requirement,
         under Article 10(2) of [the L.R. 26/02], of a prior discretionary assessment by the Administration (carried out in agreement
         with the bodies and organisations specified in that article) as to the special nature of the municipal area in which the applicant
         pharmacies are located, as a precondition for obtaining a derogation from those prohibitions within the Municipality of Rome?
      
2.      Is it compatible with Articles [EC] and [EC] to impose on the public pharmacy service, albeit with the aim of protecting
         the health of consumers, conditions – such as those laid down in [the L.R. 26/02] – limiting or precluding the possibility
         of extending the daily, weekly or annual opening times of individual pharmacies?
      
 The admissibility of the reference for a preliminary ruling
In their written observations, the Italian and Greek Governments dispute the admissibility of the present reference for a
         preliminary ruling. At the hearing, Assiprofar and, implicitly, the Ordine dei Farmacisti della Provincia di Roma expressed
         the same opinion.
      
In particular, the Italian Government argues that the referring court does not provide any information about the factual and
         legal situation which led it to question whether the relevant national provision is compatible with the provisions of the
         EC Treaty that it refers to. The Greek Government, Assiprofar and the Ordine dei Farmacisti della Provincia di Roma maintain,
         for their part, that, in the absence of any cross-border element, the questions referred for a preliminary ruling have no
         connection with European Union law.
      
In that regard, it must be recalled that it is solely for the national court before which the dispute has been brought, and
         which must assume responsibility for the subsequent judicial decision, to determine in the light of the particular circumstances
         of the case both the need for a preliminary ruling in order to enable it to deliver judgment and the relevance of the questions
         which it submits to the Court. Consequently, where the questions submitted concern the interpretation of European Union law,
         the Court is in principle bound to give a ruling (see Case C‑169/Hartlauer [2009] ECR I‑1721, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
It follows that questions relating to European Union law enjoy a presumption of relevance. The Court may thus refuse to rule
         on a question referred by a national court only where it is quite obvious that the interpretation of European Union law that
         is sought bears no relation to the actual facts of the main action or its purpose, where the problem is hypothetical, or where
         the Court does not have before it the factual or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions submitted
         to it (see, to that effect, Joined Cases C‑94/and C‑202/Cipolla and Others [2006] ECR I‑11421, paragraph 25, and Joined Cases C‑222/to C‑225/van der Weerd and Others [2007] ECR I‑4233, paragraph 22).
      
As regards the objection of inadmissibility raised by the Italian Government, it must be stated that the order for reference
         contains an adequate description of the legal and factual background to the dispute in the main proceedings, and the information
         provided by the referring court allows the significance of the questions referred to be determined. Thus, the order for reference
         has given the interested persons a genuine opportunity to submit observations in accordance with Article of the Statute
         of the Court of Justice, as is indeed shown by the content of the observations submitted to the Court.
      
It follows that that objection cannot be upheld.
      
As regards next the arguments raised by Assiprofar, the Ordine dei Farmacisti della Provincia di Roma and the Greek Government,
         according to which all aspects of the main proceedings are confined within one Member State, it is apparent from the case-law
         of the Court that its answer may be useful to the referring court even in such circumstances, in particular if its national
         law were to require it to allow a national to enjoy the same rights as those which a national of another Member State would
         derive from European Union law in the same situation (see, inter alia, Case C‑451/Servizi Ausiliari Dottori Commercialisti [2006] ECR I‑2941, paragraph 29; Cipolla and Others, paragraph 30; and Joined Cases C‑570/and C‑571/Blanco Pérez and Chao Gómez [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 36).
      
In the present case, the situation evoked in the case-law cited in paragraph of this judgment applies, in the context of
         the main proceedings, to the rights that a national of another Member State could derive from European Union law if he were
         in the same situation as Ms Sbarigia, running a pharmacy in a specific municipal area of the municipality of Rome and faced
         with a decision of the competent national authorities applying Article 10(2) of the L.R. 26/to an application which in
         no way calls in question the general system of rules on opening times and holidays for pharmacies laid down by that law, but
         seeks merely to obtain, as an exception to that general system, exemption from any period of closure.
      
Therefore, in the light of the specific circumstances of the main proceedings, it is quite obvious that the interpretation
         of Article EC, requested by the referring court in its order, is not relevant for the outcome of the main proceedings.
      
As the Advocate General stated in points and of his Opinion, it is apparent from settled case-law that a national of
         a Member State, who pursues a professional activity on a stable and continuous basis in another Member State, comes under
         the chapter of the EC Treaty relating to the right of establishment and not that relating to services (see, inter alia, Case
         2/Reyners [1974] ECR 631, paragraph 21, and Case C‑55/Gebhard [1995] ECR I‑4165, paragraph 28).
      
Moreover, as regards specifically the freedom of establishment, although the Tribunale amministrativo regionale per il Lazio
         has not expressly requested the Court to interpret Article EC, it is quite obvious that the interpretation of that article
         is also not relevant in the context of the proceedings pending before the referring court.
      
In the present case, as has already been stated in paragraph of this judgment, the pharmacy concerned is a fixed establishment
         in the pedestrianised zone in the centre of Rome, the owner of which, by definition a national of another Member State, would
         already be pursuing a professional activity on a continuous basis. Accordingly, the exercise of the right of establishment
         laid down in Article EC is clearly not at issue in the main proceedings.
      
That said, it is apparent that the other provisions of Community law relating to competition of which the referring court
         seeks an interpretation, in particular Articles EC to EC, are also manifestly inapplicable in a context such as that
         of the main proceedings.
      
It should be noted, first, that Articles EC to EC are not in any way relevant in the context of the proceedings before
         the referring court, because they are either purely procedural provisions (Articles EC and EC) or transitional provisions
         (Article EC).
      
As regards, secondly, Articles EC and EC, although it is true that they are concerned solely with the conduct of undertakings
         and not with laws or regulations emanating from Member States, those articles, read in conjunction with Article EC, which
         lays down a duty to cooperate, none the less require Member States not to introduce or maintain in force measures, even of
         a legislative or regulatory nature, which may render ineffective the competition rules applicable to undertakings (see Cipolla and Others, paragraph and case‑law cited).
      
In that regard, however, it is quite obvious that the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings, relating to the
         possible grant of an exemption in relation to the opening periods of a pharmacy located in a specific municipal area of the
         municipality of Rome, cannot, in itself or by its application, affect trade between Member States within the meaning of Articles
         EC and EC (see, a contrario, Case 8/Vereniging van Cementhandelaren v Commission [1972] 977, paragraph 29; Case C‑179/Merci convenzionali porto di Genova [1991] ECR I‑5889, paragraphs and 15; and Case C‑35/Arduino [2002] ECR I‑1529, paragraph 33).
      
Consequently, it must be held that, in so far as it relates to Articles EC and EC, the first question referred by the
         national court is inadmissible.
      
Thirdly, it follows from the fact that those provisions of European Union law concerning competition are not applicable in
         the main proceedings that Article EC likewise does not apply in them.
      
As regards Article EC, referred to by certain interested persons which submitted observations before the Court, it must
         be held, for the sake of completeness, that, for the reasons referred to in paragraph of this judgment, an effect on trade
         between Member States and, therefore, the possibility of a barrier to the free movement of goods must also be ruled out from
         the outset.
      
It follows that the interpretation of Article EC is not relevant for the purposes of the outcome of the proceedings before
         the referring court.
      
As regards, finally, Articles EC and EC, referred to by the national court in its second question, it suffices to
         note that, as was stated by the Advocate General in points to of his Opinion, and as was pointed out by almost all the
         interested persons which submitted observations in the present proceedings, those articles are addressed to the institutions
         of the European Union and to the Member States, and clearly cannot be relied upon in order to seek an examination of whether
         national measures are consistent with European Union law.
      
It follows from all of the foregoing that the present request for a preliminary ruling must be regarded as inadmissible.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
The reference for a preliminary ruling from the Tribunale amministrativo regionale per il Lazio, made by decision of May
            2008, is inadmissible.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 