
Case C-150/Bureau d'intervention et de restitution belge
v
Beneo-Orafti SA
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
tribunal de première instance de Bruxelles)
(Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar – Nature and scope of transitional quotas allocated to an undertaking producing sugar – Possibility for an undertaking receiving restructuring aid for the marketing year 2006/to use the transitional quota
         allocated to that undertaking – Calculation of the amount to be recovered and of the penalty to be applied in the case of non-compliance with commitments
         entered into under the restructuring plan – Ne bis in idem principle)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar – Temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry –
            Quotas
(Council Regulation No 320/2006, Art. 3(1)(b); Commission Regulation No 493/2006, Art. 9)
2.        Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar – Temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry 
(Council Regulation No 320/2006, Arts 3(1)(b), and 5(1) and (2); Commission Regulation No 968/2006, Art. 11(1))
3.        Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar – Temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry –
            Out-of-quota production 
(Council Regulation No 318/2006, Art. 15; Commission Regulation No 968/2006, Arts 26(1) and 27(3))
4.        Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar – Temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry –
            Out-of-quota production 
(Council Regulation No 320/2006, Art. 3(5); Commission Regulation No 968/2006, Art. 26(1))
1.        Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation No 320/establishing a temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry in the
         Community and amending Regulation No 1290/on the financing of the common agricultural policy must be interpreted as meaning
         that the term ‘quota’ in that provision also includes the transitional quotas within the meaning of Article of Regulation
         No 493/laying down transitional measures within the framework of the reform of the common organisation of the markets
         in the sugar sector, and amending Regulations No 1265/and No 314/2002.
      
As is apparent from recital in the preamble to Regulation No 493/2006, the transitional quotas were established by that
         regulation with the aim of increasing, during the 2006/marketing year, the quotas provided by Regulation No 318/on the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector and, more specifically, Article of that regulation, since
         those quotas, like the quotas provided under the previously applicable Regulation No 1260/on the common organisation
         of the markets in the sugar sector, applied for months whereas that marketing year, exceptionally, extended over months.
         Having regard to that specific objective pursued by the legislature of the Union, which is solely to adjust the volume of
         the quotas to the exceptional length of the 2006/marketing year, the transitional quotas cannot be considered as being
         different in nature from those of which they constitute a simple increase intended to achieve that objective. That increase
         is, moreover, proportional to the exceptional extension of that marketing year.
      
(see paras 42-43, 51, operative part 1)
2.        Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation No 320/establishing a temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry in the
         Community and amending Regulation No 1290/on the financing of the common agricultural policy must be interpreted as meaning
         that the commitment to renounce the quota for the production of sugar, isoglucose and inulin syrup that has been allocated
         to an undertaking and assigned by it to one or more of its factories, takes effect on the date when, having regard to the
         information that is communicated to it or that is published in the Official Journal of the European Union, the undertaking
         that makes that commitment is in a position to know, as a reasonably diligent undertaking, that, in the view of the competent
         authorities, the conditions for obtaining the restructuring aid set out in Article 5(2) of that regulation have been fulfilled.
         
      
As is apparent from Article 5(2) of that regulation, when exercising their competence to decide to grant restructuring aid,
         under Article 5(1) of Regulation No 320/2006, once they have established that the conditions set out in the former provision
         have been fulfilled, the Member States have no further discretion to decide that the aid shall not be granted. It follows
         that an undertaking is in a position to know that it will obtain the restructuring aid as soon as it becomes aware that, in
         the view of the competent authorities, the conditions to obtain that aid, set out in Article 5(2) of Regulation No 320/2006,
         have been fulfilled. Such awareness may result from communications made to that undertaking by those authorities after it
         has applied for the restructuring aid or from the publication made by the Commission in the Official Journal of the European
         Union concerning the availability of the necessary financial resources in the restructuring fund. In these circumstances it
         cannot be considered, without infringing the objective pursued by the legislature of the Union by adopting Regulation No 320/2006,
         which is to restructure the sugar sector in order to reduce unprofitable production capacity in the Union by introducing an
         economic incentive for undertakings with the lowest productivity, to give up their quota production and renounce the quotas
         concerned, that the commitment to renounce the quota only takes effect on the date when the restructuring aid is granted,
         within the meaning of Article 11(1) of Regulation No 968/laying down detailed rules for the implementation of Regulation
         No 320/2006. Such an interpretation would allow an undertaking which has made a commitment to renounce the quota, and which
         is sure to obtain restructuring aid in return for that commitment, to continue to produce under the quota that it is supposed
         to renounce, which runs directly counter to the aim pursued by the legislation at issue.
      
(see paras 57-61, operative part 2)
3.        Articles 26(1) and of Regulation No 968/laying down detailed rules for the implementation of Regulation No 320/2006,
         and Article of Regulation No 318/on the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector, must be interpreted
         as meaning that a production, on the assumption that it is contrary to the commitment to renounce the quota for the production
         of sugar, isoglucose and inulin syrup that has been allocated to an undertaking and assigned by it to one or more of its factories,
         may give rise to recovery of the aid, the imposition of a penalty and the collection of the levy on surpluses, as respectively
         set out in those provisions. With regard to the penalty under Article 27(3) of Regulation No 968/2006, it is for the national
         court to assess whether, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, the non-compliance can be regarded as having
         been committed intentionally or as a result of grave negligence. The principles of ne bis in idem, proportionality and non-discrimination must be interpreted as not precluding the cumulative application of those measures.
      
With regard, in particular, to the principle of ne bis in idem, the recovery of the aid within the meaning of Article 26(1) of Regulation No 968/constitutes withdrawal of a wrongly
         obtained advantage within the meaning of Article 4(1) of Regulation No 2988/on the protection of the European Communities
         financial interests. As is apparent from Article 4(4) of that regulation, such a measure does not constitute a penalty to
         which the principle of ne bis in idem is applicable, as is explicitly confirmed in the tenth recital in the preamble to that regulation. The same applies to the
         levy on surpluses within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 318/2006. It is apparent from Article 5(1) of Regulation
         No 2988/that administrative penalties may be imposed if irregularities, intentional or caused by negligence, have been
         committed. An irregularity is defined in Article 1(2) of that regulation as, in essence, an infringement of a provision of
         European Union law. The rules on out-of-quota production, in particular Chapter of Regulation No 318/2006, do not lead to
         the conclusion that such production must be regarded as an irregularity within the meaning of Article 1(2) of Regulation No
         2988/95. It is certainly true that the levy on surpluses represents a substantial economic incentive not to produce in excess
         of the quota. However, it does not appear from those provisions that out-of-quota production constitutes, as such, an infringement
         of a provision of Union law and therefore an irregularity that could give rise, under the conditions laid down in Article
         5(2) of Regulation No 2988/95, to the imposition of a penalty.
      
(see paras 70-73, 81, operative part 3)
4.        Article 26(1) of Regulation No 968/laying down detailed rules for the implementation of Regulation No 320/must be
         interpreted as meaning that, if an undertaking has complied with its commitment partially to dismantle the production facilities
         of the factories concerned but not its commitment to renounce the quota for the production of sugar, isoglucose and inulin
         syrup that has been allocated to it and assigned by it to one or more of its factories, the amount of the aid to be recovered
         is equal to the part of the aid corresponding to the commitment that has not been complied with. That part of the aid must
         be determined on the basis of the amounts laid down in Article 3(5) of Regulation No 320/establishing a temporary scheme
         for the restructuring of the sugar industry in the Community and amending Regulation No 1290/on the financing of the
         common agricultural policy.
      
(see para. 92, operative part 4)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar – Nature and scope of transitional quotas allocated to an undertaking producing sugar – Possibility for an undertaking receiving restructuring aid for the marketing year 2006/to use the transitional quota
         allocated to that undertaking – Calculation of the amount to be recovered and of the penalty to be applied in the case of non-compliance with commitments
         entered into under the restructuring plan – Ne bis in idem principle)
      
In Case C‑150/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Tribunal de première instance de Bruxelles (Belgium), made
         by decision of March 2010, received at the Court on March 2010, in the proceedings 
      
Bureau d’intervention et de restitution belge
v
Beneo-Orafti SA,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of J.-C. Bonichot, President of the Chamber, K. Schiemann, C. Toader, A. Prechal (Rapporteur) and E. Jarašiūnas,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: Y. Bot,
Registrar: B. Fülöp, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on January 2011,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Beneo-Orafti SA, by D. De Keuster, advocaat, and C. Pitschas, Rechtsanwalt,
–        the Belgian Government, by J.-C. Halleux, acting as Agent, and E. Grégoire and J. Mariani, avocats,
–        the European Commission, by A. Bouquet and P. Rossi, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2011,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles 2(6) and of Council Regulation (EC) No 320/of February establishing a temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry in the Community and amending
         Regulation (EC) No 1290/on the financing of the common agricultural policy (OJ L 58, p. 42), Article of Commission
         Regulation (EC) No 493/of March laying down transitional measures within the framework of the reform of the common
         organisation of the markets in the sugar sector, and amending Regulations (EC) No 1265/and (EC) No 314/(OJ L 89, p. 11), Article of Commission Regulation (EC) No 967/of June laying down detailed rules for the application
         of Council Regulation (EC) No 318/as regards sugar production in excess of the quota (OJ L 176, p. 22), Articles
         and of Commission Regulation (EC) No 968/of June laying down detailed rules for the implementation of Council
         Regulation (EC) No 320/(OJ L 176, p. 32), the principle ne bis in idem and the principles of proportionality and non-discrimination.
      
This reference has been made in two sets of proceedings between the Bureau d’intervention et de restitution belge (‘BIRB’)
         and Beneo-Orafti SA (‘Beneo‑Orafti’) concerning, first, the repayment of a restructuring aid and, second, the payment of a
         levy on sugar production in excess of the quota.
      
 Legal context
 The common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector 
Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 318/of February on the common organisation of the markets in the sugar
         sector (OJ L 58, p. 1), entitled ‘Scope’, provides in paragraph 2:
      
‘The marketing year for the products [governed by the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector] shall begin
         on October and end on September of the following year.
      
However, the marketing year 2006/shall begin on July and end on September 2007.’
Article of that regulation, entitled ‘Quota allocation’, provides:
      
‘1.      The quotas for the production of sugar, isoglucose and inulin syrup at national or regional level are fixed in Annex III.
2.      The Member States shall allocate a quota to each undertaking producing sugar, isoglucose or inulin syrup established in its
         territory and approved under Article 17. 
      
…’
Chapter of that regulation, entitled ‘Out-of-quota production’, contains Articles to of the regulation.
      
Article of that regulation, entitled ‘Scope’, provides:
      
‘The sugar, isoglucose or inulin syrup produced during a marketing year in excess of the quota referred to in Article may
         be:
      
(a)      used for the processing of certain products as referred to in Article 13;
(b)      carried forward to the quota production of the next marketing year, in accordance with Article 14;
(c)      used for the specific supply regime for the outermost regions …;
or
(d)      exported within the quantitative limit fixed in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 39(2) respecting the
         commitments resulting from agreements concluded under Article of the Treaty.
      
Other quantities shall be subject to the surplus amount referred to in Article 15.’
Article of that regulation, entitled ‘Surplus amount’, provides:
      
‘1.      A surplus amount shall be levied on quantities of:
(a)      surplus sugar, surplus isoglucose and surplus inulin syrup produced during any marketing year, except quantities carried forward
         to the quota production of the following marketing year … or quantities referred to in Article 12(c) and (d);
      
…
2.      The surplus amount shall be fixed … at a sufficiently high level in order to avoid the accumulation of quantities referred
         to in paragraph 1.
      
…’
Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 493/states:
      
‘Under Article 1(2) of Regulation … No 318/2006, the period covered by the marketing year begins on October and ends on
         September of the following year. However, the 2005/marketing year, as laid down by [Council Regulation (EC) No 1260/of June on the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector (OJ L 178, p.1)], ends on June 2006.
         The 2006/marketing year therefore begins on July and ends on September 2007, and thus extends over months.
         For the 2006/marketing year, therefore, provision should be made for an increase in the quotas and the traditional refining
         requirements which previously corresponded to a 12‑month period and which will, after this marketing year, again apply to
         a 12‑month period, by taking the extra three months into account so as to ensure an allocation which corresponds to that of
         the preceding and subsequent marketing years. These transitional quotas should cover sugar production from the start of the
         2006/marketing year, from sugar beet sown before January 2006.’
      
Article of Regulation No 493/2006, entitled ‘Transitional quotas’, provides in paragraphs and 4:
      
‘3.      For the 2006/marketing year, a transitional inulin syrup quota of tonnes of dry matter, expressed as white sugar/isoglucose
         equivalent, shall be allocated to the Member States in accordance with the breakdown in part C of Annex II.
      
4.      The transitional quotas laid down in paragraphs 1, and 3:
(a)      shall not be subject to the payment of the temporary restructuring amount provided for in Article 11(2) of Regulation … No
         320/2006;
      
(b)       may not benefit from the payment of the aid provided for in Regulation … No 320/2006.’
Article of Regulation No 967/2006, entitled ‘Amount’, provides in paragraph 1:
      
‘The levy provided for in Article of Regulation … No 318/shall be EUR per tonne.’
Article of Regulation No 967/2006, entitled ‘Surplus subject to levy’, states in paragraph 1:
      
‘The levy shall be charged to manufacturers in respect of the surplus produced in excess of their quota for a given marketing
         year.
      
However, the levy shall not be charged on the quantities referred to in paragraph which have been:
(a)      delivered to a processor before November of the following marketing year to be used in the manufacture of the products
         referred to in the Annex;
      
(b)      carried forward in accordance with Article of Regulation … No 318/and, in the case of sugar, stored by the manufacturer
         until the last day of the marketing year in question;
      
(c)      delivered before December of the following marketing year in the context of the specific supply arrangements for the outermost
         regions …;
      
(d)      exported before December of the following marketing year under an export licence;
(e)      destroyed or damaged without possibility of recovery, in circumstances recognised by the competent authority of the Member
         State concerned.’
      
 The temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry in the European Union 
Recitals and in the preamble to Regulation No 320/state:
      
‘(1)      Due to developments within the Community and at international level, the sugar industry in the Community is faced with structural
         problems which could seriously put at stake the competitiveness and even the viability of the industry as a whole. These problems
         cannot be addressed effectively by using the market management instruments as provided for in the common market organisation
         for sugar. To bring the Community system of sugar production and trading in line with international requirements and ensure
         its competitiveness in the future it is necessary to launch a profound restructuring process leading to a significant reduction
         of unprofitable production capacity in the Community. To this end, as a precondition for the implementation of a functioning
         new common market organisation for sugar a separate and autonomous temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry
         in the Community should be established. Under this scheme quotas should be reduced in a manner that takes account of the legitimate
         interests of the sugar industry, sugar beet, cane and chicory growers and consumers in the Community.
      
…
(5)      An important economic incentive for sugar undertakings with the lowest productivity to give up their quota production in the
         form of an adequate restructuring aid should be introduced. To this effect, a restructuring aid should be set up that creates
         an incentive to abandon sugar quota production and renounce the quotas concerned, at the same time allowing to take into due
         account the respect of social and environmental commitments linked to the abandoning of production. The aid should be available
         during four marketing years with the aim to reduce production to the extent necessary to reach a balanced market situation
         in the Community.’
      
Article of that regulation, entitled ‘Definitions’, provides:
      
‘For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions shall apply:
…
(6)      “quota” means any quota for the production of sugar, isoglucose and inulin syrup allocated to an undertaking in accordance
         with Articles 7(2), 8(1), 9(1) and (2) and Article of Regulation … No 318/… .’
      
Article of that regulation, entitled ‘Restructuring aid’, provides:
      
‘1.      Any undertaking producing sugar, isoglucose or inulin syrup to which a quota has been allocated by July shall be entitled
         to a restructuring aid per tonne of quota renounced, provided that during one of the marketing years 2006/2007, 2007/2008,
         2008/and 2009/it:
      
…
(b)      renounces the quota assigned by it to one or more of its factories, partially dismantles the production facilities of the
         factories concerned and does not use the remaining production facilities of the factories concerned for the production of
         products covered by the common market organisation for sugar;
      
or
(c)      renounces a part of the quota assigned by it to one or more of its factories and does not use the production facilities of
         the factories concerned for refining raw sugar.
      
…
5.      The amount of restructuring aid per tonne of renounced quota shall be:
…
(b)      in the case referred to in point (b) of paragraph 1:
–        EUR 547.for the marketing year 2006/2007, 
…
 (c)      in the case referred to in point (c) of paragraph 1:
–        EUR 255.for the marketing year 2006/2007,
…’
Article of that regulation, entitled ‘Decision on the restructuring aid and controls’, states:
      
‘1.      By the end of February preceding the marketing year referred to in Article 3(2), Member States shall decide on the granting
         of the restructuring aid. However, the decision for the marketing year 2006/shall be adopted by September 2006. 
      
2.      The restructuring aid shall be granted if the Member State has established after thorough verification that:
–        the application contains the elements referred to in Article 4(2),
–        the restructuring plan contains the elements referred to in Article 4(3),
–        the measures and actions described in the restructuring plan are in conformity with the relevant Community and national legislation;
and
–        the necessary financial resources are available in the restructuring fund, on the basis of information obtained from the Commission.
…’
Article of that regulation, entitled ‘Temporary restructuring amount’, provides:
      
‘1.      A temporary restructuring amount shall be paid per marketing year per tonne of quota by those undertakings to which a quota
         has been allocated.
      
Quotas that have been renounced by an undertaking as from a given marketing year in accordance with Article 3(1) shall not
         be subject to the payment of the temporary restructuring amount for this marketing year and subsequent marketing years.
      
2.      The temporary restructuring amount for sugar and inulin syrup shall be set at:
–        EUR 126.per tonne of quota for the marketing year 2006/2007,
…’
Article of Regulation No 968/2006, entitled ‘Renunciation of quota’, provides:
      
‘As from the marketing year for which the quota is renounced in accordance with Article of Regulation … No 320/2006, no
         production of sugar, isoglucose or inulin syrup and no sugar, isoglucose or inulin syrup carried forward or withdrawn from
         the previous marketing year may be deemed as a production under that quota as regards the factories concerned.’
      
Article of that regulation, entitled ‘Amendments to the restructuring plan’, provides in paragraph 1:
      
‘As soon as the restructuring aid is granted, the beneficiary shall carry out all measures detailed in the approved restructuring
         plan and respect the commitments included in its application for restructuring aid.’
      
Article of that regulation, entitled ‘Recovery’, provides in paragraph 1:
      
‘… [I]f a beneficiary does not comply with one or more of his commitments under the restructuring plan, the business plan
         or a national restructuring programme, as appropriate, the part of the aid granted in respect of the commitment(s) concerned
         shall be recovered except in the case of force majeure.’ 
      
Article of that regulation, entitled ‘Penalties’, provides:
      
‘1.      If a beneficiary does not comply with one or more of his commitments under the restructuring plan, the business plan or the
         national restructuring programme, as appropriate, it shall be required to pay an amount equal to 10% of the amount to be recovered
         under Article 26.
      
…
3.      If the non-compliance has been committed intentionally or as a result of grave negligence, the beneficiary shall be required
         to pay an amount equal to 30% of the amount to be recovered under Article 26.’ 
      
 The protection of European Union financial interests 
The tenth recital in the preamble to Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 2988/of December on the protection of
         the European Communities financial interests (OJ L 312, p. 1) states:
      
‘… not only under the general principle of equity and the principle of proportionality but also in the light of the principle
         of ne bis in idem, appropriate provisions must be adopted while respecting the acquis communautaire and the provisions laid down in specific
         Community rules existing at the time of entry into force of this Regulation, to prevent any overlap of Community financial
         penalties and national criminal penalties imposed on the same persons for the same reasons’.
      
Article 1(2) of that regulation provides:
      
‘“Irregularity” shall mean any infringement of a provision of Community law resulting from an act or omission by an economic
         operator, which has, or would have, the effect of prejudicing the general budget of the Communities or budgets managed by
         them, either by reducing or losing revenue accruing from own resources collected directly on behalf of the Communities, or
         by an unjustified item of expenditure.’
      
Article of that regulation provides:
      
‘1.      As a general rule, any irregularity shall involve withdrawal of the wrongly obtained advantage:
–        by an obligation to pay or repay the amounts due or wrongly received,
…
4.      The measures provided for in this Article shall not be regarded as penalties.’
Article 5(1) of that regulation states:
      
‘Intentional irregularities or those caused by negligence may lead to the following administrative penalties:
(a)      payment of an administrative fine;
(b)      payment of an amount greater than the amounts wrongly received or evaded, plus interest where appropriate; …
(c)      total or partial removal of an advantage granted by Community rules, even if the operator wrongly benefited from only a part
         of that advantage;
      
(d)      exclusion from, or withdrawal of, the advantage for a period subsequent to that of the irregularity;
(e)      temporary withdrawal of the approval or recognition necessary for participation in a Community aid scheme;
(f)      the loss of a security or deposit provided for the purpose of complying with the conditions laid down by rules or the replenishment
         of the amount of a security wrongly released;
      
(g)      other penalties of a purely economic type, equivalent in nature and scope, provided for in the sectoral rules adopted by the
         Council in the light of the specific requirements of the sectors concerned and in compliance with the implementing powers
         conferred on the Commission by the Council.’
      
 The actions in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
According to the order for reference, in July Beneo-Orafti obtained from the competent Belgian authorities, for the 2006/marketing year, a normal basic quota of tonnes and a transitional quota of tonnes of inulin syrup.
      
On July 2006, Beneo-Orafti submitted an application for restructuring aid to the competent Belgian authorities. On August
         2006, those authorities replied that the application was regarded as complete and, on September 2006, they informed Beneo-Orafti
         that its application was admissible and notified the Commission accordingly. 
      
In November 2006, the competent Belgian authorities informed Beneo-Orafti that they could not give an unchallengeable legal
         assessment as to whether the latter’s wish to use its transitional quota was compatible with the conditions for obtaining
         the restructuring aid requested. They proposed contacting the Commission in order to clarify the question or supporting Beneo-Orafti
         in making contact.
      
Between November and December 2006, Beneo-Orafti produced 756.tonnes of inulin syrup.
      
On January 2007, the competent Belgian authorities informed Beneo-Orafti that it had been granted aid in the amount of
         EUR 771.50.
      
In reply to a question from the competent Belgian authorities, the Commission replied, by letter of March 2007, that the
         transitional quotas represented no more than an extension of the basic quotas. In its view, an undertaking which had renounced
         its basic quota under the restructuring scheme could not continue production solely on the basis of the transitional quota.
      
On April 2007, the competent Belgian authorities replied, in the same terms as the Commission’s letter of March 2007,
         to the questions that the BIRB had asked them on February 2007.
      
On July 2007, the BIRB sent Beneo-Orafti a letter, repeating the Commission’s position and stating that a levy on out-of-quota
         sugar production of EUR (756.tonnes x EUR per tonne) would be payable by Beneo-Orafti unless it could
         show that it had complied with its commitments.
      
By registered letter of August 2007, the BIRB demanded the repayment by Beneo-Orafti of EUR 468.36, corresponding
         to the aid received in connection with the quantity produced under the transitional quota, together with EUR 040.51,
         corresponding to a penalty of 30% of the amount to be recovered pursuant to Articles and 27(3) of Regulation No 968/2006,
         making a total of EUR 508.87.
      
Beneo-Orafti also requested partial release of the bank guarantee, which was refused by the BIRB.
      
By writs of March and July 2008, the BIRB brought proceedings before the referring court in order to obtain payment
         from Beneo-Orafti of the said amounts of EUR 508.and EUR 493.
      
Since it considered that the outcome of the disputes before it depended on the interpretation of European Union law, the Tribunal
         de première instance de Bruxelles (Court of First Instance, Brussels) decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following
         questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Are the transitional quotas allocated to an undertaking producing sugar on the basis of Article of [Regulation No 493/2006]
         exempt from the temporary restructuring scheme established by [Regulation No 320/2006] and by [Regulation No 968/2006], given
         that:
      
(a)      those quotas are not subject to payment of the temporary amount for restructuring,
(b)      they do not give rise to restructuring aid, and
(c)      they are not quotas within the meaning of [Regulation No 320/2006], as defined by Article 2(6) of that regulation?
2.      Even if the reply to Question is in the negative, are transitional quotas quotas in their own right, independent of the
         normal basic quotas, given that:
      
(a)      transitional quotas are allocated on the basis of Article of [Regulation No 493/2006] and not on the basis of Article of [Regulation No 318/2006],
      
(b)      the criteria for the allocation of transitional quotas differ from the criteria for the allocation of normal basic quotas,
         and 
      
(c)      the transitional quotas are transitional measures intended to facilitate the transition from the former scheme for the sugar
         market to the new scheme for the Community sugar market and, as a consequence, apply in principle only during the 2006/marketing year?
      
3.      If the reply to either or both of Questions and is in the affirmative, does an undertaking producing sugar which has applied
         for restructuring aid for the marketing year 2006/in accordance with Article of [Regulation No 320/2006] have a right
         to a transitional quota allocated for the marketing year 2006/in accordance with Article of [Regulation No 493/2006]?
         
      
4.      If the reply to Question is in the negative, can the penalty applied consist in recovery of part of the restructuring aid
         granted, together with recovery of the transitional quota?
      
How must the amount of aid to be recovered under Article 26(1) and the penalty provided for under Article of [Regulation
         No 968/2006] be calculated where an undertaking producing sugar has received restructuring aid (for the 2006/marketing
         year) and has used its transitional quota (for which no restructuring aid was granted)? 
      
Must all or some of the following factors be taken into account in the calculation of that amount and of that penalty: 
(a)      the costs born by the undertaking producing sugar in question for the dismantling of its production facilities,
(b)      the losses incurred by the undertaking producing sugar in question as a result of giving up its normal basic quota,
(c)      the fact that the transitional quota is a one-off, transitional measure which permits production for the 2006/marketing
         year only and does not apply to other marketing years (save in the case of the transitional sugar quota), and
      
(d)      is a calculation of the amount to be recovered which does not take into account the factors referred to in points (a) to (c)
         inconsistent with the principle of proportionality? 
      
5.      Notwithstanding the preceding questions, when do the commitments entered into on the basis of a restructuring plan take effect,
         that is to say, when do they become binding on the claimant:
      
(a)      at the beginning of the marketing year for which the claimant submits its application for restructuring aid?
(b)      on the submission of the application to the competent national authority?
(c)      on notification by the competent national authority that the application is regarded as complete?
(d)      on notification by the competent national authority that the application is regarded as admissible in respect of restructuring
         aid?
      
(e)      on notification by the competent national authority of its decision to grant restructuring aid?
6.      If the reply to either or both of Questions and is in the affirmative, is an undertaking producing sugar which has been
         allocated a transitional quota for the marketing year 2006/authorised to use that quota during the marketing year even
         though the undertaking has been granted restructuring aid by reference to its normal basic quota, beginning with the marketing
         year 2006/2007?
      
7.      If the reply to Questions 1, and is in the negative, is a competent national authority of a Member State authorised, in
         the event of failure to fulfil the commitments entered into on the basis of the restructuring plan, to combine recovery of
         the restructuring aid and the penalty under Articles and of [Regulation No 968/2006] with the imposition of a levy on
         surpluses in accordance with Article of [Regulation No 967/2006] or is the combination of penalties in that way inconsistent
         with the principle ne bis in idem and the principles of proportionality and non-discrimination?’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred 
It should be observed at the outset that, as is apparent from the documents before the Court, the restructuring aid to Beneo-Orafti
         was granted pursuant to Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation No 320/2006.
      
 The first to third and sixth questions
By its first to third and sixth questions, which should be considered together, the referring court asks, in essence, whether
         Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation No 320/should be interpreted as meaning that the term ‘quota’ in that provision also includes
         the transitional quotas within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 493/2006.
      
Beneo-Orafti proposes that that question, thus reformulated, be answered in the negative. In its view, the commitment entered
         by an undertaking to renounce the quota applicable to the production of sugar, isoglucose and inulin syrup that is allocated
         to it and which that undertaking has assigned to one or more of its factories, referred to in Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation
         No 320/(‘the commitment to renounce the quota’), relates only to the quotas allocated under Article of Regulation No
         318/2006, excluding the transitional quotas allocated under Article of Regulation No 493/2006. The Belgian Government and
         the Commission propose that this question be answered in the affirmative.
      
In that regard, it should be noted that the term ‘quota’ in Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation No 320/is defined in Article
         2(6) of that regulation. As Beneo‑Orafti rightly observes, the wording of that latter provision contains a reference only
         to quotas allocated under various provisions of Regulation No 318/and not to transitional quotas within the meaning of
         Article of Regulation No 493/2006.
      
However, according to settled case‑law, in interpreting a provision of European Union law, it is necessary to consider not
         only its wording but also the context in which it occurs and the objectives pursued by the rules of which it is part (see,
         inter alia, Case C‑116/Feltgen and Bacino Charter Company [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 12).
      
As is apparent from recital in the preamble to Regulation No 493/2006, the transitional quotas were established with the
         aim of increasing, during the 2006/marketing year, the quotas provided by Regulation No 318/and, more specifically,
         Article of that regulation, since those quotas, like the quotas provided under the previously applicable Regulation No 1260/2001,
         applied for months whereas that marketing year, exceptionally, extended over months.
      
Having regard to that specific objective pursued by the legislature of the European Union, which is solely to adjust the volume
         of the quotas to the exceptional length of the 2006/marketing year, the transitional quotas cannot be considered as being
         different in nature to those of which they constitute a simple increase intended to achieve that objective. As the Advocate
         General has observed at paragraph of his Opinion, that increase is, moreover, proportional to the exceptional extension
         of that marketing year.
      
In these circumstances, even if Article 2(6) of Regulation No 320/does not expressly mention the transitional quotas,
         which, in any event, was not possible, as Regulation No 493/establishing those quotas was subsequent to Regulation No
         320/2006, the term ‘quota’ in Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation No 320/should be interpreted as also including the transitional
         quotas.
      
That interpretation is confirmed by the objective pursued by the legislature of the European Union in adopting Regulation
         No 320/2006. As is apparent, in particular, from recitals and in the preamble to that regulation, that objective is to
         restructure the sugar sector in order to reduce unprofitable production capacity in the European Union by introducing an economic
         incentive, in the form of a restructuring aid, for undertakings with the lowest productivity, to give up their quota production
         and renounce the quotas concerned (see, to that effect, Case C‑33/Agrana Zucker [2009] ECR I‑5035, paragraph 22).
      
As the Advocate General has observed at paragraph of his Opinion, that objective would be disregarded if an undertaking
         benefiting from that aid and required, because of this, to renounce its quotas and dismantle its corresponding production
         facilities were still allowed to use those facilities until the end of the marketing year for the use of its transitional
         quota.
      
The interpretation according to which the term ‘quota’ in Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation No 320/also includes the transitional
         quotas is not affected by the circumstance that, as Beneo-Orafti argues, the transitional quotas are allocated by a legal
         act that is distinct from that under which the quotas within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 318/are allocated
         and that the former, unlike the latter, are not allocated on a historical basis.
      
It does not appear that those circumstances are, in themselves, capable of altering the nature of the transitional quotas,
         as follows from the objective pursued by the legislature of the European Union when introducing those quotas, recalled in
         paragraph above.
      
Nor is that conclusion affected by the fact, emphasised by Beneo-Orafti, that, under Article 9(4) of Regulation 493/2006,
         the transitional quotas are not subject to the payment of the temporary restructuring amount provided for in Article 11(2)
         of Regulation No 320/and may not benefit from the payment of the aid provided for in that regulation.
      
The fact that the legislature of the European Union expressly provided that the transitional quotas should not affect the
         level of the charges or of the financial advantages linked to the temporary restructuring scheme, represented by those amounts
         and by that aid, respectively, does not in itself imply that the transitional quotas were intended by that legislature not
         to come within the scope of that scheme. On the contrary, the specific exclusion provided for by the legislature of the European
         Union in Article 9(4) of Regulation No 493/confirms rather that the transitional quotas come, a priori, within that scope.
         
      
Consequently, the answer to the first to third and sixth questions is that Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation No 320/must
         be interpreted as meaning that the term ‘quota’ in that provision also includes the transitional quotas within the meaning
         of Article of Regulation No 493/2006.
      
 The fifth question
By its fifth question, which should be considered next, the referring court seeks to ascertain the date on which, in circumstances
         such as those at issue in the main proceedings, the commitment to renounce the quota takes effect.
      
In the view of Beneo-Orafti, which refers to Article 11(1) of Regulation No 968/2006, that date is the date of receipt of
         the notification, by the competent national authority, of the granting of the restructuring aid, which, in the main proceedings,
         was January 2007, while in the Belgian Government’s view the relevant date is the beginning of the marketing year, which,
         for the 2006/marketing year, was July 2006. The Commission, in turn, considers that the commitment to renounce the
         quota takes effect at the beginning of the marketing year or, at the latest, on the date when the producer is informed by
         the national authorities of the admissibility of its application and the Commission publishes its communication that the funds
         are available. In the main proceedings, that date was September 2006.
      
It should be noted that, under Article 11(1) of Regulation No 968/2006, as soon as the restructuring aid is granted, the beneficiary
         is obliged to carry out all measures detailed in the approved restructuring plan and to respect the commitments included in
         its application for restructuring aid.
      
Even if, read a contrario, those terms mean that, before granting the aid, the beneficiary is not bound to carry out all the
         measures and respect the commitments referred to in that provision, it remains the case that, as recalled in paragraph above, in interpreting a provision of European Union law, it is necessary to consider not only its wording but also the context
         in which it occurs and the objectives pursued by the rules of which it is part.
      
In that regard, consideration should be given to Article of Regulation No 320/2006, which concerns the decision on the restructuring
         aid and controls.
      
As is apparent from Article 5(2) of that regulation, when exercising their competence to decide to grant restructuring aid,
         under Article 5(1) of that regulation, once they have established that the conditions set out in the former provision have
         been fulfilled, the Member States have no further discretion to decide that the aid shall not be granted.
      
It follows that an undertaking such as Beneo-Orafti is in a position to know that it will obtain the restructuring aid as
         soon as it becomes aware that, in the view of the competent authorities, the conditions to obtain that aid, set out in Article
         5(2) of Regulation No 320/2006, have been fulfilled. Such awareness may result from communications made to that undertaking
         by those authorities after it has applied for the restructuring aid, as is apparent from the documents submitted to the Court,
         or from the publication made by the Commission in the Official Journal of the European Union concerning the availability of the necessary financial resources in the restructuring fund.
      
In these circumstances it cannot be considered, without infringing the objective pursued by the legislature of the European
         Union by adopting Regulation No 320/2006, recalled at paragraph above, that the commitment to renounce the quota only takes
         effect on the date when the restructuring aid is granted, within the meaning of Article 11(1) of Regulation No 968/2006.
      
As is specifically shown by the facts in the main proceedings, that interpretation would allow an undertaking which has made
         a commitment to renounce the quota, and which is sure to obtain restructuring aid in return for that commitment, to continue
         to produce under the quota that it is supposed to renounce, which runs directly counter to the aim pursued by the legislation
         at issue of reducing unprofitable production capacity in the European Union by introducing such aid.
      
Consequently, the answer to the fifth question is that Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation No 320/must be interpreted as meaning
         that, in circumstances such as those at issue in the main proceedings, the commitment to renounce the quota takes effect on
         the date when, having regard to the information that is communicated to it or that is published in the Official Journal of the European Union, the undertaking that makes that commitment is in a position to know, as a reasonably diligent undertaking, that, in the
         view of the competent authorities, the conditions for obtaining the restructuring aid set out in Article 5(2) of that regulation
         have been fulfilled.
      
 The first part of the fourth question and the seventh question
By the first part of its fourth question and by its seventh question, which should be considered together, the referring court
         asks, in essence, whether Articles 26(1) and of Regulation No 968/and Article of Regulation No 318/should
         be interpreted as meaning that a production such as that at issue in the main proceedings, on the assumption that it is contrary
         to the commitment to renounce the quota, may give rise to recovery of the aid, the imposition of a penalty and the collection
         of the levy on surpluses, as respectively set out in those provisions, and, if so, whether the principles of ne bis in idem, proportionality and non-discrimination should be interpreted to mean that they preclude a cumulative application of those
         measures.
      
Beneo-Orafti argues that the production at issue in the main proceedings does not constitute a production that gives rise
         to the levy on surpluses within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 318/2006, since it cannot be regarded as out-of-quota
         production. In any event, the principles of ne bis in idem, proportionality and non-discrimination preclude the cumulative application of the measures set out in Articles 26(1) and
         of Regulation No 968/and in Article of Regulation No 318/2006. The Belgian Government and the Commission take the
         opposite view.
      
In that regard, in relation to Articles 26(1) and of Regulation No 968/2006, it should be noted that those apply if a beneficiary
         does not comply with one or more of his commitments under the restructuring plan, the business plan or the national restructuring
         programme. This is without doubt the case where that beneficiary produces sugar, isoglucose or inulin syrup despite its commitment
         to renounce the quota. Such production may therefore give rise to recovery of the aid within the meaning of Article 26(1)
         of Regulation No 968/and the imposition of a penalty within the meaning of Article of that regulation, whereas the
         penalty under Article 27(3) of that regulation may only be imposed if, having regard to all the circumstances of the case,
         the non-compliance can be regarded as having been committed intentionally or as a result of grave negligence. It is for the
         national court to assess whether this is the case in the main proceedings.
      
Furthermore, such production constitutes out-of-quota production within the meaning of Chapter of Regulation No 318/2006,
         which, unless the conditions set out in the second subparagraph of Article 4(1) of Regulation No 967/are fulfilled, give
         rise to the collection of the levy on surpluses within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 318/2006.
      
For the same reasons as those set out in paragraphs and above, the concept of ‘quota’, in relation to out-of-quota production
         within the meaning of Chapter of Regulation No 318/2006, should be interpreted as also including the transitional quotas.
      
Moreover, as the Advocate General observed in paragraph of his Opinion, production is out-of-quota where the producer
         has exceeded its quota, has never had a quota or has renounced its quota. In the latter event, that interpretation is confirmed,
         moreover, by Article of Regulation No 968/2006, under which, as from the marketing year for which the quota is renounced
         in accordance with Article of Regulation No 320/2006, no production may be deemed as a production under that quota.
      
Regarding the issue of whether the principle of ne bis in idem precludes the cumulative application of the measures set out in Articles 26(1) and of Regulation No 968/and in Article
         of Regulation No 318/2006, it should be noted, first, that this principle is enshrined, inter alia, in Article of the
         Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union.
      
Second, it should be recalled that, in the area of checks and penalties for irregularities committed under European Union
         law, the European Union legislature has, by adopting Regulation No 2988/95, laid down a series of general principles and has
         required that, as a general rule, all sectoral regulations comply with those principles (see, inter alia, Case C‑420/Jager [2008] ECR I‑1315, paragraph 61).
      
With regard to recovery of the aid within the meaning of Article 26(1) of Regulation No 968/2006, that constitutes withdrawal
         of a wrongly obtained advantage within the meaning of Article 4(1) of Regulation No 2988/95. As is apparent from Article 4(4)
         of that regulation, such a measure does not constitute a penalty to which the principle of ne bis in idem is applicable, as is explicitly confirmed in the tenth recital in the preamble to that regulation.
      
The same applies to the levy on surpluses within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 318/2006, as the Belgian Government
         and the Commission rightly argue.
      
It is apparent from Article 5(1) of Regulation No 2988/that administrative penalties may be imposed if irregularities,
         intentional or caused by negligence, have been committed. An irregularity is defined in Article 1(2) of that regulation as,
         in essence, an infringement of a provision of European Union law.
      
The rules on out-of-quota production, in particular Chapter of Regulation No 318/2006, do not lead to the conclusion that
         such production must be regarded as an irregularity within the meaning of Article 1(2) of Regulation No 2988/95. It is certainly
         true that the levy on surpluses represents a substantial economic incentive not to produce in excess of the quota. However,
         it does not appear from those provisions that out-of-quota production constitutes, as such, an infringement of a provision
         of European Union law and therefore an irregularity that could give rise, under the conditions laid down in Article 5(2) of
         Regulation No 2988/95, to the imposition of a penalty.
      
It follows that, as only the measure set out in Article of Regulation No 968/can be regarded as a penalty, the ne bis in idem principle does not apply to a situation such as that at issue in the main proceedings.
      
With regard to the principle of proportionality, it should be noted that this principle, which is one of the general principles
         of European Union law, requires that acts adopted by European Union institutions do not exceed the limits of what is appropriate
         and necessary in order to attain the legitimate objectives pursued by the legislation in question; where there is a choice
         between several appropriate measures, recourse must be had to the least onerous, and the disadvantages caused must not be
         disproportionate to the aims pursued (see, inter alia, Agrana Zucker, paragraph 31).
      
As regards judicial review of the implementation of that principle, bearing in mind the wide discretion enjoyed by European
         Union legislature where the common agricultural policy is concerned, the lawfulness of a measure adopted in that sphere can
         be affected only if the measure is manifestly inappropriate in terms of the objective which the competent institution is seeking
         to pursue (Agrana Zucker, paragraph 32).
      
What must be ascertained is therefore not whether the measure adopted by the legislature was the only measure possible or
         the best measure possible but whether it was manifestly inappropriate (Agrana Zucker, paragraph 33).
      
Having regard to the importance assigned by the legislature of the European Union, both in Regulation No 318/and in Regulation
         No 320/2006, to respecting the quota system with a view to stabilising the markets in the sugar sector, it does not appear
         that the possibility, permitted by that legislature, of the cumulative application of the measures set out in Articles 26(1)
         and of Regulation No 968/and in Article of Regulation No 318/constitutes a manifestly inappropriate measure
         in terms of the objective pursued by it.
      
Furthermore, the mere repayment of wrongly paid aid under Article 26(1) of Regulation No 968/2006, plus a penalty set out
         in Article of that regulation, is not necessarily such, of itself, as to prevent the accumulation, by the out-of-quota
         production that constitutes the production infringing the commitment to renounce the quota, of the quantities referred to
         in Article 15(1) of Regulation No 318/2006. As is apparent, inter alia, from Article 15(2) of that regulation, the specific
         objective of the levy on surpluses is to avoid that accumulation.
      
Finally, with regard to the principle of non-discrimination, it should be noted that this requires that comparable situations
         must not be treated differently and that different situations must not be treated in the same way unless such treatment is
         objectively justified (see, to that effect, Case C‑133/Uzonyi [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and case-law cited). However, the documents before the Court do not contain any information
         relating to a situation that might be comparable to that in the main proceedings. It cannot be concluded from those documents,
         therefore, whether and, if appropriate, in what conditions, the principle of non-discrimination could apply to such proceedings.
      
The answer to the first part of the fourth question and to the seventh question is therefore that Articles 26(1) and of
         Regulation No 968/and Article of Regulation No 318/must be interpreted as meaning that a production such as that
         at issue in the main proceedings, on the assumption that it is contrary to the commitment to renounce the quota, may give
         rise to recovery of the aid, the imposition of a penalty and the collection of the levy on surpluses, as respectively set
         out in those provisions. With regard to the penalty under Article 27(3) of Regulation No 968/2006, it is for the referring
         court to assess whether, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, the non-compliance can be regarded as having
         been committed intentionally or as a result of grave negligence. The principles of ne bis in idem, proportionality and non-discrimination must be interpreted as not precluding the cumulative application of those measures.
      
 The second part of the fourth question 
By the second part of its fourth question, which should be considered last, the referring court asks, in essence, how to calculate
         the amount of aid to be recovered under Article 26(1) of Regulation No 968/2006.
      
Beneo-Orafti argues that this calculation must be done taking into account the elements listed by the referring court in the
         second part of the fourth question, whereas the Belgian Government considers that the BIRB correctly calculated the amount
         to be recovered by multiplying the amount of aid per tonne received by the quantity of tonnes produced by Beneo-Orafti. The
         Commission suggests that several methods of calculation are possible.
      
It should be noted that, under Article 26(1) of Regulation No 968/2006, if a beneficiary does not comply with one or more
         of his commitments under the restructuring plan, the business plan or a national restructuring programme, as appropriate,
         the part of the aid granted in respect of the commitment(s) concerned is to be recovered.
      
It is apparent from the documents before the Court that, in the main proceedings, obtaining restructuring aid was subject
         to two commitments set out in Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation No 320/2006, namely a commitment to renounce the quota and a commitment
         partially to dismantle the production facilities of the factories concerned, and that the main proceedings concern compliance
         with the first commitment only.
      
Since, in such a case, the only ‘commitment concerned’ within the meaning of Article 26(1) of Regulation No 968/is that
         arising from the commitment to renounce the quota, only the part of the aid relating to that commitment may be recovered,
         pursuant to that provision and if the commitment has not in fact been complied with.
      
With regard to the distribution of the aid between the various commitments concerned, it should be noted that, in relation
         to the two commitments at issue in the main proceedings, that distribution is apparent from the various amounts fixed by the
         legislature of the European Union at Article 3(5) of Regulation No 320/2006. Thus, whereas, in return for the two commitments
         referred to in Article 3(1)(b) of that regulation, the amount of restructuring aid per tonne of renounced quota for the marketing
         year 2006/is EUR 547.under Article 3(5)(b), first indent, of that regulation, the amount is EUR 255.under Article 3(5)(c),
         first indent, of that regulation if the commitment to renounce the quota is not accompanied by a commitment partially to dismantle
         the production facilities of the factories concerned.
      
As Beneo-Orafti rightly argues, if an undertaking complies with its dismantling commitment but not its commitment to renounce
         the quota, it follows that the aid wrongly received by it must be considered, in circumstances such as those at issue in the
         main proceedings, to be EUR 255.per tonne produced in breach of the latter commitment.
      
By contrast, as regards the elements referred to by the referring court in its fourth question, points (a) to (c), there is
         nothing in the applicable rules, in particular in Article 26(1) of Regulation No 968/2006, to suggest that those elements
         are relevant for the calculation of the repayment of the aid received.
      
Furthermore, it is apparent from the latter provision that the extent to which the aid is wrongly paid is determined by the
         commitment that has not been complied with. Since it follows from the answer to the first to third and sixth questions that
         the commitment to renounce the quota applies without distinction to quotas within the meaning of Article of Regulation No
         318/and transitional quotas within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 493/2006, it cannot be considered that the
         aid would be less wrongful if an undertaking described its production, contrary to that commitment, as production under those
         transitional quotas rather than production under the quotas within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 318/2006.
      
Finally, in relation to the principle of proportionality, which the referring court makes reference to in the second part
         of its fourth question, it does not appear that a measure to recover restructuring aid, the extent of which, as provided by
         Article 26(1) of Regulation No 968/2006, depends on the commitment that has not been complied with, constitutes a measure
         that is manifestly disproportionate, within the meaning of the case-law cited at paragraph above, in terms of the objective
         which the legislature of the European Union sought to pursue by introducing that aid, recalled at paragraph above.
      
The answer to the second part of the fourth question is, therefore, that Article 26(1) of Regulation No 968/must be interpreted
         as meaning that, in circumstances such as those at issue in the main proceedings, if an undertaking has complied with its
         commitment partially to dismantle the production facilities of the factories concerned but not its commitment to renounce
         the quota, the amount of the aid to be recovered is equal to the part of the aid corresponding to the commitment that has
         not been complied with. That part of the aid must be determined on the basis of the amounts laid down in Article 3(5) of Regulation
         No 320/2006.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article 3(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EC) No 320/of February establishing a temporary scheme for the restructuring
            of the sugar industry in the Community and amending Regulation (EC) No 1290/on the financing of the common agricultural
            policy must be interpreted as meaning that the term ‘quota’ in that provision also includes the transitional quotas within
            the meaning of Article of Commission Regulation (EC) No 493/of March laying down transitional measures within
            the framework of the reform of the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector, and amending Regulations (EC) No
            1265/and (EC) No 314/2002.
2.      Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation No 320/must be interpreted as meaning that, in circumstances such as those at issue in
            the main proceedings, the commitment to renounce the quota for the production of sugar, isoglucose and inulin syrup that has
            been allocated to an undertaking and assigned by it to one or more of its factories, referred to in that provision, takes
            effect on the date when, having regard to the information that is communicated to it or that is published in the Official Journal of the European Union, the undertaking that makes that commitment is in a position to know, as a reasonably diligent undertaking, that, in the
            view of the competent authorities, the conditions for obtaining the restructuring aid set out in Article 5(2) of that regulation
            have been fulfilled.
3.      Articles 26(1) and of Commission Regulation (EC) No 968/of June laying down detailed rules for the implementation
            of Regulation No 320/and Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 318/of February on the common organisation
            of the markets in the sugar sector must be interpreted as meaning that a production such as that at issue in the main proceedings,
            on the assumption that it is contrary to the commitment to renounce the quota for the production of sugar, isoglucose and
            inulin syrup that has been allocated to an undertaking and assigned by it to one or more of its factories, referred to in
            Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation No 320/2006, may give rise to recovery of the aid, the imposition of a penalty and the collection
            of the levy on surpluses, as respectively set out in those provisions. With regard to the penalty under Article 27(3) of Regulation
            No 968/2006, it is for the referring court to assess whether, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, the non-compliance
            can be regarded as having been committed intentionally or as a result of grave negligence. The principles of ne bis in idem, proportionality and non‑discrimination must be interpreted as not precluding the cumulative application of those measures.
4.      Article 26(1) of Regulation No 968/must be interpreted as meaning that, in circumstances such as those at issue in the
            main proceedings, if an undertaking has complied with its commitment partially to dismantle the production facilities of the
            factories concerned but not its commitment to renounce the quota for the production of sugar, isoglucose and inulin syrup
            that has been allocated to it and assigned by it to one or more of its factories, referred to in Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation
            No 320/2006, the amount of the aid to be recovered is equal to the part of the aid corresponding to the commitment that has
            not been complied with. That part of the aid must be determined on the basis of the amounts laid down in Article 3(5) of Regulation
            No 320/2006.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 