
Case C-547/P
Asian Institute of Technology (AIT)
v
Commission of the European Communities
(Appeal – Asia-Invest Programme – Public call for proposals – Contract – Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance – Manifest inadmissibility – No legal interest in bringing proceedings – Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance – Measures of organisation of procedure – Request for production of documents – Parties requested to make written submissions on certain aspects of the proceedings)
Summary of the Judgment
Procedure – Decision given by reasoned order – Application of measures of organisation of procedure
(Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance, Arts. and 111)
Since the purpose of the measures of organisation of procedure envisaged in Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court
         of First Instance is to ensure, as provided in that article, that cases are prepared for hearing, procedures carried out and
         disputes resolved under the best possible conditions, the application of such measures is not, in itself, capable of precluding
         an order from being adopted under Article of those rules. 
      
(see para. 30)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
January (*)
      
(Appeal – Asia-Invest Programme – Public call for proposals – Contract – Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance – Manifest inadmissibility – No legal interest in bringing proceedings – Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance – Measures of organisation of procedure – Request for production of documents – Parties requested to make written submissions on certain aspects of the proceedings)
In Case C-547/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, brought on December 2003, 
Asian Institute of Technology (AIT), established in Pathumthani (Thailand), represented by H. Teissier du Cros, lawyer, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
the other party to the proceedings being:
Commission of the European Communities,  represented by P.‑J. Kuijper and B. Schöfer, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C. W. A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, J. Makarczyk,  R. Silva de Lapuerta,  P. Kūris and G. Arestis (Rapporteur),
         Judges,
      
Advocate General:  C. Stix-Hackl,
Registrar: K. Sztranc, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on May 2005,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
By its appeal, the Asian Institute of Technology (the ‘AIT’) requests the annulment of the Order of the Court of First Instance
         of the European Communities of October in Case T-288/AIT v Commission (not published in the ECR, the ‘contested order’), by which the Court of First Instance dismissed, as manifestly inadmissible,
         its action for annulment of the decision of the European Commission of February to conclude a research contract within
         the framework of the ‘Asia-Invest’ programme with the Center for Energy-Environment Research and Development (the ‘decision
         at issue’). 
      
 Legal framework
Title II of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance in the version applicable at the date of the contested order
         contains a Chapter entitled ‘Measures of Organisation of Procedure and Measures of Inquiry’. In Section I of that chapter,
         entitled ‘Measures of organisation of procedure’, Article is set out, paragraphs to of which provide:  
      
‘(1)  The purpose of measures of organisation of procedure shall be to ensure that cases are prepared for hearing, procedures carried
         out and disputes resolved under the best possible conditions. They shall be prescribed by the Court of First Instance, after
         hearing the Advocate General.
      
(2)       Measures of organisation of procedure shall, in particular, have as their purpose:
(a)       to ensure efficient conduct of the written and oral procedure and to facilitate the taking of evidence;
(b)       to determine the points on which the parties must present further argument or which call for measures of inquiry;
(c)       to clarify the forms of order sought by the parties, their pleas in law and arguments and the points at issue between them;
(d)       to facilitate the amicable settlement of proceedings.
(3)       Measures of organisation of procedure may, in particular, consist of:
(a)      putting questions to the parties;
(b)      inviting the parties to make written or oral submissions on certain aspects of the proceedings;
(c)      asking the parties or third parties for information or particulars;
(d)      asking for documents or any papers relating to the case to be produced;
(e)      summoning the parties’ agents or the parties in person to meetings.
(4)      Each party may, at any stage of the procedure, propose the adoption or modification of measures of organisation of procedure.
         In that case, the other parties shall be heard before those measures are prescribed.
      
Where the procedural circumstances so require, the Registrar shall inform the parties of the measures envisaged by the Court
         of First Instance and shall give them an opportunity to submit comments orally or in writing.’
      
Title III of those rules of procedure contains a Chapter 2, entitled ‘Preliminary Issues’. That chapter includes inter alia
         Articles 111, and 114, which provide: 
      
‘Article Where it is clear that the Court of First Instance has no jurisdiction to take cognisance of an action or where the action
         is manifestly inadmissible or manifestly lacking any foundation in law, the Court of First Instance may, by reasoned order,
         after hearing the Advocate General and without taking further steps in the proceedings, give a decision on the action.
      
Article The Court of First Instance may at any time, of its own motion, consider whether there exists any absolute bar to proceeding
         with an action or declare, after hearing the parties, that the action has become devoid of purpose and that there is no need
         to adjudicate on it; it shall give its decision in accordance with Article 114(3) and (4).
      
Article …
(3)       Unless the Court of First Instance otherwise decides, the remainder of the proceedings shall be oral.
(4)       The Court of First Instance shall, after hearing the Advocate General, decide on the application or reserve its decision for
         the final judgment. It shall refer the case to the Court of Justice if the case falls within the jurisdiction of that Court.
      
If the Court of First Instance refuses the application or reserves its decision, the President shall prescribe new time-limits
         for further steps in the proceedings.’
      
  Background to the dispute
The AIT is a non-profit-making technological instruction and research agency established in Thailand.  
      
As is apparent from the contested order, the AIT included, until 2001, a department without legal personality known as the
         ‘Center for Energy-Environment Research and Development’ (the ‘CEERD’), the director of which was, until December 2001,
         Mr Lefèvre. 
      
The ‘Asia-Invest’ programme is part of a series of European Community initiatives designed to promote reciprocal exchanges
         and agreements between the European Union and Asia by supporting economic cooperation. In the context of that programme, the
         Commission of the European Communities published, on April 2001, Call for proposals No EUROPEAID/112441/C/G (OJ C
         109, p. 9). 
      
Following that publication, the Center for Energy-Environment Research and Development – Foundation for International Human
         Resource Development (the ‘CEERD-FIHRD’) submitted, on November 2001, a proposal signed by Mr Lefèvre as Director of that
         agency. 
      
After examining the documents submitted, the Commission decided to accept, among others, that proposal, and adopted the contested
         decision. Contract No ASI/B7-301/95/108-concluded with the CEERD was signed on February by Mr Lefèvre holding
         himself out as Director of that agency. That contract envisaged the payment of an advance of EUR 481.88, which was paid
         into an account opened in the name of the Foundation for International Human Resource Development (the ‘FIHRD’) at the Thai
         Farmers Bank.
      
By letter of July 2002, the AIT’s lawyer requested EuropeAid, the Commission’s Office for cooperation (‘EuropeAid’), for
         information on a project entitled ‘Facilitating the Dissemination of European Clean Technologies in Thailand’. In that letter,
         that lawyer pointed out that the CEERD was ‘simply a service of the AIT and not a legal entity, with no capacity to contract
         under that usurped name, above all through Mr … Lefèvre who [had] not been Director of that body for a long time’. 
      
In reply to that letter, Mr Muller, Director of EuropeAid, sent the AIT’s lawyer a letter on July with the information
         that a contract had been signed on February 2002, on behalf of the Commission, by himself and Mr Eich, of the one part,
         and on February by Mr Lefèvre, Director of the CEERD, of the other part. That letter stated that a sum of EUR 481.had already been paid as an advance under that contract and that, as its period of execution was months, the project would
         be completed on May 2003.   
      
In the same letter, the Commission also mentioned that it had already signed a similar contract on July 2000, for a duration
         of months, with Mr Lefèvre, Director of the CEERD, and that the grant envisaged in that contract, amounting to EUR 227.50,
         had been paid in its entirety. 
      
 The procedure before the Court of First Instance and the contested order 
By application lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on September 2002, the AIT brought an action for annulment
         of the decision at issue. That case was registered under number T‑288/02. 
      
The same day, the AIT brought an action for annulment of the Commission’s decision of July to conclude the research
         contract referred to at paragraph of the present judgment. That case was registered under number T-287/02. 
      
On December 2002, the Commission submitted defence statements in the AIT v Commission cases that gave rise to the Order of the Court of First Instance of June (T-287/[2003] ECR II-2179) and to the
         contested order (T-288/02, not published in the ECR), requesting, inter alia, for those cases to be joined. The Registry of
         the Court of First Instance set a time-limit for the AIT to submit its comments on that request for joinder. The AIT opposed
         the joinder of the cases.  
      
In its defence submitted in Case T-288/02, the Commission argued that the action was inadmissible. The first pages of the
         proposal of the CEERD-FIHRD, signed by Mr Lefèvre as Director of the CEERD-FIHRD on November 2001, and the contract of
         February concluded between the Commission and the CEERD were also annexed to that defence. 
      
By interim application, lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on May 2003, the AIT brought an application
         to suspend the operation of the decision at issue. By order of July in Case T‑288/R AIT v Commission   [2003] ECR II-2885, the President of the Court of First Instance dismissed that application, reserving the costs of the
         proceedings. The AIT lodged an appeal against that order, which the President of the Court of Justice, sitting in an interlocutory
         capacity, dismissed by Order of September in Case C‑348/P(R) AIT v Commission (not published in the ECR).  
      
In the case giving rise to the contested order, the Court of First Instance, under Article of its Rules of Procedure, requested
         the Commission on June to send it copies of the request for proposals No EUROPEAID/112441/C/G, referred to in paragraph
         of the present judgment, the documents containing the legal provisions on the granting of subsidies envisaged by the ‘Asia-Invest’
         programme and the CEERD‑FIHRD’s full proposal of November 2001. 
      
The Commission having complied with that request on July 2003, the Court of First Instance, under Article of its Rules
         of Procedure, invited the AIT to comment on the documents produced by that Community institution and to submit its observations
         on the plea of inadmissibility put forward by the Commission in its defence. 
      
On September 2003, the AIT complied with that request. In its observations it stated, inter alia, that it had commenced
         proceedings for forgery against Mr Lefèvre on September before the Tribunal de Grande Instance (Regional Court), Paris.
         
      
By Order of June in AIT v Commission the Court of First Instance, under Articles and of its Rules of Procedure, dismissed the application brought by the
         AIT in the corresponding case as inadmissible. 
      
By the contested order, the Court of First Instance dismissed the action against the decision at issue as manifestly inadmissible
         under Article of its Rules of Procedure.  
      
The findings of the Court of First Instance were in this respect as follows: 
      
‘It is apparent from settled case-law that, pursuant to the fourth subparagraph of Article EC, a natural or legal person
         may challenge only measures which produce binding legal effects capable of affecting that person’s interests by bringing about
         a distinct change in its legal situation (judgment of the Court in Case 60/IBM v Commission [1981] ECR I-2639, paragraph 9; judgments of the Court of First Instance in Case T-37/BEUCandNCC v Commission [1994] ECR II-285, paragraph 27, and Case T-178/ATM v Commission [1997] ECR II-2529, paragraph 53).
      
It is apparent from the Commission’s pleadings, the documents disclosed to the Court of First Instance and, in particular,
         from the contract of February and the proposal of November made by the [CEERD-FIHRD], that the Commission
         adopted the decision at issue with full knowledge of the facts, that is to say, knowing perfectly well that the other contracting
         party was a separate body from the AIT and that the CEERD and its director were no longer associated with the AIT. As the
         Commission observes in its defence, the proposal of November and, in particular, Part II, “The Applicant”, explicitly
         mention the transfer of the CEERD from the AIT to the FIHRD and the fact that Mr T. Lefèvre was no longer employed at the
         AIT. In addition, the documents in question had notified the Commission, before the contract was concluded, of a completely
         new set of contact details for the CEERD and for the FIHRD. 
      
It follows from the preceding that the Commission’s decision to conclude the contract of February was not vitiated
         by any error as regards the separate identity of the contracting party, nor by any misleading practice as regards the existence
         of a connection between that latter and the applicant. The Commission was aware that the contract had been sought by Mr Lefèvre
         on behalf of the [CEERD-FIHRD], a new and separate body, and it concluded the contract in the knowledge of that fact. 
      
Accordingly, the contested decision is addressed to the [CEERD‑FIHRD] and not to the applicant, and the contract of February
         neither imposes any obligations on that latter party nor grants it any rights. The Commission’s decision concluding that
         contract does not concern the applicant in any way, and its annulment is neither capable of altering the applicant’s legal
         position nor of benefiting it in any way. 
      
In view of the preceding, the applicant cannot claim that the decision at issue has produced any binding legal effects capable
         of affecting its interests by bringing about a distinct change in its legal situation. 
      
In so far as the applicant considers itself harmed by the alleged underhand conduct of Mr Lefèvre and by the alleged “usurpation”
         of the CEERD, it is still in a position to assert its rights before the competent national courts. The annulment of the decision
         at issue could not compensate for the loss allegedly suffered because of the alleged usurpation.’
      
 The forms of order sought and the procedure before the Court
In its appeal, the AIT claims that the Court should:  
      
–        set aside the contested order;
–        refer the case back to the Court of First Instance;
–        or failing that, arrange for and open the oral procedure;
–        annul the decision at issue.
The Commission contends that the Court should: 
      
–        dismiss the appeal;
–        order the AIT to pay the costs. 
By letter lodged at the Registry of the Court on March 2004, the AIT, pursuant to Article of the Rules of Procedure
         of the Court, requested permission to lodge a response. By decision of March 2004, the President of the Court refused that
         request. 
      
 The appeal
In support of its claims for the setting aside of the contested order, the AIT puts forward three pleas. The first and second
         pleas allege misapplication of Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance and infringement of the
         fourth subparagraph of Article EC respectively. In its third plea, the AIT invokes an infringement of Article of the
         Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, proclaimed at Nice on December (OJ C 364, p. 1, the ‘Charter
         of fundamental rights’). 
      
 The first plea
In this plea, the AIT submits, first, that the Court of First Instance has misapplied Article of its Rules of Procedure
         because, as in this instance, it had already determined the measures of organisation of procedure in accordance with Article
         of the same rules before giving judgment pursuant to Article 111.
      
It must be noted, on the one hand, that Article of the Rules of Procedure allows the Court of First Instance to dismiss
         an action by reasoned order, without taking further steps in the proceedings, when that action is not capable of succeeding,
         on the grounds set out in that provision. 
      
On the other hand, Article 64(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance provides that the purpose of the
         measures of organisation of procedure determined under that article shall be to ensure that cases are prepared for hearing,
         procedures carried out and disputes resolved under the best possible conditions. 
      
Therefore, since the purpose of the measures of organisation of procedure envisaged in Article of the Rules of Procedure
         of the Court of First Instance is to ensure, as provided in that article, that cases are prepared for hearing, procedures
         carried out and disputes resolved under the best possible conditions, the application of such measures is not, in itself,
         capable of precluding an order from being adopted under Article of the same rules. 
      
In that regard, the AIT maintains, specifically, that Article was misapplied in the present case on the ground that the
         action which it had brought was not manifestly inadmissible within the meaning of that article. The inadmissibility found
         by the Court of First Instance emerged following the measures of organisation of procedure, which were determined a year after
         the originating application was lodged, and after a first exchange of pleadings.
      
As appears from paragraphs and of the contested order, the action brought before the Court of First Instance was dismissed
         as manifestly inadmissible on the ground that the AIT could not show a legal interest in bringing proceedings. That plea of
         inadmissibility had already been set out in the Commission’s defence. Furthermore, the documents on which the Court of First
         Instance based its reasoning, namely the CEERD-FIHRD’s proposal of November and the contract of February 2002,
         were included for the most part in the procedural documents annexed to the Commission’s defence. 
      
Therefore, the AIT’s claim that the action would not have been declared inadmissible were it not for the production of certain
         documents, referred to expressly in the contested order and for whose provision the Court of First Instance had given the
         Commission a time-limit, is, in any event, unfounded and, consequently, must be rejected. 
      
Secondly, the AIT submits that the adoption of the contested order under Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court
         of First Instance, after a first exchange of pleadings, prejudices its procedural rights, since it has not had the opportunity
         to be heard. On that basis, the AIT maintains that the inadmissibility alleged in the present case falls within the scope
         of Article of those rules, which grants it more rights, in particular the right to oral proceedings.
      
The Court observes in this connection that the application of Article does not guarantee that an oral procedure will take
         place, as the Court of First Instance may, under Article 114(3) of its Rules of Procedure, to which Article of those rules
         refers, give judgment following a solely written procedure. 
      
Although in its claims the AIT essentially relies on the infringement of its procedural rights, in that it has not had the
         opportunity to be heard, the Court of First Instance in any event requested the AIT to submit its observations on the pleas
         of inadmissibility raised by the Commission in its defence, and the AIT responded to that request. 
      
As a result, the second set of arguments relied on by the AIT in support of the present plea must also be rejected.
      
If follows from the preceding that the Court of First Instance did not make any error of law in the application of Article
         of its Rules of Procedure and, consequently, the first plea must be rejected. 
      
 The second plea 
The AIT submits that, by applying the Court’s judgment in Case 60/IBM v Commission [1981] ECR I-2639, the Court of First Instance infringed the fourth paragraph of Article EC. According to the AIT, the
         admissibility of its action should be examined in the light of the Court’s judgment in Case 25/Plaumann v Commission [1963] ECR 95.  The AIT submits that all the conditions laid down in that case are satisfied in the present case. Taking
         as a basis the judgment in Case C‑309/Codorniu v Council [1994] ECR I-1853, it maintains that the decision at issue prejudices, inter alia, its entitlement to use the name and logo
         ‘CEERD’ which appear in a number of documents in the case, thereby distinguishing its situation in relation to that of all
         other economic operators. 
      
The Court finds that, in this plea, the AIT has not put forward any arguments capable of establishing that the finding of
         the Court of First Instance in paragraph of the contested order that the decision at issue has not had any binding legal
         effects capable of affecting its interests by bringing about a distinct change in its legal situation, is incorrect.  
      
Firstly, the AIT has not rebutted the Court’s findings, set out in paragraphs and of the contested order respectively,
         that the Commission adopted the decision at issue knowing full well that the other party to the contract was a separate body
         from the AIT, and that that decision was addressed to the CEERD, and not to itself. Nor does it dispute that, when the contract
         at issue was signed, the CEERD and its director were no longer associated with the AIT. 
      
Secondly, the AIT does not offer any argument to rebut the finding, in paragraph of the contested order, that the decision
         at issue neither imposes any obligations on it nor grants it any rights. 
      
As regards the claim that the name and the logo ‘CEERD’, which appear in various documents produced before the Court of First
         Instance, were usurped by Mr Lefèvre, that information does not justify a finding that the AIT has a legal interest in bringing
         proceedings before the Court against the decision at issue.  
      
In any case, as the Court correctly noted in paragraph of the contested order, if the AIT considers itself harmed by the
         alleged underhand conduct of Mr Lefèvre, it is for the AIT to assert its rights before the competent national courts. 
      
As is apparent from the observations submitted by the AIT following its  receipt of the documents lodged by the Commission
         under the measures of organisation of procedure before the Court of First Instance, the AIT stated that it had summoned Mr
         Lefèvre to appear before the Tribunal de Grande Instance de Paris on September 2003, in proceedings alleging forgery.
      
If follows from the preceding considerations that the second plea must also be rejected.
      
 The third plea
In the alternative, the AIT maintains that the dismissal of its action as inadmissible under Article EC infringes its
         right to an effective judicial remedy, such as ensured by Article of the Charter of fundamental rights. In this respect,
         the AIT maintains that an action before national courts, in contrast to what is stated in paragraph of the contested order,
         does not fulfil the conditions required by case-law for a remedy to be regarded as effective. While the Court, in its judgment
         in Case C-50/P Unión de Pequeños Agricultores v Council  [2002] ECR I‑6677, refused to follow the Advocate General’s Opinion, the reasons for so doing are not valid as regards a
         legal person which is not established in a Member State of the Union, such as the AIT.  
      
This plea must be rejected. After having found, in paragraph of the contested order, that the AIT could not claim that
         the decision at issue had any binding legal effects capable of affecting its interests by bringing about a distinct change
         in its legal situation, the Court of First Instance found in paragraph of the same order that, in so far as the AIT considered
         itself to be harmed by the alleged unlawful conduct of Mr Lefèvre and by the alleged ‘usurpation’ of the logo ‘CEERD’, it
         was still in a position to assert its rights before the competent national courts. 
      
In this connection, it is common ground that the AIT summoned Mr Lefèvre to appear before the Tribunal de Grande Instance
         de Paris on September 2003, in proceedings alleging forgery.
      
Therefore, in the present case, the AIT cannot, on any view, rely on an infringement of its right to effective judicial protection.
      
It follows from the preceding considerations that the third plea must also be rejected as unfounded and, consequently, the
         claims for annulment of the contested order must be dismissed. 
      
The other claims in the appeal having been submitted on the assumption that the Court would annul the contested order, the
         appeal must be dismissed in its entirety. 
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, which applies to appeals by virtue of Article of those rules, the unsuccessful
         party is to be ordered to pay the costs, if they have been asked for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission
         has asked for costs and the AIT has been unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Dismisses the appeal;
2.      Orders the Asian Institute of Technology (AIT) to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 