
Case C-321/Hans Markus Kofoed
v
Skatteministeriet
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Østre Landsret)
(Directive 90/434/EEC – Common system of taxation applicable to mergers, divisions, transfers of assets and exchanges of shares – National decision to tax an exchange of shares – Exchange of shares – Distribution of a dividend shortly afterwards – Abuse of rights)
Opinion of Advocate General Kokott delivered on February Judgment of the Court (First Chamber), July Summary of the Judgment
1.     Approximation of laws – Common system of taxation applicable to mergers, divisions, transfers of assets and exchanges of shares
            concerning companies of different Member States – Directive 90/(Council Directive 90/434, Art. 2(d))
2.     Acts of the institutions – Directives – Implementation by Member States 
(Art. 249, third para., EC)
3.     Approximation of laws – Common system of taxation applicable to mergers, divisions, transfers of assets and exchanges of shares
            concerning companies of different Member States – Directive 90/(Council Directive 90/434, Art. 11(1)(a))
1.     On a proper interpretation of Directive 90/on the common system of taxation applicable to mergers, divisions, transfers
         of assets and exchanges of shares concerning companies of different Member States, the common tax rules which it lays down,
         which cover different tax advantages, apply without distinction to all mergers, divisions, transfers of assets or exchanges
         of shares irrespective of the reasons, whether financial, economic or simply fiscal.
      
In that regard, the concept of the ‘cash payment’ made to shareholders of the acquired company in the context of an exchange
         of shares, within the meaning of Article 2(d) of that directive covers monetary payments having the characteristics of genuine
         consideration for the acquisition, namely payments agreed upon in a binding manner in addition to the allotment of securities
         representing the share capital of the acquiring company, irrespective of any reasons underlying the acquisition. Consequently,
         a monetary payment made by an acquiring company to the shareholders of the acquired company cannot be classified as a ‘cash
         payment’ for the purposes of Article 2(d) of Directive 90/merely because of a certain temporal or other type of link to
         the acquisition, or possible fraudulent intent. On the contrary, it is necessary to ascertain in each case, having regard
         to the circumstances as a whole, whether the payment in question has the characteristics of binding consideration for the
         acquisition. 
      
It follows that a dividend paid by an acquiring company to shareholders of the acquired company shortly after the exchange
         of shares, but not forming an integral part of the consideration payable by the acquiring company, is not to be included in
         the calculation of the ‘cash payment’ provided for in Article 2(d) of Directive 90/434. 
      
(see paras 27-31, 33, 48, operative part)
2.     All authorities of a Member State, in applying national law, are required to interpret it as far as possible in the light
         of the wording and purpose of Community directives in order to achieve the result pursued by those directives. Although it
         is true that the requirement of a directive-compliant interpretation cannot reach the point where a directive, by itself and
         without national implementing legislation, may create obligations for individuals or determine or aggravate the liability
         in criminal law of persons who act in contravention of its provisions, the Member State may nevertheless, in principle, impose
         a directive-compliant interpretation of national law on individuals.
      
(see para. 45)
3.     Under Article 11(1)(a) of Directive 90/on the common system of taxation applicable to mergers, divisions, transfers of
         assets and exchanges of shares concerning companies of different Member States, by way of exception and in specific cases,
         Member States may refuse to apply or withdraw the benefit of all or any part of the provisions of that directive, inter alia,
         where the exchange of shares has tax evasion or tax avoidance as its principal objective or as one of its principal objectives.
         
      
Where there is some evidence which might justify application of that article, but the national law of the Member State concerned
         does not contain any specific provision transposing it, taxation of the exchange of shares in question may be justified if
         national law contains a provision or general principle prohibiting abuse of rights or other provisions on tax evasion or tax
         avoidance which might be interpreted in accordance with the said article.
      
(see paras 37, 39, 46, 48, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Directive 90/434/EEC – Common system of taxation applicable to mergers, divisions, transfers of assets and exchanges of shares – National decision to tax an exchange of shares – Exchange of shares – Distribution of a dividend shortly afterwards – Abuse of rights)
In Case C-321/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Østre Landsret (Denmark), made by decision of August 2004,
         received at the Court on August 2005, in the proceedings
      
Hans Markus Kofoed
v
Skatteministeriet,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, A. Tizzano, A. Borg Barthet, M. Ilešič and E. Levits, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: H. von Holstein, Deputy Registrar, 
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on January 2007,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Hans Markus Kofoed, by L. Melchior Kjeldsen, advokat,
–       the Danish Government, by J. Molde, acting as Agent, and K. Lundgaard Hansen, advokat,
–       the United Kingdom Government, by C. Gibbs, acting as Agent, and J. Stratford, Barrister,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by H. Støvlbæk and R. Lyal, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on February 2007,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles 2(d), and of Council Directive 90/434/EEC
         of July on the common system of taxation applicable to mergers, divisions, transfers of assets and exchanges of shares
         concerning companies of different Member States (OJ L 225, p. 1).
      
The reference was made in the context of proceedings between Mr Kofoed and the Skatteministeriet (Danish Ministry of Fiscal
         Affairs) concerning the charging of income tax on an exchange of shares.
      
 Legal framework
 Community legislation
According to the first recital in the preamble to Directive 90/434, the purpose of the directive is to ensure that restructuring
         operations of companies of different Member States, such as mergers, divisions, transfers of assets and exchanges of shares,
         are not hampered by restrictions, disadvantages or distortions arising in particular from the tax provisions of the Member
         States.
      
To that end, Directive 90/establishes a scheme under which those operations are not themselves taxable. Any capital gains
         arising from those operations may, in principle, be taxed, but only at the time at which they actually take place.
      
Article 2(d) of Directive 90/defines ‘exchange of shares’ as ‘an operation whereby a company acquires a holding in the
         capital of another company such that it obtains a majority of the voting rights in that company in exchange for the issue
         to the shareholders of the latter company, in exchange for their securities, of securities representing the capital of the
         former company, and, if applicable, a cash payment not exceeding 10% of the nominal value or, in the absence of a nominal
         value, of the accounting par value of the securities issued in exchange’.
      
According to Article 2(g) and (h) of Directive 90/434, ‘acquired company’ means ‘the company in which a holding is acquired
         by another company by means of an exchange of securities’ and ‘acquiring company’ means ‘the company which acquires a holding
         by means of an exchange of securities’.
      
Article 8(1) and (4) of that directive reads as follows:
‘1.      On a merger, division or exchange of shares, the allotment of securities representing the capital of the receiving or acquiring
         company to a shareholder of the transferring or acquired company in exchange for securities representing the capital of the
         latter company shall not, of itself, give rise to any taxation of the income, profits or capital gains of that shareholder.
      
…
4.      Paragraphs 1, and shall not prevent a Member State from taking into account when taxing shareholders any cash payment
         that may be made on the merger, division or exchange.’
      
Article 11(1)(a) of Directive 90/provides that a Member State may refuse to apply or withdraw the benefit of all or any
         part of the provisions of Titles II, III and IV of the directive where it appears that the exchange of shares has tax evasion
         or tax avoidance as its principal objective or as one of its principal objectives.
      
 National legislation
Under Danish law, the tax treatment of exchanges of shares is governed by the Aktieavancebeskatningslov (Law on the taxation
         of capital gains upon disposal of shares) of September (Lovtidende 1993, p. 4171; ‘the Aktieavancebeskatningslov’) and the Fusionsskattelov (Law on the tax treatment of mergers) of August
         (Lovtidende 1992, p. 3374; ‘Fusionsskattelov’).
      
Paragraph of the Aktieavancebeskatningslov provides:
‘1.      In the case of exchange of shares, where both the acquiring and the acquired company are included in the definition of a “company
         from a Member State” set out in Article of Directive 90/434/EEC, shareholders in the acquired company shall have the right
         to be taxed under Paragraphs and of the Fusionsskattelov. In this connection the date of the exchange of shares shall
         be regarded as the date of merger. It shall be a precondition that the exchange of shares be effected within a period of no
         more than six months from the first day of the exchange.
      
2.      “Exchange of shares” (within the meaning of subparagraph 1) shall mean an operation whereby a company acquires a holding in
         the capital of another company such that it obtains a majority of the voting rights in that company in exchange for the issue
         to the shareholders of the latter company, in exchange for their securities, of securities representing the capital of the
         former company, and, if applicable, a cash payment not exceeding 10% of the nominal value or, in the absence of a nominal
         value, of the accounting par value of the securities issued in exchange.
      
…’
Paragraph of the Fusionsskattelov, referred to in Paragraph 13(1) of the Aktieavancebeskatningslov, is worded as follows:
‘1.      Where in respect of shares in the [acquired company] consideration provided is other than by way of shares in the acquiring
         company, the shareholder shall be deemed to have effected a third-party sale of the shares in the [acquired company]. …
      
…’
Paragraph of the Fusionsskattelov provides:
‘1.      In determining general or special taxable income, shares of the [acquiring company] acquired by its shareholders as consideration
         for the [acquired company] shall be treated as if they had been acquired on the same date and at the same price as the shares
         for which they were exchanged. …
      
…’
It is common ground that, at the time of the facts material to the main proceedings, there were no specific provisions in
         Danish law transposing Article of Directive 90/434.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
Mr Kofoed and Mr Toft each held 50% of the total share capital of Cosmopolit Holding ApS (‘Cosmopolit’), a limited liability
         company incorporated under Danish law having share capital of DKK 000.
      
On October 1993, they each acquired one share for the price of IEP in Dooralong Ltd (‘Dooralong’), a limited liability
         company incorporated under Irish law, those two shares constituting the share capital of Dooralong.
      
Dooralong subsequently increased its share capital by issuing new shares for the price of IEP 1.
On October 1993, Mr Kofoed and Mr Toft exchanged all the shares they held in Cosmopolit for all the new shares in Dooralong.
         As a result of that exchange, they thus each held shares in Dooralong. The latter held the total share capital of Cosmopolit.
         
      
On November 1993, Dooralong collected a dividend of IEP (approximately DKK 000), paid by its newly acquired
         subsidiary Cosmopolit, the shareholders’ equity of which was thereby reduced to DKK 806.
      
On November 1993, Dooralong’s general meeting decided to distribute a dividend of IEP to its two shareholders,
         Mr Kofoed and Mr Toft.
      
For the purposes of his income tax relating to the year 1993, Mr Kofoed stated in his income declaration that the exchange
         of shares in Cosmopolit in return for new shares in Dooralong should be exempt from tax. The Danish tax authorities did not
         accept that statement, taking the view that the dividend distribution had to be regarded as forming part of the exchange of
         shares, with the result that the maximum threshold of 10% of the nominal value of the securities issued in exchange, provided
         for by Directive 90/for a possible cash payment, had been exceeded. In the authorities’ view, that exchange of shares
         could accordingly not be exempt under that directive.
      
Mr Kofoed thereupon challenged before the Landsskatteret (National Tax Court) the decision of the tax authorities to the effect
         that the exchange of shares in question could not be exempted under Directive 90/434. When that decision was upheld, Mr Kofoed
         brought an action before the Østre Landsret (Eastern Regional Court).
      
In those circumstances, the Østre Landsret decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question to the Court
         of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Is Article 2(d) of Directive 90/434/EEC … to be interpreted as meaning that there is no “exchange of shares” within the meaning
         of that directive where the persons involved in the exchange of shares, at the same time as agreeing to exchange the shares
         in a non-legally binding manner, declare it to be their common intention to vote, at the first general meeting of the acquiring
         company after the exchange, in favour of distributing a profit in excess of 10% of the nominal value of the security transferred
         by way of the exchange of shares and such a profit is in fact distributed?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
By its question, the national court asks, essentially, whether, in circumstances such as those in the main proceedings, Article
         8(1) of Directive 90/precludes taxation of an exchange of shares such as the one in question.
      
In that context, the national court asks, first, whether such an exchange of shares constitutes an ‘exchange of shares’ within
         the meaning of Article 2(d) of that directive and, more specifically, whether or not a dividend such as the one paid must
         be included in the calculation of the cash payment provided for in that article.
      
Second, the national court asks, essentially, whether the tax authorities may react to a possible abuse of rights, even though
         the national legislature has not enacted specific measures to transpose Article of Directive 90/434.
      
 The classification as an ‘exchange of shares’ within the meaning of Directive 90/The Court notes, as a preliminary point, that Article 8(1) of Directive 90/provides that an allotment of securities accruing
         from an exchange of shares to shareholders of the acquired company may not be taxed.
      
According to the definition contained in Article 2(d) of that directive, an ‘exchange of shares’ is an ‘operation whereby
         a company acquires a holding in the capital of another company such that it obtains a majority of the voting rights in that
         company in exchange for the issue to the shareholders of the latter company, in exchange for their securities, of securities
         representing the capital of the former company, and, if applicable, a cash payment not exceeding 10% of the nominal value
         or, in the absence of a nominal value, of the accounting par value of the securities issued in exchange’.
      
In the main proceedings, it is common ground that the exchange of shares in question was, in principle, effected in the context
         of an acquisition within the terms of that provision.
      
The parties disagree, however, on whether or not the dividend paid by Dooralong to Mr Kofoed and Mr Toft shortly after that
         exchange of shares should be regarded as forming part of that acquisition. If so, the 10% threshold provided for by Article
         2(d) of Directive 90/for a cash payment has been exceeded and that exchange of shares must be taxed.
      
The Court finds in this regard, as noted by the Advocate General in points to and points and of her Opinion, that
         the concept of ‘cash payment’ within the meaning of Article 2(d) of Directive 90/covers monetary payments having the characteristics
         of genuine consideration for the acquisition, namely payments agreed upon in a binding manner in addition to the allotment
         of securities representing the share capital of the acquiring company, irrespective of any reasons underlying the acquisition.
      
Both the scheme and the logic of Directive 90/tend to support the position that the cash payment and the acquisition are
         part of the same transaction. The payment is part and parcel of the consideration paid by the acquiring company to the shareholders
         of the acquired company with a view to obtaining a majority holding in the latter.
      
Likewise, the Court has previously had the opportunity to state that it is clear from Article 2(d) and from the general scheme
         of Directive 90/that the common tax rules which it lays down, which cover different tax advantages, apply without distinction
         to all mergers, divisions, transfers of assets or exchanges of shares irrespective of the reasons, whether financial, economic
         or simply fiscal, for those operations (see Case C‑28/Leur-Bloem [1997] ECR I-4161, paragraph 36).
      
Consequently, a monetary payment made by an acquiring company to the shareholders of the acquired company cannot be classified
         as a ‘cash payment’ for the purposes of Article 2(d) of Directive 90/merely because of a certain temporal or other type
         of link to the acquisition, or possible fraudulent intent. On the contrary, it is necessary to ascertain in each case, having
         regard to the circumstances as a whole, whether the payment in question has the characteristics of binding consideration for
         the acquisition. 
      
That interpretation is supported by the purpose behind Directive 90/434, which is to eliminate fiscal barriers to cross-border
         restructuring of undertakings, by ensuring that any increases in the value of shares are not taxed before they are actually
         realised and by preventing operations involving high levels of capital gains realised on exchanges of shares from being exempt
         from income tax simply because they are part of a restructuring operation.
      
The Court finds that, in the main proceedings, there is nothing in the case-file demonstrating that the dividend in question
         formed an integral part of the necessary consideration to be paid by Dooralong for the acquisition of Cosmopolit, which is
         the necessary condition for it to qualify as a ‘cash payment’ within the terms of Article 2(d) of Directive 90/434. On the
         contrary, according to the national court, it is common ground that at no time was there any agreement between Mr Kofoed and
         Mr Toft, on the one hand, and Dooralong, on the other, by which the latter was bound to distribute that dividend.
      
In those circumstances, the dividend in question in the main proceedings cannot be included in the calculation of the ‘cash
         payment’ provided for in Article 2(d) of Directive 90/434.
      
Consequently, the exchange of shares in question is covered by Article 8(1) of Directive 90/434, which implies that it cannot,
         in principle, be subject to tax.
      
However, since the national court and the Danish Government state several times that the exchange of shares in issue in the
         main proceedings was not carried out for any commercial reason whatsoever but solely for the purpose of achieving tax savings,
         it is still appropriate to consider the application of Article 8(1) in the event of possible abuse of rights.
      
 Whether a possible abuse of rights may be taken into account
Under Article 11(1)(a) of Directive 90/434, by way of exception and in specific cases, Member States may refuse to apply or
         withdraw the benefit of all or any part of the provisions of that directive, inter alia, where the exchange of shares has
         tax evasion or tax avoidance as its principal objective or as one of its principal objectives. That same provision also provides
         that the fact that the operation is not carried out for valid commercial reasons, such as the restructuring or rationalisation
         of the activities of the companies participating in the operation, may constitute a presumption that the operation has such
         an objective (see, to that effect, Leur-Bloem, paragraphs and 39).
      
Thus, Article 11(1)(a) of Directive 90/reflects the general Community law principle that abuse of rights is prohibited.
         Individuals must not improperly or fraudulently take advantage of provisions of Community law. The application of Community
         legislation cannot be extended to cover abusive practices, that is to say, transactions carried out not in the context of
         normal commercial operations, but solely for the purpose of wrongfully obtaining advantages provided for by Community law
         (see, to that effect, Case C‑212/Centros [1999] ECR I-1459, paragraph 24; Case C‑255/Halifax and Others [2006] ECR I-1609, paragraphs and 69; Case C‑456/Agip Petroli [2006] ECR I-3395, paragraphs and 20; and Case C‑196/Cadbury Schweppes and Cadbury Schweppes Overseas [2006] ECR I-7995, paragraph 35).
      
As indicated by the Advocate General in point of her Opinion, it is true that, in the main proceedings, there is some evidence
         which might justify application of Article 11(1)(a) of Directive 90/434.
      
However, it is necessary, as a preliminary issue, to determine whether, in the absence of a specific transposition provision
         transposing Article 11(1)(a) of Directive 90/into Danish law, that provision may nevertheless apply in the case in the
         main proceedings.
      
In that regard, it should be borne in mind that, according to Articles EC and EC, each of the Member States to which
         a directive is addressed is obliged to adopt, within the framework of its national legal system, all the measures necessary
         to ensure that the directive is fully effective, in accordance with the objective that it pursues (see, inter alia, the judgment
         of March in Case C‑531/Commission v Germany, not published in the ECR, paragraph 16, and Case C‑456/Commission v Italy [2005] ECR I-5335, paragraph 50).
      
Moreover, the principle of legal certainty precludes directives from being able by themselves to create obligations for individuals.
         Directives cannot therefore be relied upon per se by the Member State as against individuals (see, inter alia, Case 14/Pretore di Salò [1987] ECR 2545, paragraphs and 20; Case 80/Kolpinghuis Nijmegen [1987] ECR 3969, paragraphs and 13; Case C‑168/Arcaro [1996] ECR I‑4705, paragraphs and 37; and Joined Cases C‑387/02, C‑391/and C‑403/Berlusconi and Others [2005] ECR I‑3565, paragraphs and 74). 
      
However, the Court observes, first, that, according to the actual wording of the third paragraph of Article EC, Member
         States may choose the form and methods for implementing directives which best ensure the result to be achieved by those directives
         (see, to that effect, Commission v Italy, paragraph 51).
      
Accordingly, provided that the legal situation arising from the national transposition measures is sufficiently precise and
         clear and that the persons concerned are put in a position to know the full extent of their rights and obligations, transposition
         of a directive into national law does not necessarily require legislative action in each Member State. Likewise, as noted
         by the Advocate General in point of her Opinion, the transposition of a directive may, depending on its content, be achieved
         through a general legal context, so that a formal and express re-enactment of the provisions of the directive in specific
         national provisions is not necessary (see Commission v Italy, paragraph 51, and Case C‑428/Commission v Austria [2006] ECR I‑3325, paragraph 99).
      
The Court notes, second, that all authorities of a Member State, in applying national law, are required to interpret it as
         far as possible in the light of the wording and purpose of the Community directives in order to achieve the result pursued
         by those directives. Moreover, although it is true that the requirement of a directive-compliant interpretation cannot reach
         the point where a directive, by itself and without national implementing legislation, may create obligations for individuals
         or determine or aggravate the liability in criminal law of persons who act in contravention of its provisions, a Member State
         may nevertheless, in principle, impose a directive-compliant interpretation of national law on individuals (see, to that effect,
         Kolpinghuis Nijmegen, paragraphs to 14, and Arcaro, paragraphs and 42).
      
As noted by the Advocate General in point of her Opinion, in the main proceedings it is therefore for the national court
         to ascertain whether there is, in Danish law, a provision or general principle prohibiting abuse of rights or other provisions
         on tax evasion or tax avoidance which might be interpreted in accordance with Article 11(1)(a) of Directive 90/and thereby
         justify taxation of the exchange of shares in question (see also Case 8/Becker [1982] ECR 53, paragraph 34). 
      
If so, it will be for the national court to determine whether the conditions for the application of those national provisions
         are satisfied in the main proceedings.
      
In the light of all the foregoing, the answer to the question referred must be that, in circumstances such as those in the
         main proceedings, a dividend, such as that paid, is not to be included in the calculation of the ‘cash payment’ provided for
         in Article 2(d) of Directive 90/and that, accordingly, an exchange of shares such as that in issue constitutes an ‘exchange
         of shares’ within the meaning of Article 2(d) of that directive.
      
Consequently, Article 8(1) of Directive 90/precludes, in principle, the taxation of such an exchange of shares, unless
         national rules on abuse of rights, tax evasion or tax avoidance may be interpreted in accordance with Article 11(1)(a) of
         Directive 90/and thus justify the taxation of that exchange.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
In circumstances such as those in the main proceedings, a dividend, such as that paid, is not to be included in the calculation
            of the ‘cash payment’ provided for in Article 2(d) of Council Directive 90/434/EEC of July on the common system of
            taxation applicable to mergers, divisions, transfers of assets and exchanges of shares concerning companies of different Member
            States and that, accordingly, an exchange of shares such as that in issue constitutes an ‘exchange of shares’ within the meaning
            of Article 2(d) of that directive.
Consequently, Article 8(1) of Directive 90/precludes, in principle, the taxation of such an exchange of shares, unless
            national rules on abuse of rights, tax evasion or tax avoidance may be interpreted in accordance with Article 11(1)(a) of
            Directive 90/and thus justify the taxation of that exchange.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Danish.
      
Top  
 