
Avis juridique important
|
61992JJudgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber) of May 1993.  -  Laboratoire de Prothèses Oculaires v Union Nationale des Syndicats d'Opticiens de France and Groupement d'Opticiens Lunetiers Détaillants and Syndicat des Opticiens Français Indépendants and Syndicat National des Adapteurs d'Optique de Contact.  -  Reference for a preliminary ruling: Cour de cassation - France.  -  Interpretation of Articles and of the Treaty - National legislation on the sale of contact lenses.  -  Case C-271/92.  
European Court reports Page I-Summary
Parties
Grounds
Decision on costs
Operative part
Keywords
++++1. Free movement of goods ° Quantitative restrictions ° Measures having equivalent effect ° National legislation reserving to opticians the sale of optical appliances and corrective lenses  (EEC Treaty, Art. 30)  2. Free movement of goods ° Exceptions ° Protection of public health ° National legislation reserving to opticians the sale of contact lenses and related products ° Justification  (EEC Treaty, Art. 36)  
Summary
1. Article of the Treaty must be interpreted as precluding national legislation which reserves the sale of optical appliances and corrective lenses solely to holders of an optician' s certificate.  Such legislation, which grants to members of a specific profession the exclusive right to distribute certain products, is capable, in so far as it restricts sales to certain channels, of affecting the possibilities of marketing imported products and may accordingly constitute a measure having an effect equivalent to a quantitative restriction on imports within the meaning of the abovementioned provision.  2. Article of the Treaty must be interpreted as meaning that national legislation which prohibits the sale of contact lenses and related products in commercial establishments which are not run or managed by persons who fulfil the conditions laid down for practising as opticians is justified on grounds of the protection of public health.  In reserving the sale of such products to professionally qualified traders, such legislation is intended to ensure the protection of public health, for which purpose it is appropriate, and does not go beyond what is necessary to achieve it.  
Parties
In Case C-271/92,  REFERENCE to the Court under Article of the EEC Treaty by the French Cour de Cassation, Chambre Commerciale, Financière et Economique, for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending before that court between  Laboratoire de Prothèses Oculaires (LPO)  and  Union Nationale des Syndicats d' Opticiens de France (UNSOF), Groupement d' Opticiens Lunetiers Détaillants (GOLD), Syndicat des Opticiens Français Indépendants (SOFI) and Syndicat National des Opticiens d' Optique de Contact (SNADOC),  on the interpretation of Articles and of the EEC Treaty,  THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),  composed of: C.N. Kakouris, President of the Chamber, G.F. Mancini, F.A. Schockweiler, M. Diez de Velasco and P.J.G. Kapteyn, Judges,  Advocate General: G. Tesauro,  Registrar: L. Hewlett, Administrator,  after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:  ° LPO, by M. Levis, of the Paris Bar,  ° Union Nationale des Syndicats d' Opticiens de France (UNSOF) and Syndicat National des Adaptateurs d' Optique de Contact (SNADOC), by A. Monod, of the Paris Bar,  ° Syndicat des Opticiens Français Indépendants (SOFI) and Groupement d' Opticiens Lunetiers-Détaillants (GOLD), by Thiriez and Brueder, of the Paris Bar,  ° the French Government, by P. Pouzoulet, Deputy Director of Legal Affairs, and H. Duchene, Secretary of Foreign Affairs at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, acting as Agents,  ° the Greek Government, by F. Georgakopoulos, Assistant Legal Adviser to the State Legal Service, acting as Agent,  ° the Commission of the European Communities, by R. Pellicer, of its Legal Service, and V. Melgar, a national civil servant seconded to the Legal Service, acting as Agents,  having regard to the Report for the Hearing,  after hearing the oral observations of LPO, the Union Nationale des Syndicats d' Opticiens de France (UNSOF) and the Syndicat National des Adaptateurs d' Optique de Contact (SNADOC), the Syndicat des Opticiens Français Indépendants (SOFI) and the Groupement d' Opticiens Lunetiers Détaillants (GOLD), the French Government and the Commission at the hearing on February 1993,  after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 1993,  gives the following  Judgment  
Grounds
By judgment of June 1992, received at the Court on June, the Cour de Cassation (Court of Cassation) referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article of the EEC Treaty two questions on the interpretation of Articles and of the Treaty in relation to the French Code de la Santé Publique (Public Health Code, hereinafter "the Code") which prohibits the sale of corrective lenses by persons who do not hold an optician' s certificate or similar qualification.  Those questions were raised in proceedings between LPO, which markets contact lenses, intra-ocular implants and related products, and a number of professional organizations of opticians supplying spectacles, which consider that LPO is in breach of the Code' s provisions on the sale of such products.  The Cour de Cassation, before which the case was brought on appeal, decided to stay the proceedings until the Court of Justice had given a preliminary ruling on the following questions:  "1. Must Article of the Treaty be interpreted as applying to the sale of contact lenses and related products subject to conditions such as those laid down in Articles L-and L-of the Code de la Santé Publique reserving solely to holders of an optician' s certificate (Diplôme d' opticien-lunetier) the sale of optical appliances and corrective lenses?  2. May such legislation be justified by mandatory requirements relating to the protection of consumers or human health and life, as referred to in Article of the Treaty?"  Reference is made to the Report for the Hearing for a fuller account of the facts of the case, the procedure and the written observations submitted to the Court, which are mentioned or discussed hereinafter only in so far as is necessary for the reasoning of the Court.  The first question  It should be noted first of all that Community law contains no common or harmonized rules on the distribution of contact lenses. Consequently, the task of determining the relevant rules is a matter for the Member States, subject to compliance with the provisions of the Treaty, in particular those on the free movement of goods.  It is clear from the documents in the case and from the written and oral observations submitted to the Court that the French legislation at issue in the main proceedings applies without distinction to domestic and imported products and has no direct effect on imports.  However, as that legislation prohibits certain forms of marketing, it must be borne in mind that the Court has held that national legislation which grants to members of a specific profession the exclusive right to distribute certain products is capable, in so far as it restricts sales to certain channels, of affecting the possibilities of marketing imported products and may accordingly constitute a measure having an effect equivalent to a quantitative restriction on imports within the meaning of Article of the Treaty (Case C-369/Delattre [1991] ECR I-1487, paragraph 51, and Case C-60/Monteil [1991] ECR I-1547, paragraph 38).  It follows that legislation of the kind at issue in the main proceedings, which reserves to specialized agents the sale of contact lenses and related products, is capable of affecting intra-Community trade.  The answer to the first question must therefore be that Article of the Treaty is to be interpreted as precluding national legislation which reserves the sale of optical appliances and corrective lenses solely to holders of an optician' s certificate.  The second question  As to whether such legislation may be justified on the basis of Article of the Treaty, on grounds of the protection of public health, it follows from the Court' s case-law (judgment in Joined Cases C-1/and C-176/Aragonesa [1991] ECR I-4154, paragraph 16) that in the absence of common or harmonized rules it is for the Member States to decide on the degree of protection which they wish to afford to public health and on the way in which that protection is to be achieved. They may do so, however, only within the limits set by the Treaty and must, in particular, comply with the principle of proportionality.  National legislation which reserves the sale of products designed to correct a defect in a human bodily function to traders holding the relevant professional qualifications is intended to protect public health. The sale of contact lenses, even if ophthalmologists are responsible for prescribing them, cannot be regarded as a commercial activity like any other, since the vendor must be able to provide users with information on the use and care of the lenses.  Furthermore, legislation of the kind at issue in the main proceedings does not contravene the principle of proportionality. The reservation to opticians of the sale of contact lenses and related products is appropriate for the purpose of ensuring the protection of public health. There is no evidence in the file to suggest that such legislation goes beyond what is necessary to achieve that objective.  The answer to the second question must therefore be that Article of the Treaty is to be interpreted as meaning that national legislation which prohibits the sale of contact lenses and related products in commercial establishments which are not run or managed by persons who fulfil the conditions laid down for practising as opticians is justified on grounds of the protection of public health.  
Decision on costs
Costs  The costs incurred by the French Government, the Greek Government and the Commission of the European Communities, which have submitted observations to the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court.  
Operative part
On those grounds,  THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),  in answer to the questions referred to it by the Cour de Cassation by judgment of June 1992, hereby rules:  1. Article of the Treaty is to be interpreted as precluding national legislation which reserves the sale of optical appliances and corrective lenses solely to holders of an optician' s certificate.  2. Article of the Treaty is to be interpreted as meaning that national legislation which prohibits the sale of contact lenses and related products in commercial establishments which are not run or managed by persons who fulfil the conditions laid down for practising as opticians is justified on grounds of the protection of public health.  
Top  
 