
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-211/Commission of the European CommunitiesvCouncil of the European Union
«(EC/Bulgaria and EC/Hungary Agreements – Carriage of goods by road and combined transport – Taxation – Legal basis – Articles EC and EC)»
Opinion of Advocate General Alber delivered on March Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber), September Summary of the Judgment
1..
Acts of the institutions – Choice of legal basis – Criteria – Community measure pursuing a twofold purpose or having a twofold component – Reference to the main or predominant purpose or component – Inseparable purposes – Joint legal basis  
2..
International agreements – Conclusion – EC/Bulgaria Agreement and EC/Hungary Agreement on the carriage of goods by road and combined transport – Agreements falling principally under transport policy – Predominating over harmonisation of fiscal laws – Legal basis – Article EC in conjunction with Article 300(3) EC – Conclusion on the basis of Article EC – Unlawfulness(Arts 71, and 300(3) EC;EC/Bulgaria agreement; EC/Hungary Agreement)
3..
Actions for annulment – Judgment annulling a measure – Effects – Limitation by the Court – Case of a decision concerning the conclusion of an international agreement  (Art. 231, second para., EC; Council Decisions 2001/and 2001/266)
1.
 The choice of legal basis for a Community measure must rest on objective factors amenable to judicial review, which include
         in particular the aim and the content of the measure. If examination of such a measure reveals that it pursues a twofold purpose
         or that it has a twofold component and if one of these is identifiable as the main or predominant purpose or component whereas
         the other is merely incidental, the act must be based on a single legal basis, namely that required by the main or predominant
         purpose or component. By way of exception, if it is established that the measure simultaneously pursues several objectives
         which are inseparably linked without one being secondary and indirect in relation to the other, the measure must be founded
         on the corresponding different legal bases.  see paras 38-2.
 Even accepting that the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States achieved through Article of the agreements concluded
         between the European Community on the one hand and the Republic of Bulgaria and the Republic of Hungary on the other, establishing
         certain conditions for the carriage of goods by road and the promotion of combined transport, is necessary in order to ensure
         the establishment and the functioning of the internal market, as required under Article EC if that article is to be taken
         as the legal basis for a Community measure, in any event the aspect of those agreements which concerns the harmonisation of
         fiscal laws is, in the light of their aim and their content, only secondary and indirect in nature compared with the transport
         policy objective which they pursue. The principle of equal treatment in the area of road vehicle taxation and other fiscal
         charges set out in Article 8(1) and the various fiscal exemptions laid down in Article 8(2) and (4) are closely linked to
         the simplification of transit through Bulgaria and Hungary for the purpose of facilitating the carriage of goods between Greece
         and other Member States. Moreover, Article of the agreements, concerning their scope, characterises fiscal measures as 
         
         supporting measures. It follows that the Council should have used Article EC alone, in conjunction with Article 300(3) EC, as the legal basis
         for the decisions on the conclusion of the agreements. Since Article EC is referred to as the legal basis for the decisions in question, they must be annulled, since, in principle,
         the incorrect use of a Treaty article as a legal basis which results in the substitution of unanimity for qualified majority
         voting in the Council cannot be considered a purely formal defect since a change in voting method may affect the content of
         the act adopted.  see paras 48-50, 52-3.
 In order to avoid any legal uncertainty as regards the applicability of the international commitments entered into by the
         Community within the Community's legal order, the effects of Decisions 2001/and 2001/concerning the conclusion of
         agreements between the European Community on the one hand and the Republic of Bulgaria and the Republic of Hungary on the
         other, establishing certain conditions for the carriage of goods by road and the promotion of combined transport, must be
         maintained until the measures necessary to implement the judgment annulling them have been adopted. The content of international
         agreements cannot be amended unilaterally, without new negotiations being undertaken by the contracting parties.  see paras 55, JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)September (1)
((EC/Bulgaria and EC/Hungary Agreements – Carriage of goods by road and combined transport – Taxation – Legal basis – Articles EC and EC))
 In Case C-211/01, 
            
Commission of the European Communities, represented initially by M. Wolfcarius and, subsequently, by W. Wils, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, 
v
Council of the European Union,   represented by A. Lopes Sabino and E. Karlsson, acting as Agents,
            
defendant,  supported byFederal Republic of Germany,   represented by W.-D. Plessing and M. Lumma, acting as Agents,and byGrand Duchy of Luxembourg,   represented by J. Faltz and N. Mackel, acting as Agents,
            
interveners, 
 APPLICATION for the annulment of Council Decisions 2001/265/EC of March concerning the conclusion of the agreement
            between the European Community and the Republic of Bulgaria establishing certain conditions for the carriage of goods by road
            and the promotion of combined transport (OJ L 108, p. 4), and 2001/266/EC of March concerning the conclusion
            of the agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Hungary establishing certain conditions for the carriage
            of goods by road and the promotion of combined transport (OJ L 108, p. 27), but only in so far as they are based on Article
            EC and without altering their effects, which should be maintained,
            
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),,
 composed of: M. Wathelet (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, C.W.A. Timmermans, D.A.O. Edward, A. La Pergola and S. von Bahr, Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: S. Alber, Registrar: H.A. Rühl, Principal Administrator,  
            
having regard to the Report for the Hearing, after hearing oral argument from the parties at the hearing on February 2003, at which the Commission was represented by
            W. Wils and the Council by A. Lopes Sabino,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By application lodged at the Court Registry on May 2001, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action under
         the first subparagraph of Article EC for the annulment of Council Decisions 2001/265/EC of March concerning the
         conclusion of the agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Bulgaria establishing certain conditions for
         the carriage of goods by road and the promotion of combined transport (OJ L 108, p. 4) and 2001/266/EC of March concerning the conclusion of the agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Hungary establishing certain
         conditions for the carriage of goods by road and the promotion of combined transport (OJ L 108, p. 27,  
         the contested decisions), but only in so far as they are based on Article EC and without altering their effects, which should be maintained. 
         
Subject-matter of the proceedings
            
 In December 1995, the Council authorised the Commission to negotiate agreements with the Republic of Bulgaria, the Republic
         of Hungary and Romania for the purpose of establishing certain conditions for the carriage of goods by road and the promotion
         of combined transport and to facilitate the transit of road vehicles through the territory of the contracting parties. 
         
            
 The agreements thus concluded were initialled with the Republic of Bulgaria in December and with the Republic of Hungary
         in April respectively.  At the time the application was made, negotiations with Romania were still under way.  
         
            
 The Commission forwarded to the Council two proposals for a decision, based on Article EC, concerning the signature of
         those agreements (hereinafter  
         the agreements) and accompanied by proposals for their subsequent conclusion and for the allocation between Member States of transit authorisations
         (OJ C E, p. and p. 52).  
         
            
 In the light of Article of each of the agreements, entitled  
         Fiscal provisions, the Council authorised their signing by a decision of March which added as a legal basis, in addition to Article
         EC, Article EC on the harmonisation of legislation concerning turnover taxes, excise duties and other forms of indirect
         taxation.  By contrast with Article EC, which refers to the procedure in Article EC and provides for consultation with
         the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, Article EC provides that the Council is to act unanimously
         on a proposal from the Commission and after consulting the European Parliament and the Economic and Social Committee. 
         
            
 On March the Council unanimously adopted the contested decisions on the legal basis of Articles EC and EC in
         conjunction with the second subparagraph of Article 300(3) EC. 
         
            
 Since it was of the opinion that the Council was wrong to take Article EC as the legal basis, the Commission brought the
         present action, claiming that the Court should annul the contested decisions in so far as they are based on that article and
         should maintain the effects of the agreements until the Council has adopted new concluding acts. 
         
            
 By orders of and October 2001, the President of the Court gave the Federal Republic of Germany and the Grand Duchy of
         Luxembourg leave to intervene in support of the form of order sought by the Council. 
         Content of the agreements
            
 The agreements are almost identical in content.  According to their respective preambles, they contribute to the  
         completion of the internal market and the  
         implementation of the common transport policy by ensuring that Community goods in transit through Bulgaria and Hungary can  
         flow as quickly and efficiently as possible without hindrance or discrimination (second recital in the preamble) while ensuring the coordinated development of transport flows respecting the environment
         and the  
         principle of sustainable mobility (fourth recital). 
         
            
 Article of each of the agreements provides that its aim is to promote cooperation between the Contracting Parties on the
         transport of goods and, in particular, transit traffic by road, and to ensure for this purpose that transport between and
         through the territories of the Contracting Parties is developed in a coordinated manner. 
         
            
 Under their Article 2: 
         
1.
 Cooperation shall cover transport of goods by road and combined transport.
         
2.
 In this connection, the scope of this Agreement shall cover in particular:
         
─
 market access for transit traffic in the field of transport of goods by road, 
         
─
 legal and administrative supporting measures including commercial, taxation, social and technical measures, 
         
─
 cooperation in developing a transport system which,  
         inter alia, meets environmental needs, 
         
─
 a regular exchange of information on the development of the transport policies of the Contracting Parties.
         
            
 Title II of each of the agreements is devoted to  
         Combined transport, and Title III to  
         Road transport.  The latter title, in the agreement concluded with the Republic of Hungary, includes Article 8, entitled  
         Fiscal provisions, which provides that: In the case of transport operations in accordance with this Agreement:
         
1.
 the Contracting Parties shall ensure that the principle of non-discrimination in terms of nationality or place of establishment
         is applied to road vehicle taxation, fiscal burdens, tolls and any other form of user charges made for the use of road transport
         infrastructure; 
         
2.
 road vehicles registered in one Contracting Party shall be exempted from all vehicle taxes and charges levied on the circulation
         or possession of vehicles as well as from all special taxes or charges levied on transport operations in the territory of
         the other Contracting Party. Road vehicles shall not be exempted from payment of taxes and charges on motor fuel, without prejudice to paragraph 4, and
         of road tolls and user charges levied for the use of infrastructure; 
         
3.
 the Contracting Parties shall ensure that tolls and any other form of user charges may not be imposed at the same time for
         the use of a single road section.  However, Contracting Parties may also impose tolls on networks where user charges are levied,
         for the use of bridges, tunnels and mountain passes; 
         
4.
 the following items shall be exempt from custom duty and from all taxes and charges at the time of importation into the territory
         of the other Contracting Party: 
         
(a)
 fuel contained in the tanks of road vehicles at the time of importation into the territory of the other Contracting Party,
         where the tanks are those designed by the manufacturer for the type of road vehicle in question; 
         
(b)
 fuel held in the tanks of trailers and semi-trailers used for the cooling systems of refrigerators; 
         
(c)
 lubricants in quantities required for use during the journey; 
         
(d)
 spare parts and tools required for the repair of a vehicle which has broken down while performing an international road transport
         operation.  The spare parts that are replaced should be re-exported or destroyed under the control of the competent customs
         authority of the other Contracting Party; 
         
5.
 without prejudice to the second subparagraph of paragraph 2, if the weights, dimensions or axle load of a vehicle exceed the
         maximum limits in force in the territory of Hungary while the vehicle conforms to the provisions as laid down in Directive
         96/53/EC on weights and dimensions, the vehicle shall not be subjected to any special charges provided it keeps to the main
         transit routes concerned in Hungary as specified in Annex 5.
         
            
 Article of the agreement concluded with the Republic of Bulgaria is worded in identical terms, with the exception of the
         second subparagraph of paragraph 2, drafted as follows: Road vehicles shall not be exempted from payment of taxes and charges on motor fuel, road tolls and user charges levied for
         the use of infrastructure,and the beginning of paragraph and paragraph 4(b), which reads:the following items shall be exempt from customs duty and from all taxes and charges:...(b) fuel held in the tanks of trailers and semi-trailers used for the cooling systems of refrigerators.
         
            
 Title IV of the agreements is devoted to the simplification of formalities, and Title V contains final provisions concerning
         the widening of the scope of the agreements, the creation of a joint committee, infringements, the duration, denunciation,
         languages and entry into force of the agreements, and the status of the annexes. 
         Substance Arguments of the parties
         
            
 The Commission claims that the contested decisions should have been based solely on Article EC. 
         
            
 First, it points out the wide scope acknowledged to apply to the common transport policy in the light of Articles 3(f) EC,
         EC and EC and the case-law of the Court (Case 22/Commission v  
         Council [1971] ECR 263, paragraphs to 26, and Opinion 1/[1977] ECR 741; Opinion 1/[1994] ECR I-5267, paragraph and Opinion
         2/[1995] ECR I-521). 
         
            
 The wording of Article EC, under which  
         [t]he objectives of this Treaty shall ... be pursued by Member States within the framework of a common transport policy, and of Article EC, which allows the Community to adopt any  
         other appropriate provisions, argues however to that effect. 
         
            
 In support of that interpretation, the Commission refers to a number of internal Community measures in the field of transport
         which have a single legal basis although they include related provisions concerning vocational training, environmental protection
         or noise control (see Council Directive 94/58/EC of November on the minimum level of training of seafarers, OJ L 319, p. 28; Directive 2000/59/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of November on port reception facilities
         for ship-generated waste and cargo residues, OJ L 332, p. 81; and Council Directive 92/14/EEC of March on the
         limitation of the operation of aeroplanes covered by Part II, Chapter 2, Volume of Annex to the Convention on International
         Civil Aviation, second edition (1988), OJ L 76, p. 21).  The Commission also makes reference to two international agreements
         concluded on the basis of Article of the Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) although they contain fiscal provisions
         (Council Decision 93/409/EEC concerning the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Economic Community and the Republic
         of Slovenia in the field of transport (OJ L 189, p. 160) and Council Decision 97/832/EC of November concerning
         the conclusion of an Agreement between the European Community and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in the field of
         transport (OJ L 348, p. 169)). 
         
            
 As regards Article of the agreements, the Commission takes the view that, contrary to what its title might suggest, it contains
         few provisions of a fiscal nature. Those provisions are limited to recalling the principle of non-discrimination in terms
         of nationality as far as concerns road vehicle taxation and any other form of user charge levied on the use of road transport
         infrastructure (paragraph 1); as regards road vehicles registered in one Contracting Party, an exemption is provided for taxes
         levied on circulation and transport operations in the territory of the other Contracting Party, except as regards taxes on
         motor fuel, road tolls and charges levied for the use of infrastructure (paragraph 2); finally, an exemption is provided for
         fuel contained in tanks, lubricants required for use during the journey and the spare parts required for the repair of a vehicle
         which has broken down while performing an international road transport operation (paragraph 4).  
         
            
 The other paragraphs do not relate to taxes or relate only to co-contracting third country parties.  First, since the provisions
         relating to tolls and custom duties are not of a fiscal nature, they do not come under Article EC; nor do customs duties
         (and taxes with equivalent effect) come under Community fiscal law, but rather under legislation relating to the customs union;
         tolls are not taxes but rather constitute consideration for a service supplied to the user of road infrastructure (see to
         that effect Case C-276/Commission v  
         France [2000] ECR I-6251,  
         inter alia paragraphs 32, and 36, and Case C-83/Commission v  
         Spain [2001] ECR I-445, paragraph 11).  Secondly, Article 8(5) of the agreements contains a commitment by the co-contracting third
         country parties not to subject to any special charges Member State lorries in transit the weight and dimensions of which do
         not exceed the limits in force in Hungary and Bulgaria and which conform to the provisions laid down in Council Directive
         96/53/EC of July laying down for certain road vehicles circulating within the Community the maximum authorised dimensions
         in national and international traffic and the maximum authorised weights in international traffic (OJ L 235, p. 59).
         
         
            
 The Commission infers from the foregoing that Article of the agreements contains secondary accompanying measures which contribute
         to achieving the objective linked to transport policy, namely to simplify the carriage of goods by road and the promotion
         of combined transport between Greece and the other Member States, which is also in accordance with the negotiating directives
         which the Council sent to the Commission. 
         
            
 Since it is limited to prohibiting discrimination on grounds of nationality and preventing double taxation, Article of the
         agreements does not contain any harmonisation measure and cannot in any circumstances be detached from the agreements.  The
         Commission adds that the fiscal aspects referred to in Article of those agreements have already been subject to harmonisation
         measures at Community level (see Directive 1999/62/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of June on the
         charging of heavy goods vehicles for the use of certain infrastructures (OJ L 187, p. 42) and Council Directive 92/12/EEC
         of February on the general arrangements for products subject to excise duty and on the holding, movement and monitoring
         of such products (OJ L 76, p. 1), Council Directive 92/81/EEC of October on the harmonisation of the structures
         of excise duties on mineral oils (OJ L 316, p. 12) and Council Directive 92/82/EEC of October on the approximation
         of the rates of excise duties on mineral oils (OJ L 316, p. 19)). 
         
            
 Finally, the Commission points out that it is settled case-law that the choice of the legal basis for a Community measure
         must rest on objective factors amenable to judicial review, which include in particular the aim and the content of the measure
         (Case C-42/Parliament v  
         Council [1999] ECR I-869, paragraph 36, and Case C-269/Commission v  
         Council [2000] ECR I-2257, paragraph 43).  However, measures or actions provided for in Community legislation sometimes pursue different
         aims, to which distinct legal bases are applicable.  In such circumstances it is necessary, in order to determine the appropriate
         legal basis, to consider whether the measures in question relate largely or principally to a particular field of action, having
         only incidental effects on other policies, or whether both aspects are equally essential.  If the first hypothesis is correct,
         recourse to a single legal basis is sufficient (Case C-70/Parliament v  
         Council [1991] ECR I-4529, paragraph 17, and Case C-271/Parliament v  
         Council [1996] ECR I-1689, paragraphs and 33); if the second is correct, the institution is required to adopt the measure on the
         basis of both of the provisions from which its competence derives.  However, no such dual basis is possible where the procedures
         laid down for each legal basis are incompatible with one another (see,  
         inter alia, Case C-300/Commission v  
         Council [1991] ECR I-2867, paragraphs and 21,  
         Titanium dioxide, and Joined Cases C-164/and C-165/Parliament v  
         Council [1999] ECR I-1139, paragraph 14). 
         
            
 In this case, the Commission considers that transport undoubtedly constitutes the main component of the agreements.  Moreover,
         the legal bases of Articles EC and EC are incompatible in terms of the rule in  
         Titanium dioxide, inasmuch as Article EC requires unanimity in the Council and mere consultation of the Parliament.  According to the Commission,
         it is true that the question of the Parliament's rights and powers has not arisen in the present case in view of the use of
         the procedure in Article 300(3) EC, which governs the conclusion of international agreements.  Nevertheless, the requirement
         for unanimity in the Council would radically alter the procedure for concluding transit agreements, which are subject to qualified
         majority voting as a matter of course. 
         
            
 The Council contends that, in the light of Article of the agreements, it was necessary to conclude them on the dual legal
         basis of Articles EC and EC. 
         
            
 The Council maintains that the phrase  
         any other appropriate provisions in Article 71(1)(d) EC does not authorise the Community legislature to reject specific legal bases where distinct and autonomous
         objectives are being pursued.  In the present case, the dual legal basis chosen by the Council is warranted inasmuch as the
         aim and content of the agreements negotiated seek, distinctly, autonomously and separately, to achieve a transport-related
         objective and a fiscal objective and it is not possible to consider one as the principal and the other as a subsidiary objective.
         
         
            
 Article of each of the agreements, which leads to harmonisation of the laws of the Member States in the areas of road vehicle
         taxation and fiscal burdens (paragraph 1), vehicle taxes and charges or special taxes or charges levied on transport operations
         (paragraph 2) and taxes on fuel contained in tanks (paragraph 4(a) and (b)), lubricants (paragraph 4(c)) and spare parts (paragraph
         4(d)), could have been subject to a separate agreement concluded by means of an autonomous decision.  Procedural economy cannot
         disregard the conferred powers and internal procedures of the Community.  
         
            
 In support of its argument, the Council cites a large number of measures which come under the common transport policy and
         which, because they contain fiscal provisions that can be detached from the measure in question, take Article of the EC
         Treaty (now Article EC) or Article EC as their legal basis. 
         
            
 It also refers to the judgment in Case C-21/Parliament v  
         Council [1995] ECR I-1827, by which the Court annulled Council Directive 93/89/EEC of October on the application by Member
         States of taxes on certain vehicles used for the carriage of goods by road and tolls and charges for the use of certain infrastructures
         (OJ L 279, p. 32) without calling in question its dual legal basis, namely, Articles and of the Treaty. 
         
            
 To the same effect, the Council states that in Case C-268/Portugal v  
         Council [1996] ECR I-6177, paragraph 39, the Court held that the fact that a development cooperation agreement contains clauses concerning
         various specific matters cannot alter the characterisation of an agreement, which must be determined having regard to its
         essential object and not in terms of individual clauses, provided that those clauses do not impose such extensive obligations
         concerning the specific matters referred to that those obligations in fact constitute objectives distinct from those of development
         cooperation.  However, such is precisely the effect of Article in each of the agreements. 
         
            
 The two international agreements with the Republic of Slovenia and with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia referred
         to by the Commission cannot support its position inasmuch as the provisions of those agreements which are at issue do not
         contain binding measures with effective consequences for the tax systems of the contracting parties, involving harmonisation
         of the laws of the Member States on the legal basis of Article of the Treaty.  The Council maintains that Article of
         the Treaty is therefore the sole legal basis necessary for the conclusion of those agreements. 
         
            
 As regards the argument relying on  
         Titanium dioxide, cited above, relating to the allegedly irreconcilable nature of the procedures laid down in Articles EC and EC, the
         Council points out that the Treaty has been amended since that judgment was given in order to allow the Council to act by
         unanimity under the procedure laid down in Article EC, for example in the field of cultural policy (see Article EC).
          The case-law in  
         Titanium dioxide is therefore outdated, since nothing now prevents the adoption of a measure which brings together unanimity within the Council
         and the co-decision procedure.  
         
            
 The Council adds that in any event, as regards the contested decisions, Article 300(3) EC does not require that the Parliament
         be consulted even in the case where agreements are concluded on the sole legal basis of Article EC.  
         
            
 The German and Luxembourg Governments support the Council's arguments.  They take the view that Article 8, paragraphs 1, and of which would result in a harmonisation of indirect taxes in the Member States, is autonomous and separable from the
         rest of the agreements. 
         
            
 The German Government adds that under the Treaty fiscal policy is horizontal in nature.  Therefore, measures of fiscal policy
         frequently relate to other fields, such as energy.  However, horizontal authorisation rules always take precedence over sectoral
         legal bases such as Article EC.  For that reason, where there is a conflict between the two horizontal authorisation rules
         contained in Article EC concerning the approximation of national laws in order to achieve the internal market and Article
         EC, the authors of the Treaty explicitly provided in Article 95(1) EC that that article applies save where otherwise provided
         in the Treaty. 
         
            
 The German and Luxembourg Governments maintain that the Commission's argument, based on a broad interpretation of Article
         71(1)(d) EC, undermines the specific authorisation rule contained in Article EC.  
         
            
 Finally, like the Council, the German and Luxembourg Governments consider that the  
         Titanium dioxide case-law is outdated in the light of the inclusion in the Treaty of legal bases which provide for the use of both the co-decision
         procedure and unanimity in the Council. 
          Findings of the Court
         
            
 It is settled case-law that the choice of the legal basis for a Community measure must rest on objective factors amenable
         to judicial review, which include in particular the aim and the content of the measure (see,  
         inter alia, Case C-300/Commission v  
         Council, cited above, paragraph 10, and Case C-269/Commission v  
         Council, cited above, paragraph 43). 
         
            
 If examination of a Community measure reveals that it pursues a twofold purpose or that it has a twofold component and if
         one of these is identifiable as the main or predominant purpose or component whereas the other is merely incidental, the act
         must be based on a single legal basis, namely that required by the main or predominant purpose or component (see, to that
         effect,  
         inter alia Case C-155/Commission v  
         Council [1993] ECR I-939, paragraphs and 21,  and Case C-36/Spain v  
         Council [2001] ECR I-779, paragraph 59). 
         
            
 By way of exception, if it is established that the measure simultaneously pursues several objectives which are inseparably
         linked without one being secondary and indirect in relation to the other, the measure must be founded on the corresponding
         legal bases (see,  
         inter alia,  Case C-336/Huber  [2002] ECR I-7699, paragraph 31; Case C-281/Commission v  
         Council [2002] ECR I-2049, paragraph 35, and Opinion 2/[2001] ECR 1-9713, paragraph 23). 
         
            
 In the present case, it is not in dispute that the agreements pursue a transport policy objective and that their content relates
         to that policy.  Nor do the parties disagree as to the fact that the agreements contain provisions of a fiscal nature. Thus,
         the Commission does not deny that certain provisions of Article of the agreements, namely paragraphs 1, and 4, on which
         the Council relies to maintain its position, are of such a nature.  
         
            
 On the other hand, the parties disagree as to the extent to which the aim and the content of Article of the agreements justify,
         for the purpose of their conclusion, recourse to Article EC as a legal basis in addition to Article EC. 
         
            
 It is therefore appropriate, having identified the fiscal provisions in the agreements, to determine their purpose and to
         ascertain whether it is different from that which relates to transport policy, without being secondary and indirect as compared
         to the latter, so as to justify taking Article EC in addition to Article EC as the basis for the adoption of the contested
         decisions. 
         
            
 In that regard, it should be pointed out that the second indent of Article 2(2) of the agreements, which defines their scope,
         refers to  
         legal and administrative supporting measures, including ... taxation ... measures. 
         
            
 Those measures are specified in Article of the agreements. 
         
            
 It is apparent from examination of that article that only paragraphs (1), (2) and (4) have a fiscal content in that they concern,
         first, the application of the principle of equal treatment in terms of road vehicle taxation and other fiscal charges and,
         secondly, the granting of exemptions from taxes levied on the circulation or possession of vehicles and from taxes levied
         on transport operations, fuel contained in tanks, lubricants, spare parts and tools required in case of a breakdown. 
         
            
 Such provisions, in particular those relating to fiscal exemptions, serve to harmonise the laws of the Member States concerning
         indirect taxes for the purpose of implementing the agreements. 
         
            
 Even accepting that the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States achieved through Article of the agreements is necessary
         in order to ensure the establishment and the functioning of the internal market, as required under Article EC if that article
         is to be taken as the legal basis for a Community measure, it must be stated that in any event the aspect of the agreements
         which concerns the harmonisation of fiscal laws is, in the light of their aim and their content, only secondary and indirect
         in nature compared with the transport policy objective which they pursue. 
         
            
 The principle of equal treatment in the area of road vehicle taxation and other fiscal charges set out in Article 8(1) and
         the various fiscal exemptions laid down in Article 8(2) and (4) are closely linked to the simplification of transit through
         Bulgaria and Hungary for the purpose of facilitating the carriage of goods between Greece and other Member States.  Moreover,
         Article of the agreements, on their scope, characterises fiscal measures as  
         supporting measures, as is apparent from paragraph of the present judgment. 
         
            
 It follows from the foregoing considerations that the Council should have used Article EC alone, in conjunction with Article
         300(3) EC, as the legal basis for the contested decisions. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, there is no need to examine the Commission's other arguments concerning the scope of Articles EC
         and EC in relation to other objectives of the Treaty, or arguments relating to  
         Titanium dioxide, cited above. 
         
            
 In principle, the incorrect use of a Treaty article as a legal basis which results in the substitution of unanimity for qualified
         majority voting in the Council cannot be considered a purely formal defect since a change in voting method may affect the
         content of the act adopted. 
         
            
 In conclusion, since Article EC is referred to as the legal basis for the contested decisions, those decisions must be
         annulled.  
         Limitation of the effects of the judgment
            
 The Commission and the Council have asked, if the application were to be allowed, that the effects of the judgment be limited
         so that the effects of the agreements may be maintained until the Council has adopted new concluding measures.  
         
            
 It is common ground that the content of international agreements cannot be amended unilaterally, without new negotiations
         being undertaken by the contracting parties. 
         
            
 Moreover, the parties agree that the material content of the agreements has in no way been affected by the dispute between
         them and make it known that they have no intention of re-opening negotiations with the other contracting parties. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, in order to avoid any legal uncertainty as regards the applicability of the international commitments
         entered into by the Community within the Community's legal order, the effects of the contested decisions must be maintained
         until the measures necessary to implement the present judgment have been adopted. 
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party's pleadings.  Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Council has been unsuccessful,
         the latter must be ordered to pay the costs. 
         
            
 Under the second subparagraph of Article 69(4) of the Rules of Procedure, the Federal Republic of Germany and the Grand Duchy
         of Luxembourg, which have intervened in the proceedings, are to bear their own costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
 hereby: 
         
1.
 Annuls Council Decision 2001/265/EC of March concerning the conclusion of the agreement between the European Community
               and the Republic of Bulgaria establishing certain conditions for the carriage of goods by road and the promotion of combined
               transport and 2001/266/EC of March concerning the conclusion of the agreement between the European Community and the
               Republic of Hungary establishing certain conditions for the carriage of goods by road and the promotion of combined transport;
               
2.
 Declares that the effects of the decisions are to be maintained until the measures necessary to implement the present judgment
               have been adopted; 
3.
 Orders the Council of the European Union to pay the costs; 
4.
 Orders the Federal Republic of Germany and the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg to bear their own costs. 
Wathelet
Timmermans 
Edward 
La Pergola
von Bahr 
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on September 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
M. Wathelet  
Registrar
President of the Fifth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: French.
Top  
 