
Case C-325/Ismail Derin
v
Landkreis Darmstadt-Dieburg
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Verwaltungsgericht Darmstadt)
(EEC-Turkey Association – Article of the Additional Protocol – Articles 6, and of Decision No 1/of the Association Council – Right of free access to employment under the second indent of the first paragraph of Article – Corollary right of residence – Turkish national over the age of years who is no longer dependent on his parents − Criminal convictions − Conditions governing
         the loss of acquired rights − Compatibility with the rule that the Republic of Turkey is not to receive more favourable treatment
         than that applicable between Member States)
      
Opinion of Advocate General Bot delivered on January Judgment of the Court (First Chamber), July Summary of the Judgment
International agreements – EEC-Turkey Association Agreement – Association Council established by the EEC-Turkey Association
            Agreement – Decision No 1/– Family reunification – Child of a Turkish worker having acquired the right of free access to
            employment 
(Additional Protocol to the EEC-Turkey Association Agreement, Art. 59; Decision No 1/of the EEC-Turkey Association Council,
            Arts 7, first para., and 14(1))
It follows from both the scheme and the objective of Decision No 1/on the development of the Association, adopted by the
         Association Council established by the Agreement establishing an Association between the European Economic Community and Turkey
         that a Turkish national, who was authorised while he was a child to enter the territory of a Member State in order to join
         his family and who has acquired the right of free access to any paid employment of his choice under the second indent of the
         first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/80, loses the right of residence in the host Member State which is a corollary
         of that right of free access only in two situations, that is: 
      
–       where he constitutes, on account of his own conduct, a genuine and serious threat to public policy, public security or public
         health, in accordance with Article 14(1) of that decision, or 
      
–       if he leaves the territory of the Member State concerned for a significant length of time without legitimate reason, 
even though he is over years of age, is no longer dependent on his parents, but lives independently in the Member State
         concerned, and was not available to join the labour force for several years because he was during that period serving an unsuspended
         sentence of imprisonment.
      
 Such an interpretation is not inconsistent with the requirements of Article of the Additional Protocol to the Association
         Agreement, whereby Turkey may not receive more favourable treatment than that applicable between Member States.
      
(see paras 54, 57, 75, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
July (*)
      
(EEC-Turkey Association – Article of the Additional Protocol – Articles 6, and of Decision No 1/of the Association Council – Right of free access to employment under the second indent of the first paragraph of Article – Corollary right of residence – Turkish national over the age of years who is no longer dependent on his parents − Criminal convictions − Conditions governing
         the loss of acquired rights − Compatibility with the rule that the Republic of Turkey is not to receive more favourable treatment
         than that applicable between Member States)
      
In Case C‑325/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Verwaltungsgericht Darmstadt (Germany), made by decisions
         of August and of September 2005, received at the Court on August and September respectively, in
         the proceedings
      
Ismail Derin
v
Landkreis Darmstadt-Dieburg,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann, President of the Chamber, R. Schintgen (Rapporteur), A. Tizzano, M. Ilešič and E. Levits, Judges,
Advocate General: Y. Bot,
Registrar: H. von Holstein, Deputy Registrar,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on November 2006,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       the German Government, by M. Lumma and C. Schulze-Bahr, acting as Agents,
–       the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and W. Ferrante, avvocato dello Stato,
–       the United Kingdom Government, by S. Nwaokolo, acting as Agent, and T. Ward, Barrister,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by G. Rozet and I. Kaufmann-Bühler, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2007,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article of the Additional Protocol signed at Brussels
         on November and concluded, approved and confirmed on behalf of the Community by Council Regulation (EEC) No 2760/of December (OJ C 113, p. 17; ‘the Additional Protocol’) and of Articles 6, and of Decision No 1/of the
         Association Council of September on the development of the Association (‘Decision No 1/80’). The Association Council
         was set up by the Agreement establishing an Association between the European Economic Community and Turkey, signed at Ankara
         on September by the Republic of Turkey, of the one part, and by the Member States of the EEC and the Community, of
         the other part, and concluded, approved and confirmed on behalf of the Community by Council Decision 64/732/EEC of December
         (OJ C 113, p. 1; ‘the Association Agreement’).
      
The reference was made in proceedings between Mr Derin, a Turkish national, and the administrative district Darmstadt-Dieburg,
         regarding a procedure for expulsion from German territory.
      
 Legal framework
 EEC-Turkey Association 
In accordance with Article 2(1) of the Association Agreement, the aim of the agreement is to promote the continuous and balanced
         strengthening of trade and economic relations between the Contracting Parties, including in the labour sector, inter alia
         by progressively securing freedom of movement for workers (Article of the agreement), in order to improve the standard
         of living of the Turkish people and to facilitate the accession of the Republic of Turkey to the Community at a later date
         (fourth recital in the preamble and Article of the agreement). 
      
To that end, the Association Agreement provides for a preparatory stage enabling the Republic of Turkey to strengthen its
         economy with aid from the Community (Article of the agreement), a transitional stage, during which a customs union is to
         be progressively established and economic policies are to be aligned more closely (Article of the agreement) and a final
         stage which is to be based on the customs union and is to entail closer coordination of the economic policies of the Contracting
         Parties (Article of the agreement).
      
Article of the Association Agreement is worded as follows:
‘To ensure the implementation and the progressive development of the Association, the Contracting Parties shall meet in a
         Council of Association which shall act within the powers conferred upon it by this Agreement.’
      
Article of the Association Agreement, which appears in Chapter (‘Other economic provisions’) of Title II (‘Implementation
         of the transitional stage’), provides:
      
‘The Contracting Parties agree to be guided by Articles [EC], [EC] and [EC] for the purpose of progressively securing
         freedom of movement for workers between them.’
      
Under Article 22(1) of the Association Agreement:
‘In order to attain the objectives of this Agreement the Council of Association shall have the power to take decisions in
         the cases provided for therein. Each of the Parties shall take the measures necessary to implement the decisions taken. …’
      
The Additional Protocol – which, in accordance with Article thereof, forms an integral part of the Association Agreement
         – lays down, as is stated in Article 1, the conditions, arrangements and timetables for implementing the transitional stage
         referred to in Article of the Association Agreement.
      
The Additional Protocol contains a Title II (‘Movement of persons and services’), Chapter I of which relates to ‘Workers’.
         
      
Article of the Additional Protocol, which is part of Chapter I, provides that freedom of movement for workers between Member
         States of the Community and Turkey is to be secured by progressive stages in accordance with the principles set out in Article
         of the Association Agreement between the end of the 12th and the 22nd year after the entry into force of that Agreement
         and that the Association Council is to decide on the rules necessary to that end.
      
Article of the Additional Protocol, which appears in Title IV (‘General and final provisions’), is worded as follows:
‘In the fields covered by this Protocol Turkey shall not receive more favourable treatment than that which Member States grant
         to one another pursuant to the Treaty establishing the Community.’
      
Decision No 1/seeks, according to the third recital of its preamble, to improve, in the social field, the treatment accorded
         workers and members of their families in relation to the arrangements laid down by Decision No 2/which had been adopted
         by the Association Council on December 1976.
      
Articles 6, and of Decision No 1/appear in Section (‘Questions relating to employment and the free movement of workers’)
         of Chapter II (‘Social provisions’) of the decision. 
      
According to Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80: 
‘Subject to Article on free access to employment for members of his family, a Turkish worker duly registered as belonging
         to the labour force of a Member State:
      
–       shall be entitled in that Member State, after one year’s legal employment, to the renewal of his permit to work for the same
         employer, if a job is available; 
      
–       shall be entitled in that Member State, after three years of legal employment and subject to the priority to be given to workers
         of Member States of the Community, to respond to another offer of employment, with an employer of his choice, made under normal
         conditions and registered with the employment services of that State, for the same occupation;
      
–       shall enjoy free access in that Member State to any paid employment of his choice, after four years of legal employment.’
         
      
Article of Decision No 1/provides:
‘The members of the family of a Turkish worker duly registered as belonging to the labour force of a Member State, who have
         been authorised to join him:
      
–       shall be entitled – subject to the priority to be given to workers of Member States of the Community – to respond to any offer
         of employment after they have been legally resident for at least three years in that Member State; 
      
–       shall enjoy free access to any paid employment of their choice provided they have been legally resident there for at least
         five years. 
      
Children of Turkish workers who have completed a course of vocational training in the host country may respond to any offer
         of employment there, irrespective of the length of time they have been resident in that Member State, provided one of their
         parents has been legally employed in the Member State concerned for at least three years.’
      
Article 14(1) of Decision No 1/provides:
‘The provisions of this section shall be applied subject to limitations justified on grounds of public policy, public security
         or public health.’
      
 Other provisions of Community law
Article 10(1) and (2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 1612/of October on freedom of movement for workers within
         the Community (OJ, English Special Edition (II), p. 475), as amended by Council Regulation (EEC) No 2434/of July
         (OJ L 245, p. 1) (‘Regulation No 1612/68’), state as follows:
      
1.      The following shall, irrespective of their nationality, have the right to install themselves with a worker who is a national
         of one Member State and who is employed in the territory of another Member State: 
      
(a)      his spouse and their descendants who are under the age of years or are dependants;
(b)      dependent relatives in the ascending line of the worker and his spouse.
2.      Member States shall facilitate the admission of any member of the family not coming within the provisions of paragraph if
         dependent on the worker referred to above or living under his roof in the country whence he comes.’
      
Under Article of Regulation No 1612/68:
‘Where a national of a Member State is pursuing an activity as an employed or self-employed person in the territory of another
         Member State, his spouse and those of the children who are under the age of years or dependent on him shall have the right
         to take up any activity as an employed person throughout the territory of that same State, even if they are not nationals
         of any Member State.’
      
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
It is apparent from the order for reference that Mr Derin, born on September 1973, was authorised to join his parents on
         the territory of the Federal Republic of Germany on July in order to live with them as a family. 
      
Mr Derin’s father and mother have been legally employed in Germany for six and twenty-four years respectively. 
After arriving in Germany, Mr Derin attended primary school, from August until July 1988, and, from August to July
         1990, a vocational school. He completed his schooling in the course of by passing the Lower Secondary Examination (‘mittlere
         Reife’). 
      
Following completion of his education, Mr Derin was legally employed successively by several employers, but the period of
         employment with the same employer was always less than one year.
      
From to 1996, Mr Derin was legally self-employed.
On September 2001, he began retraining as a professional driver, but this was interrupted when he was sent to prison. He
         was nevertheless employed once more with effect from January 2005.
      
Mr Derin has held a German residence permit of unlimited duration since December 1990.
In autumn 1994, Mr Derin left the family home and set up house on his own. His wife, a Turkish national, was authorised to
         join him in Germany on February 2002. 
      
Since August 1994, Mr Derin has been sentenced on several occasions to fines for various offences and, by judgment of December
         2002, he was sentenced to a term of imprisonment of more than two-and-a-half years for smuggling foreign nationals into Germany.
      
On November 2003, a decision was taken to expel him from German territory for an unlimited period. On leaving prison, he
         was to have been escorted directly to the frontier.
      
The competent national authority is of the view that Mr Derin satisfies the conditions for expulsion in principle under Article
         47(2)(1) of the Law on Foreign Nationals (Ausländergesetz; ‘the AuslG’), according to which a foreign national is, in general,
         to be expelled if he has been given an unsuspended sentence of imprisonment for committing one or more intentional crimes
         by a judgment which has become final. Given however that Mr Derin holds a residence permit of unlimited duration in Germany
         and that he entered that Member State when he was a minor, that authority considers that he has enhanced protection from expulsion
         under Article 48(1)(2) of the AuslG and can therefore be expelled only on serious grounds of public security or public policy.
         According to the authority, it was bound in this case to take the decision concerning expulsion in exercise of its discretion,
         in accordance with the second sentence of Article 47(3) of the AuslG.
      
In that regard, the competent national authority found that, although Mr Derin had resided in Germany since childhood, he
         had nevertheless not succeeded in integrating in German society. He had first been convicted of a criminal offence in and had re-offended continually thereafter. He had no appreciation of doing wrong, since his behaviour had not changed as
         a result of the punishments imposed on him. There was therefore no reason to think that his first prison sentence would bring
         about an improvement in that behaviour either. The expulsion of Mr Derin might also exercise a deterrent effect on other foreign
         nationals who would realise the serious consequences of smuggling foreigners into a Member State. It was indeed important
         to take strict measures against smugglers given the problem represented by the presence in Germany of a significant number
         of foreign nationals living there illegally. Furthermore, Mr Derin did not enjoy any rights under Article 6(1) or Article
         of Decision No 1/since, first, he had never been employed by the same employer for more than a year without interruption
         and, second, he was no longer living under the same roof as his parents and was no longer dependent on them.
      
Since the objection lodged by Mr Derin against the decision to expel him had been rejected on September 2004, he brought
         an action on October before the Verwaltungsgericht Darmstadt (Administrative Court, Darmstadt), arguing that he belonged
         to the category of persons protected by Article of Decision No 1/80. He therefore also came within the scope of Article
         14, which makes expulsion subject to the existence of a specific risk of new and serious prejudice to the requirements of
         public policy, a condition not fulfilled in this case.
      
The defendant in the main proceedings, on the other hand, maintains that Article of Decision No 1/protects only the children
         of Turkish workers who are under the age of years and are dependent on their parents.
      
The referring court considers that Mr Derin does satisfy the conditions for acquisition of the rights provided for in the
         second indent of the first paragraph of Article 7(1) of Decision No 1/80, owing to the fact that he was legally resident for
         more than five years under the roof of his parents, who are Turkish workers residing in the host Member State. 
      
That court however is unsure as to the conditions under which a Turkish national in a situation such as that of Mr Derin may
         lose the rights which he has acquired under the second indent of the first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/80.
      
First of all, the referring court makes reference to the judgment in Case C-373/Aydinli [2005] ECR I-and states that the Court limited to only two the grounds on which the rights conferred by the said provision
         can be lost, that is, first, the fact that the presence of the Turkish migrant in the host Member State constitutes, on account
         of his own conduct, a genuine and serious threat to public policy, public security or public health, in accordance with Article
         14(1) of Decision No 1/80, and second, the fact that the person concerned has left the territory of that Member State for
         a significant length of time without legitimate reason. 
      
Mr Derin’s situation in this case does not, according to the referring court, correspond to either of those grounds for the
         loss of rights conferred by the second indent of the first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/80.
      
The referring court is nevertheless of the view that it is important, in accordance with Article of the Additional Protocol,
         to establish whether such a limitation of the grounds for the loss of rights acquired under the second indent of the first
         paragraph of Article 7(1) of Decision No 1/is liable to favour Turkish nationals compared to members of the family of a
         worker who is a national of a Member State, who, under Article of Regulation No 1612/68, have the right to install themselves
         with that worker, provided that they are under the age of years or are his dependants. In this case, if there are no other
         possibilities to limit his rights under Decision No 1/80, Mr Derin, who has not lived under his parents’ roof since autumn
         1994, is over and is no longer dependent on his family, will find himself in a more favourable position than the descendant
         of a Community migrant worker.
      
Second, on the assumption that Mr Derin has in fact lost the rights which he derives from the second indent of the first paragraph
         of Article 7(1) of Decision No 1/80, because he is over 21, no longer lives with his parents and is no longer maintained by
         them, the referring court is uncertain whether he might not rely on another provision of that decision, in order to protect
         himself against a measure ordering expulsion taken under Article 14(1) of the decision, and it asks in particular to what
         extent Mr Derin’s position can be assimilated to that of persons who have acquired rights under Article 6(1) of the decision.
      
In those circumstances the Verwaltungsgericht Darmstadt decided to stay proceedings and to refer to the Court the following
         questions for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Is it compatible with Article of the Additional Protocol … for a Turkish national who, as a child, joined his parents who
         were employed as workers in the Federal Republic of Germany, and lived with them as a family, not to lose his right of residence
         derived from the right under the second indent of the first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/… to free access to
         any paid employment – apart from in cases under Article of Decision No 1/or where he leaves the host Member State without
         legitimate reason for a significant period of time – also where he has attained the age of and no longer lives with or
         is maintained by his parents?
      
 2.      Notwithstanding the loss of his legal status under the second indent of the first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/80,
         does that Turkish national enjoy special protection against expulsion under Article of Decision No 1/where, after having
         ceased to live with his parents as a family, he was employed from time to time but has not acquired in his own right the legal
         status conferred by Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/by virtue of being a worker and for a number of years has worked exclusively
         on a self-employed basis?’
      
 First question 
It should be noted at the outset that the first question refers to the situation of a Turkish national who fulfils the conditions
         necessary to benefit from the right of free access to any paid employment of his choice and from the corollary right of residence
         which are conferred by the second indent of the first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/80.
      
While it is accepted that the applicant in the main proceedings has in fact acquired such rights pursuant to that provision
         of Decision No 1/80, the Italian and United Kingdom Governments have nevertheless questioned whether Mr Derin’s situation
         is not in fact covered by the second paragraph of Article of that decision.
      
In the light of the facts of the main proceedings, as described in the order for reference, it is in fact probable that Mr
         Derin, who, as a child of a Turkish father and mother who have lawfully worked in the host Member State for between and
         years respectively, completed a course of vocational training in that Member State, can rely on the rights of access to
         employment and of residence there pursuant to the second paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/80, which constitutes a more
         favourable provision than the first paragraph of that article (see Cases C-210/Akman [1998] ECR I-7519, paragraphs and 38, and C-502/Torun [2006] ECR I-1563, paragraphs to 24).
      
It is nonetheless a matter exclusively for the referring court to establish the underlying facts of the case before it and
         to assess which of the two provisions mentioned in the preceding paragraph is applicable in the main proceedings.
      
It must be added that the question referred seeks essentially to ascertain the grounds on which a Turkish national such as
         Mr Derin may lose the rights conferred on him in the host Member State by the second indent of the first paragraph of Article
         of Decision No 1/in respect of free access to any paid employment of his choice and, concomitantly, residence. 
      
As correctly pointed out by the Advocate General in points and of his Opinion, rights acquired under Article of that
         decision are lost under identical conditions, irrespective of whether the factual situation which gave rise to the dispute
         falls under the first or the second paragraph of that article (see, to this effect, Torun, paragraphs to 25).
      
In those circumstances, the fact that a Turkish national such as the applicant in the main proceedings falls within the scope
         of the first, or the second, paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/is irrelevant for the purposes of responding to the
         first question submitted by the referring court.
      
To give a useful answer to that question, it should be stated at the outset that there is no dispute that, first, like Article
         6(1) and the second paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/80, the first paragraph of Article has direct effect in the
         Member States, with the result that Turkish nationals fulfilling the conditions which it lays down may directly rely on the
         rights it confers on them (see, inter alia, Torun, paragraph 19) and that, second, the rights granted by the first paragraph of Article to the child of a Turkish worker
         with regard to employment in the Member State concerned necessarily imply the existence of a concomitant right of residence
         for that child, without which the right of access to the employment market and actually to take up paid employment would be
         rendered totally ineffective (see, inter alia, Case C-467/Cetinkaya [2004] ECR I-10895, paragraph 31).
      
The first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/applies to the situation of a Turkish national who, as a member of the
         family of a Turkish worker who is or was duly registered as belonging to the labour force of the host Member State, has either
         been authorised to join that worker there to reunite the family or was born and has always resided in that State (see, inter
         alia, Aydinli, paragraph 22).
      
In should be noted, first, that the Court has previously held that the applicability of that provision to such situations
         is independent of the fact that, at the material time, the person concerned is an adult no longer living with his family,
         but living independently of the worker in the relevant Member State (see, in particular, Aydinli, paragraph and, by analogy, Torun, paragraphs and 28).
      
Such a Turkish national cannot, therefore, lose a right acquired on the basis of the first paragraph of Article of Decision
         No 1/as a result of circumstances arising of the kind referred to in the preceding paragraph. The right of access enjoyed
         by members of a Turkish worker’s family, after a certain period, to employment in the host Member State is in fact specifically
         intended to consolidate their position in that State by offering them the chance to become independent (see Aydinli, paragraph 23).
      
Furthermore, although the first indent of the first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/requires, as a rule, that the
         member of the family of a Turkish worker must actually reside with that worker for the three years during which he fails himself
         to satisfy the conditions for access to the labour market in the host Member State (see Case C-351/Kadiman [1997] ECR I-2133, paragraph 33, 37, 40, and 44; Case C-329/Ergat [2000] ECR I-1487, paragraphs and 37; Case C-65/Eyüp [2000] ECR I-4747, paragraphs and 29; and Cetinkaya, paragraph 30), the fact remains that Member States are no longer entitled to attach conditions to the residence of a member
         of a Turkish worker’s family after that three-year period; this must a fortiori be the case for a Turkish migrant who fulfils the conditions laid down in the second indent of the first paragraph of Article
         (see Ergat, paragraphs to 39; Cetinkaya, paragraph 30; and Aydinli, paragraph 24).
      
As noted by the Advocate General in points and and in points to of his Opinion, the Court has specifically held,
         as regards the members of a Turkish worker’s family who are covered by the first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/and, like Mr Derin, enjoy the right, after five years of legal residence, to free access to employment in the host Member
         State in accordance with the second indent of that provision, not only that the direct effect of that provision means that
         the persons concerned derive an individual employment right directly from Decision No 1/80, but also that to be effective
         that right necessarily implies a concomitant right of residence which does not depend on the continuing existence of the conditions
         for access to those rights (see, inter alia, Ergat, paragraph 40; Cetinkaya, paragraph 31; and Aydinli, paragraph 25). 
      
Accordingly, the fact that the condition of eligibility for the right in question, in this case residence with the Turkish
         worker for a certain period, ceases to obtain after the family member of the worker has acquired the relevant right cannot
         affect the enjoyment of that right (see Aydinli, paragraph 26). A different interpretation of the first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/would not be consistent
         with the aim and broad logic of Decision No 1/80, which is intended to promote the gradual integration in the host Member
         State of Turkish nationals who satisfy the conditions laid down in one of the provisions of that decision and thus enjoy the
         rights conferred on them by the decision (see, in particular, Case C‑171/Wählergruppe Gemeinsam [2003] ECR I-4301, paragraph 79).
      
Secondly, as is evident from the settled case-law of the Court, there can be only two kinds of restrictions on the rights
         conferred by the first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/on members of a Turkish worker’s family who fulfil the conditions
         laid down in that paragraph, namely, either that based on the presence of the Turkish migrant in the host Member State where
         he constitutes, on account of his own conduct, a genuine and serious threat to public policy, public security or public health,
         in accordance with Article 14(1) of that decision, or that relating to the fact that the person concerned has left the territory
         of that State for a significant length of time without legitimate reason (see Ergat, paragraphs 45, and 48; Cetinkaya, paragraphs and 38; Aydinli, paragraph 27; and Torun, paragraph 21).
      
Given that Decision No 1/draws a clear distinction between the situation of Turkish workers who have been legally employed
         in the host Member State for a specified period (Article of the decision) and that of members of the families of such workers
         legally resident in the territory of the host Member State (Article of the decision) and that, within the scheme of the
         decision, Article constitutes a lex specialis in relation to the rights laid down in the three indents of Article 6(1), which are gradually extended according to the period
         of legal paid employment (see Joined Cases C-317/and C-369/Abatay and Others [2003] ECR I‑12301, paragraph 78; Aydinli, paragraph 19; and Torun, paragraph 17), the rights conferred by Article of Decision No 1/cannot be limited in the same situations as those granted
         by Article of the decision (see Aydinli, paragraph 31, and Torun, paragraph 26).
      
In particular, a Turkish national accorded rights under Article cannot be deprived of them either because he was unemployed
         on account of being sentenced to a term of imprisonment, even one of several years’ duration which was not suspended, or because
         he never acquired rights relating to employment and residence pursuant to Article 6(1) (see, to that effect, Aydinli, paragraph 28, and Torun, paragraph 26). In contrast to Turkish workers to whom Article 6(1) applies, the status of members of their family referred
         to in Article of that decision does not depend on paid employment.
      
It must therefore be concluded from the foregoing that it follows from both the scheme and the objective of Decision No 1/that a Turkish national in a situation such as that of the applicant in the main proceedings, who enjoys the right of free
         access to any paid employment of his choice in accordance with the second indent of the first paragraph of Article of that
         decision, loses the right of residence which is a corollary of that right of free access only in two situations, that is to
         say, in the circumstances provided for in Article (1) of that decision or if he leaves the territory of the host Member
         State for a significant length of time without legitimate reason. Such a Turkish national does not, on the other hand, lose
         that right of residence on account of a prolonged absence from the labour market owing to imprisonment, even if of several
         years’ duration and not suspended, or owing to the fact that, on the date of the decision to expel him, he was over 21, no
         longer resident with the Turkish worker from whom he derived his right of residence and no longer dependent on him, but lived
         independently of that worker (see Aydinli, paragraph 32, and, by analogy, Torun, paragraph 29).
      
The referring court nevertheless raises the question whether the interpretation set out in the preceding paragraph is consistent
         with Article of the Additional Protocol.
      
Not convinced that the grounds for loss of the rights conferred by Article of Decision No 1/resulting from such an interpretation
         are exhaustive, the referring court suggests that, apart from the conditions, laid down by the case-law mentioned in paragraph
         of this judgment, for preserving the rights acquired, the child of a Turkish worker should also comply with the criteria
         provided for under secondary Community law and, in particular, Articles 10(1) and of Regulation No 1612/which apply
         only to children who are under the age of years or who are dependants of the worker.
      
As a result, the second indent of the first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/must, according to the referring court,
         be interpreted to the effect that a Turkish national who has been authorised to enter, before reaching the age of 21, the
         territory of the host Member State in order to live as a family with his parents who are employed in that State loses the
         right of employment and the corollary right of residence in that State when he reaches the age of or when he is no longer
         dependent on his family.
      
A different interpretation of that provision would, in its view, have the consequence that a family member of a Turkish worker
         duly registered as belonging to the labour force of a Member State would find himself in a more favourable position than a
         descendant of a migrant Community worker.
      
In that regard, it must be stated first that, in accordance with Article 10(1) of Regulation No 1612/68, children who are
         under the age of years or are dependants of a worker who is a national of one Member State and is employed in the territory
         of another Member State enjoy the unconditional right to install themselves with that migrant Community worker.
      
By contrast, the first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/provides expressly that the family member’s right to join
         the migrant Turkish worker is subject to the authorisation to that effect granted in accordance with the conditions laid down
         by the legislation of the host Member State (see Case C-275/Ayaz [2004] ECR I-8765, paragraphs and 35).
      
In the context, therefore, of the EEC-Turkey Association − save in the specific case where the Turkish national was born and
         has always resided in the host Member State − the members of the family of the migrant Turkish worker do not have a right
         to join him to live as a family; their ability to join him depends rather on a decision of the national authorities taken
         solely on the basis of the law of the Member State concerned, subject to the requirement of observance of fundamental rights
         as laid down, in particular, by Article of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms,
         signed at Rome on November (see, by analogy, C-413/Baumbast and R [2002] ECR I-7091, paragraph 72).
      
Second, pursuant to Article of Regulation No 1612/68, the children who have the right to install themselves with the worker
         who is a national of one Member State and is employed in the territory of another Member State enjoy, by virtue of that fact
         alone, the right to take up any activity as an employed person in the host Member State, whereas the right of the children
         of a migrant Turkish worker to be employed is specifically regulated by the first paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/80,
         a provision which lays down conditions which vary according to the length of legal residence with the migrant worker from
         whom they derive rights. Thus, during the first three years of residence, no right of that kind is accorded to Turkish nationals,
         whereas, after three years of legal residence with their family, they have the right to respond to an offer of employment,
         subject to the priority to be given to workers from the Member States. It is only after five years of legal residence that
         they enjoy free access to any paid employment of their choice.
      
Finally, the Court has repeatedly held that, unlike workers from the Member States, Turkish nationals are not entitled to
         freedom of movement within the Community but can rely only on certain rights in the territory of the host Member State alone
         (see, in that regard, in particular, Case C-171/Tetik [1997] ECR I‑329, paragraph 29; Case C-37/Savas [2000] ECR I-2927, paragraph 59; and Wählergruppe Gemeinsam, paragraph 89).
      
Moreover, the case-law of the Court relating to the conditions under which rights derived from Article of Decision No 1/can be restricted lays down, in addition to the exception based on public policy, public security and public health, which
         is applicable in the same way to Turkish nationals and to Community nationals (see, inter alia, Case C- 340/Nazli [2000] ECR I-957, paragraphs 55, and 63), a second ground of loss of those rights which is applicable only to Turkish
         migrants, namely if they leave the territory of the host Member State for a significant length of time without legitimate
         reason (see paragraphs and of this judgment). In such a case, the authorities of the Member State concerned are entitled
         to require that, should the person concerned subsequently wish to resettle in that State, he must make a fresh application
         either for authorisation to join the Turkish worker if he is still dependent on that worker, or to be admitted with a view
         to being employed there on the basis of Article of that decision (see Ergat, paragraph 49). 
      
Accordingly, the situation of a child of a migrant Turkish worker cannot usefully be compared to that of a descendant of a
         national of a Member State, having regard to the significant differences between their respective legal situations. The more
         favourable situation enjoyed by Member State nationals results, moreover, from the very wording of the applicable legislation.
      
As a consequence, contrary to the interpretation advocated by the referring court, it cannot reasonably be maintained that,
         because of the limitation, as resulting from the Court’s case law, of the grounds for loss of his right of residence (see
         paragraphs and of this judgment), a member of the family of a migrant Turkish worker who has been authorised to join
         that worker in a Member State would find himself in a more favourable situation than a member of the family of a national
         of a Member State, so that the rule laid down in Article of the Additional Protocol would be infringed.
      
Furthermore, the interpretation suggested by the referring court does not take into account the different formulations of
         Article of Decision No 1/and Article of Regulation No 1612/68.
      
Additionally, such an interpretation would inevitably render the legal status of the children of migrant Turkish workers more
         precarious the further they integrated in the host Member State, whereas Article of Decision No 1/pursues on the contrary
         the objective of a progressive consolidation of the situation of the family members of those workers in the Member State concerned,
         by permitting them, after a certain period of time, to live independently there.
      
As is evident from the grounds of the order for reference, the interpretation favoured by the referring court, which is set
         out in paragraph of this judgment, is moreover substantially based on the reasoning contained in point of the Opinion
         of Advocate General Geelhoed in Ayaz, whereas reasoning of that kind was not taken up in the grounds of the judgment in that case.
      
Since the referring court expressly reformulated its first question following delivery of the judgment in Aydinli, in order to prompt the Court to re-examine whether that judgment was well-founded, it should again be pointed out that,
         first, the interpretation of the second indent of the first paragraph of Article of Decision 1/given in that judgment
         only confirms the interpretation already given to that provision in the Court’s previous case-law (Ergat and Cetinkaya). Second, the same interpretation was extended by the Court, on identical grounds, to the second paragraph of Article of
         that decision (Torun). Furthermore, no factor has been adduced of such a kind as significantly to distinguish the factual or legal situation in
         the main proceedings from those in the cases of Ergat, Cetinkaya, Aydinli and Torun, with the result that there is no sound reason in this case for the Court to reconsider its case-law on that point.
      
Finally, with regard to a situation such as that in the main proceedings, in which a decision has been taken by the competent
         authorities of the host Member State to expel a Turkish national after his conviction there for several offences under national
         legislation, it must be pointed out that it is Article 14(1) of Decision 1/which establishes the relevant legal framework
         authorising the Member States to take the necessary measures. Those authorities are, however, obliged to assess the personal
         conduct of the offender and whether it constitutes a present, genuine and sufficiently serious threat to public policy and
         security, and in addition they must observe the principle of proportionality (see, to that effect, Nazli, paragraphs to 61, and, by analogy, Case C-100/OteizaOlazabal [2002] ECR I-10981, paragraphs 39, and 44). In particular, a measure ordering expulsion based on Article 14(1) of that
         decision may be taken only if the personal conduct of the person concerned indicates a specific risk of new and serious prejudice
         to the requirements of public policy. Consequently, such a measure cannot be ordered automatically following a criminal conviction
         and with the aim of general deterrence (see Case C-383/Dogan [2005] ECR I-6237, paragraph 24).
      
In the light of all of the foregoing, the answer to the first question must be that a Turkish national, who was authorised
         while he was a child to enter the territory of a Member State in order to join his family and who has acquired the right of
         free access to any paid employment of his choice under the second indent of the first paragraph of Article of Decision No
         1/80, loses the right of residence in the host Member State which is a corollary of that right of free access only in two
         situations, that is: 
      
–       in the circumstances provided for in Article 14(1) of that decision, or 
–       if he leaves the territory of the Member State concerned for a significant length of time without legitimate reason, 
even though he is over years of age, is no longer dependent on his parents, but lives independently in the Member State
         concerned, and was not available to join the labour force for several years because he was during that period serving an unsuspended
         sentence of imprisonment. Such an interpretation is not inconsistent with the requirements of Article of the Additional
         Protocol.
      
 Second question
In view of the answer given to the first question asked by the referring court, it is unnecessary to answer the second question.
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
A Turkish national, who was authorised while he was a child to enter the territory of a Member State in order to join his
            family and who has acquired the right of free access to any paid employment of his choice under the second indent of the first
            paragraph of Article of Decision No 1/of September on the development of the Association, adopted by the Association
            Council set up by the Association Agreement between the European Economic Community and Turkey, loses the right of residence
            in the host Member State which is a corollary of that right of free access only in two situations, that is: 
–       in the circumstances provided for in Article 14(1) of that decision, or 
–       if he leaves the territory of the Member State concerned for a significant length of time without legitimate reason, 
even though he is over years of age, is no longer dependent on his parents, but lives independently in the Member State
            concerned, and was not available to join the labour force for several years because he was during that period serving an unsuspended
            sentence of imprisonment. Such an interpretation is not inconsistent with the requirements of Article of the Additional
            Protocol signed at Brussels on November and concluded, approved and confirmed on behalf of the Community by Council
            Regulation (EEC) No 2760/of December 1972. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 