
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-102/Ingeborg Beuttenmüller
v
Land Baden-Württemberg
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Verwaltungsgericht Stuttgart)
(Freedom of movement for workers – Recognition of diplomas – Directives 89/48/EEC and 92/51/EEC – Primary and secondary school teachers – Holder of a diploma of post-secondary studies of two years’ duration – Conditions for the exercise of the profession)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Workers – Recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on
            completion of professional education and training of at least three years’ duration – Scope of Directive 89/– Diploma obtained
            after two years’ education and training – Included – Conditions
(Council Directive 89/48, Art. 1(a)) 
2.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Workers –  Recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on
            completion of professional education and training of at least three years’ duration – Directive 89/– The taking up or pursuit
            of a regulated profession on the same conditions as nationals (Article 3) – Direct effect – Education – Rules of the host
            State requiring, without exception, a minimum period of training of three years and covering at least two of the subjects
            stipulated for that profession – Not permissible 
(Council Directive 89/48, Art. 3, first para., (a)) 
3.        Acts of the institutions – Directives – Whether a Member State may rely against individuals on limitations and duties laid
            down by a directive which has not been implemented – Exclusion
4.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Workers – Recognition of diplomas – Directive 92/– The taking
            up or pursuit of a regulated profession on the same conditions as nationals (Article 3) – Direct effect in favour of the holder
            of a teaching diploma obtained after two years’ education and training
(Council Directive 92/51, Art. 3, first para., (a)) 
1.        The second subparagraph of Article 1(a) of Directive 89/on a general system for the recognition of higher-education diplomas
         awarded on completion of professional education and training of at least three years’ duration must be interpreted as meaning
         that a qualification for the profession of teacher, formerly awarded in a Member State on the basis of a two-year period of
         education and training, is the same as a diploma within the meaning of the first subparagraph of that provision, where the
         competent authority of that State certifies that the diploma awarded following that education and training of two years’ duration
         is recognised as being of a level equivalent to the diploma currently awarded after three years’ study and confers the same
         rights in that Member State in respect of the taking up or pursuit of the profession of teacher. It is for the national court
         to determine, in the light of the evidence submitted by the applicant in accordance with Article 8(1) of that directive and
         the national provisions applicable to the assessment of such evidence, whether the final condition laid down by the second
         subparagraph of Article 1(a), namely that the diploma in question confers in the Member State of origin the same rights to
         take up or pursue the profession, must be regarded as satisfied. That condition concerns the right to pursue a regulated profession
         and not the remuneration and other employment conditions applicable in the Member State which recognises the equivalence of
         the old and new education and training. 
      
(see para. 45, operative part 1)
2.        Subparagraph (a) of the first paragraph of Article of Directive 89/on a general system for the recognition of higher-education
         diplomas awarded on completion of professional education and training of at least three years’ duration, which provides that
         the competent authority of the host Member State may not, on the grounds of inadequate qualifications, refuse to authorise
         a national of a Member State to take up or pursue a regulated profession on the same conditions as apply to its own nationals
         if the applicant holds the diploma required in another Member State for the taking up or pursuit of the profession in question
         in its territory, and if that diploma was awarded in a Member State, may be relied upon by a national of a Member State as
         against national provisions inconsistent with that directive. That directive precludes such provisions where, for the purpose
         of recognising a professional teaching qualification awarded or recognised in a Member State other than the host Member State,
         they require, without exception, completion of a period of higher education and training of at least three years’ duration
         and covering at least two of the subjects stipulated for the teaching profession in the host Member State. 
      
(see para. 57, operative part 2)
3.        A Member State which has failed to fulfil its obligation to transpose the provisions of a directive into national law can
         no more rely, as against Community citizens, upon the limitations laid down by those provisions than it can require that they
         perform the obligations laid down by that directive. 
      
(see para. 63)
4.        In the absence of implementing measures enacted within the period prescribed in the first subparagraph of Article 17(1) of
         Directive 92/on a second general system for the recognition of professional education and training to supplement Directive
         89/48, a national of a Member State may rely on subparagraph (a) of the first paragraph of Article of Directive 92/in
         order to obtain in the host Member State recognition of a professional teaching qualification awarded in another Member State
         following education and training of two-years’ duration. 
      
(see para. 67, operative part 3)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)April 2004(1)
(Freedom of movement for workers  –  Recognition of diplomas  –  Directives 89/and 92/–  Primary and secondary school teachers  –  Holder of a diploma of post-secondary studies of two years' duration  –  Conditions for the exercise of the profession)
 In Case C-102/02,
             REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the  Verwaltungsgericht Stuttgart (Germany) for a preliminary ruling in the
            proceedings pending before that court between
            
Ingeborg Beuttenmüller
and
Land Baden-Württemberg,
 on the interpretation of Council Directive 89/48/EEC of December on a general system for the recognition of higher-education
            diplomas awarded on completion of professional education and training of at least three years' duration (OJ L 19, p.
            16) and  Council Directive 92/51/EEC of June on a second general system for the recognition of professional education
            and training to supplement Directive 89/(OJ L 209, p. 25),
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),,
 composed of:  P. Jann, acting for the President of the Fifth Chamber,  C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas (Rapporteur), A. La Pergola
            and S. von Bahr, Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,Registrar: R. Grass,
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
–
 Ms Beuttenmüller, by T. Weber, Rechtsanwalt,
               
–
 the Land Baden-Württemberg, by J. Daur, acting as Agent,
               
–
 the Austrian Government, by M. Fruhmann, acting as Agent,
               
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by M. Patakia and H. Kreppel, acting as Agents,
               
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By order of March 2002, received at the Court on March 2002, the Verwaltungsgericht Stuttgart (Stuttgart Administrative
         Court) referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling six questions on the interpretation of Council Directive 89/48/EEC of
         December on a general system for the recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of professional
         education and training of at least three years’ duration (OJ L 19, p. 16) and Council Directive 92/51/EEC of June
         on a second general system for the recognition of professional education and training to supplement Directive 89/(OJ
         L 209, p. 25).
         
            
 Those questions were raised in proceedings between Ms Beuttenmüller, an Austrian national, and the Land Baden-Württemberg concerning the refusal of the Oberschulamt Stuttgart (Stuttgart Secondary Education Office) to recognise
         her diploma of primary school teacher, obtained in Austria, as equivalent to the qualification required to work as a primary
         and secondary school teacher in that Land.
         
Law
Community rules
            
 Under Article 39(2) EC, freedom of movement for workers is to entail the abolition of any discrimination based on nationality
         between workers of the Member States as regards employment, remuneration and other conditions of work and employment.
         
 Directive 89/It is apparent from the third recital of the preamble to Directive 89/that its purpose is to introduce a method of recognition
         of diplomas intended to enable European citizens to pursue all those professional activities which in a host Member State
         are dependent on the completion of post-secondary education and training, provided they hold such a diploma preparing them
         for those activities awarded on completion of a course of studies lasting at least three years and issued in another Member
         State.
         
            
 The fifth recital of the preamble to that directive states as follows:
         ‘Whereas, for those professions for the pursuit of which the Community has not laid down the necessary minimum level of qualification,
         Member States reserve the option of fixing such a level with a view to guaranteeing the quality of services provided in their
         territory; whereas, however, they may not, without infringing their obligations laid down in Article of the [EC] Treaty,
         require a national of a Member State to obtain those qualifications which in general they determine only by reference to diplomas
         issued under their own national education systems, where the person concerned has already acquired all or part of those qualifications
         in another Member State; whereas, as a result, any host Member State in which a profession is regulated is required to take
         account of qualifications acquired in another Member State and to determine whether those qualifications correspond to the
         qualifications which the Member State concerned requires.’
         
            
 Article 1(a) of that directive provides: 
         ‘For the purposes of this directive the following definitions shall apply: 
         
(a)
diploma: any diploma, certificate or other evidence of formal qualifications or any set of such diplomas, certificates or
               other evidence: 
            
–
which has been awarded by a competent authority in a Member State, designated in accordance with its own laws, regulations
                     or administrative provisions; 
                  
–
which shows that the holder has successfully completed a post-secondary course of at least three years’ duration, or of an
                     equivalent duration part-time, at a university or establishment of higher education or another establishment of similar level
                     and, where appropriate, that he has successfully completed the professional training required in addition to the post-secondary
                     course, and 
                  
–
which shows that the holder has the professional qualifications required for the taking up or pursuit of a regulated profession
                     in that Member State, 
                  
 provided that the education and training attested by the diploma, certificate or other evidence of formal qualifications was
         received mainly in the Community, or the holder thereof has three years’ professional experience certified by the Member State
         which recognised a third-country diploma, certificate or other evidence of formal qualifications. 
          The following shall be treated in the same way as a diploma, within the meaning of the first subparagraph: any diploma, certificate
         or other evidence of formal qualifications or any set of such diplomas, certificates or other evidence awarded by a competent
         authority in a Member State if it is awarded on the successful completion of education and training received in the Community
         and recognised by a competent authority in that Member State as being of an equivalent level and if it confers the same rights
         in respect of the taking up and pursuit of a regulated profession in that Member State.’
         
            
 Article of Directive 89/provides: 
         ‘Where, in a host Member State, the taking up or pursuit of a regulated profession is subject to possession of a diploma,
         the competent authority may not, on the grounds of inadequate qualifications, refuse to authorise a national of a Member State
         to take up or pursue that profession on the same conditions as apply to its own nationals: 
         
(a)
if the applicant holds the diploma required in another Member State for the taking up or pursuit of the profession in question
               in its territory, such diploma having been awarded in a Member State; or 
            
(b)
if the applicant has pursued the profession in question full-time for two years during the previous ten years in another Member
               State which does not regulate that profession, within the meaning of Article 1(c) and the first subparagraph of Article 1(d),
               and possesses evidence of one or more formal qualifications: 
            
–
which have been awarded by a competent authority in a Member State, designated in accordance with the laws, regulations or
                     administrative provisions of such State, 
                  
–
which show that the holder has successfully completed a post-secondary course of at least three years’ duration, or of an
                     equivalent duration part-time, at a university or establishment of higher education or another establishment of similar level
                     of a Member State and, where appropriate, that he has successfully completed the professional training required in addition
                     to the post-secondary course, and 
                  
–
which have prepared the holder for the pursuit of his profession. 
 The following shall be treated in the same way as the evidence of formal qualifications referred to in the first subparagraph:
         any formal qualifications or any set of such formal qualifications awarded by a competent authority in a Member State if it
         is awarded on the successful completion of training received in the Community and is recognised by that Member State as being
         of an equivalent level, provided that the other Member States and the Commission have been notified of this recognition.’
         
            
 Article of Directive 89/authorises the host Member State, notwithstanding Article thereof, to require the applicant
         to provide evidence of professional experience, to complete an adaptation period not exceeding three years or to take an aptitude
         test. It lays down certain rules and conditions applicable to measures which that State may impose to make up for the shortfalls
         in education and training of the applicant (‘the compensatory measures’). 
         
            
 Pursuant to Article 8(1) of that directive:
         ‘The host Member State shall accept as proof that the conditions laid down in Articles and are satisfied the certificates
         and documents issued by the competent authorities in the Member States, which the person concerned shall submit in support
         of his application to pursue the profession concerned.’
         
 Directive 92/The complementary system for the recognition of professional education and training introduced by Directive 92/covers the
         levels of education and training which were not covered by the initial general system established by Directive 89/the scope
         of which is limited to higher education.
         
            
 Article of Directive 92/provides:
         ‘For the purposes of this Directive, the following definitions shall apply: 
         
(a)
diploma: any evidence of education and training or any set of such evidence: 
–
which has been awarded by a competent authority in a Member State, designated in accordance with the laws, regulations or
                     administrative provisions of that State, 
                  
–
which shows that the holder has successfully completed: 
(i)
either a post-secondary course other than that referred to in the second indent of Article 1(a) of Directive 89/48/EEC, of
                     at least one year’s duration or of equivalent duration on a part-time basis, one of the conditions of entry of which is, as
                     a general rule, the successful completion of the secondary course required to obtain entry to university or higher education,
                     as well as the professional training which may be required in addition to that post-secondary course; 
                  
(ii)
or one of the education and training courses in Annex C, and
–
which shows that the holder has the professional qualifications required for the taking up or pursuit of a regulated profession
                     in that Member State, 
                  
 provided that the education and training attested by this evidence was received mainly in the Community, or outside the Community
         at teaching establishments which provide education and training in accordance with the laws, regulations or administrative
         provisions of a Member State, or that the holder thereof has three years’ professional experience certified by the Member
         State which recognised third-country evidence of education and training. 
          The following shall be treated in the same way as a diploma within the meaning of the first subparagraph: any evidence of
         education and training or any set of such evidence awarded by a competent authority in a Member State if it is awarded on
         the successful completion of education and training received in the Community and recognised by a competent authority in that
         Member State as being of an equivalent level and if it confers the same rights in respect of the taking up and pursuit of
         a regulated profession in that Member State; 
         …
         
(g)
regulated education and training: any education and training which: 
–
is specifically geared to the pursuit of a given profession, and
–
comprises a course or courses complemented, where appropriate, by professional training or probationary or professional practice,
                     the structure and level of which are determined by the laws, regulations or administrative provisions of that Member State
                     or which are monitored or approved by the authority designated for that purpose;
                  
…’
         
            
 Article of that directive provides:
         ‘Without prejudice to Directive 89/48/EEC, where, in a host Member State, the taking up or pursuit of a regulated profession
         is subject to possession of a diploma, as defined in this Directive or in Directive 89/48/EEC, the competent authority may
         not, on the grounds of inadequate qualifications, refuse to authorise a national of a Member State to take up or pursue that
         profession on the same conditions as those which apply to its own nationals: 
         
(a)
if the applicant holds the diploma, as defined in this Directive or in Directive 89/48/EEC, required in another Member State
               for the taking up or pursuit of the profession in question in its territory, such diploma having been awarded in a Member
               State;
            
…
 By way of derogation from the first subparagraph of this Article, the host Member State is not required to apply this Article
         where the taking up or pursuit of a regulated profession is subject in its country to possession of a diploma as defined in
         Directive 89/48/EEC, one of the conditions for the issue of which shall be the completion of a post-secondary course of more
         than four years’ duration.’
         
            
 Article of Directive 92/allows the host Member State, notwithstanding Article thereof, to require the applicant to
         provide evidence of specific professional experience, to complete an adaptation period not exceeding three years or to take
         an aptitude test. It lays down certain rules and conditions applicable to the compensatory measures which may be required.
         According to the first indent of Article 4(1)(a), where the duration of the education and training adduced in support of his
         application pursuant to Article 3(a) of that directive is at least one year less than that required in the host Member State,
         the period of professional experience required may not exceed ‘twice the shortfall in duration of education and training where
         the shortfall relates to a post-secondary course and/or to a period of probationary practice carried out under the control
         of a supervising professional person and ending with an examination’.
         
            
 Under Article 12(1) of Directive 92/51:
         ‘The host Member State shall accept as means of proof that the conditions laid down in Articles to are satisfied the documents
         issued by the competent authorities in the Member States, which the person concerned shall submit in support of his application
         to pursue the profession concerned.’
         
National law
            
 In Germany, the regulation of the education, training and careers of teachers is essentially the responsibility of the Länder. According to the referring court, the following provisions applicable in Baden-Württemberg are relevant to the dispute in
         the main proceedings.
         
            
 The rules on the recognition of qualifications for the teaching profession are set out in the Verordnung des Kultusministeriums
         zur Umsetzung der Richtlinie 89/48/EWG … für Lehrerberufe (Ministry of Education regulation for the teaching profession transposing
         Directive 89/48/EEC) of August (GBl., p. 564, ‘the EU-EWR-LehrerVO’). That regulation was adopted on the basis of
         Paragraph 28a(1) of the Landesbeamtengesetz (Law on Land officials), in the version published on March (GBl., p. 286, ‘the LBG’). That paragraph states:
         
‘Paragraph 28a – Career qualifications under provisions of European law
         (1)     The career qualification can also be acquired under 
          1.       Directive 89/48/EEC … or
          2.       Directive 92/51/EEC …
          The detailed rules governing this matter shall be enacted, by way of a regulation, by the ministries under the powers vested
         in them, in agreement with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Finance.’
         
            
 Paragraph of the EU-EWR-LehrerVO states as follows: 
         ‘Paragraph – Recognition
          1.       A qualification for the teaching profession awarded or recognised in another Member State of the European Union or in another
         Contracting State to the Agreement on the European Economic Area after a period of higher education of at least three years’
         duration, in the form of a diploma within the meaning of Directive 89/48/EEC … shall, on application, be recognised as a qualification
         to pursue the profession of teacher in State schools in Baden-Württemberg, where
         (1)     the applicant is a national of a Member State of the European Union or of another Contracting State to the Agreement on the
         European Economic Area,
         (2)     the qualification comprises at least two of the subjects stipulated for the teaching profession in question in Baden-Württemberg,
         
         (3)     the applicant’s written and spoken knowledge of the German language is of the standard necessary to teach in Baden-Württemberg,
         (4)     the education and training required for the applicant’s diploma within the meaning of Article 3, first paragraph, under (a),
         of Directive 89/48/EEC does not reveal any substantial deficiencies as regards particular specialisation, teaching methodology,
         education theory or teaching practice as compared to the education and training in Baden-Württemberg, and
         (5)     the duration of the education and training necessary for the diploma within the meaning of Article 3, first paragraph, under
         (a), of Directive 89/48/EEC is not more than one year shorter than the duration of education and training required for the
         pursuit of the teaching profession in the kind of school in question in Baden-Württemberg.
          2.       If the content of the education and training does not meet the requirements in subparagraph 1(4), the applicant may be required
         either to complete an adaptation period or to pass an aptitude test, as the applicant may choose.
          3.       If the duration of the education and training does not meet the requirements in subparagraph 1(5), the applicant may be required
         to adduce evidence of professional experience.
          4.       The applicant may only be required either to comply with a measure under subparagraph or to adduce evidence under subparagraph
         3. If there should be a shortfall with regard to both content (subparagraph 1(4)) and duration (subparagraph 1(5)), the applicant
         may be required to make good only the content shortfall in accordance with subparagraph 2.’
         
            
 Paragraph of the EU-EWR-LehrerVO provides:
         ‘Paragraph – Decisions
          1.       The applicant shall be informed in writing of the decision on the application within four months of submission of full documentation;
         that period shall be extended by the amount of time stipulated for the submission of any additional documentation which may
         be required. The decision must give reasons and contain formal notice of the right of appeal.
          2.       The notification of the decision shall state the classification given to the applicant’s professional activity, education
         and training to work as a teacher in schools in Baden-Württemberg. It shall also contain:
         (1)     a determination as to whether there is a shortfall of more than one year compared to the length of education and training
         required for the pursuit of the profession of teacher in Baden-Württemberg,
         (2)     a determination with regard to substantial shortfalls in the subjects shown in the evidence of qualifications adduced or of
         any substantial areas of professional activity not covered, together with a list of missing subject areas,
         (3)     information on
         
(a)
the length and material content of any adaptation period and
(b)
the subject-matter of any aptitude test.’
            
 Paragraph of the EU-EWR-LehrerVO provides as follows:
         ‘Paragraph – Recognition
          1.       If the investigation reveals no shortfall, if the aptitude test or adaptation period has been successfully completed, or if
         the necessary professional experience has been proven in the case of a shortfall in duration and if the requisite knowledge
         of the German language is also proven under Paragraph 2, the teaching qualification shall be recognised. The applicant shall
         receive a certificate from the Ministry of Education confirming that finding.
          2.       The recognition decision shall state that recognition does not give rise to any entitlement to employment.’
         
The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 Ms Beuttenmüller, the claimant in the main proceedings, was born in 1958. After obtaining her school-leaving diploma, she
         followed a two-year course at the Archdiocese of Vienna College of Education (Austria), specialising in foreign-language and
         art teaching and on June she obtained a diploma in primary school teaching.
         
            
 From to 1988, Ms Beuttenmüller was employed as a primary school teacher in Austria. She went on maternity and unpaid
         leave from February 1981.
         
            
 Since 1991, Ms Beuttenmüller has been employed as a teacher in Land  Baden-Württemberg, working first in a church-maintained establishment for young migrants. Since December 1993, she has been
         employed by Land  Baden-Württemberg as a teacher in its schools.
         
            
 Until July 1996, Ms Beuttenmüller was on grade Vb of the salary scale fixed by the Bundesangestelltentarifvertrag (federal
         collective agreement on public sector employees, ‘the BAT’), in accordance with the Richtlinie des Finanzministeriums Baden-Württemberg
         über die Eingruppierung der im Angestelltenverhältnis beschäftigten Lehrkräfte des Landes (Baden-Württemberg Ministry of Finance
         guidelines on the grading of teaching staff employed by the Land). From that date, she was placed on the higher grade IVb of the BAT.
         
            
 In a letter of March 1998, Ms Beuttenmüller applied to the Oberschulamt Stuttgart for the primary school teaching certificate
         awarded to her in Austria to be treated in the same way as a teaching certificate awarded in Baden-Württemberg and for her
         promotion to grade III of the BAT.
         
            
 The Oberschulamt Stuttgart rejected that application in a decision notified to Ms Beuttenmüller on August 1999. On November
         2000, the Oberschulamt Stuttgart also rejected the complaint brought by Ms Beuttenmüller against that decision.
         
            
 In the proceedings which Ms Beuttenmüller brought before the Verwaltungsgericht Stuttgart, she claimed that the court should:
         
–
primarily, ‘annul the decision of the Oberschulamt Stuttgart of August in the form of the decision of the Oberschulamt
               Stuttgart of November in respect of the complaint and to order the defendant to grant the claimant’s application that
               her teaching qualification awarded in Austria after a period of education and training of two years’ duration be treated as
               equivalent to the primary and junior secondary school teaching qualification in Baden-Württemberg’;
            
–
in the alternative, ‘annul the decision of the Oberschulamt Stuttgart of August in the form of the decision of the
               Oberschulamt Stuttgart of November in respect of the complaint, and to declare that the defendant is required to enable
               the applicant, by means of the corresponding measures of equivalence (adaptation periods and aptitude tests, amongst others)
               to satisfy the conditions for the equivalence applied for’.
            
            
 In the order for reference, the Verwaltungsgericht Stuttgart states that the rejection of Ms Beuttenmüller’s application is
         in accordance with the relevant national provisions. The application did not satisfy the condition, which is compulsory under
         the EU-EWR-LehrerVO, that the applicant must have completed a period of post-secondary education and training of at least
         three years’ duration. There is no need even to decide whether the Archdiocese of Vienna College of Education is to be regarded
         as an establishment of higher education or at least as another establishment of similar level, within the meaning of the second
         indent of Article 1(a) of Directive 89/48. 
         
            
 However, the Verwaltungsgericht Stuttgart admits that entitlement to recognition or equivalence of Ms Beuttenmüller’s qualification
         awarded in Austria can be based directly on the two directives cited at Paragraph 28a of the LBG, namely Directives 89/and 92/51. It considers that, in that case, several difficulties in interpretation arise in relation to the relevant provisions
         of those two directives.
         
            
 In respect of Directive 89/48, it considers that the equivalence clause contained in the second subparagraph of Article 1(a)
         thereof could apply to Ms Beuttenmüller’s period of education and training of two years’ duration only. According to an opinion
         of the Austrian Federal Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs of August 1998, which the applicant placed on the file
         in the administrative proceedings, the education and training of primary school teachers in Austrian colleges of education
         was extended from two to three years of study with effect from September 1985. Persons who had completed the ‘old’ two-year
         education and training courses are afforded the same rights in respect of the taking up and pursuit of the profession as those
         who have completed the ‘new’ three-year course of education and training. According to that opinion, ‘the conditions for the
         applicability of the equal-treatment provision of Directive [89/48] appear to be satisfied in the case of the two-year period
         of education and training’.
         
            
 In that context, the Verwaltungsgericht Stuttgart also cites the following passage from an opinion of the Commission of the
         European Communities of November which Ms Beuttenmüller adduces in evidence:
         ‘If a course of education and training is replaced by a course of study at a higher-education establishment of three years’
         duration, holders of the “earlier” diploma may, in the Commission’s view, benefit from Directive 89/48/EEC if there are provisions
         of national law in existence which expressly recognise that their education and training is considered to be of a level equivalent
         to the education and training for which the “new” diploma is awarded and confers the same rights in respect of the pursuit
         of the profession’.
         
            
 However, the Verwaltungsgericht Stuttgart harbours doubts about the applicability of the equivalence clause in Ms Beuttenmüller’s
         case. It points out, first, that she received her entire education and training in Austria. In its view, the second subparagraph
         of Article 1(a) of Directive 89/seems to refer to education and training received in another Member State and recognised
         as being of an equivalent level in that Member State, in this case, the Austrian Republic.
         
            
 Second, the referring court considers that the opinion of the Austrian Federal Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs
         of August is not binding. The assertion that persons who have successfully completed the ‘old’ course are afforded
         the same rights in respect of the pursuit of the profession of primary school teacher in Austria as persons who have successfully
         completed the ‘new’ course of education and training is undermined by the content of a letter of April from the Vienna
         Stadtschulrat (City School Board) to the claimant. According to the referring court, it is apparent from that letter that,
         whilst both kinds of education and training are recognised to be of an equivalent level for recruitment purposes, only the
         three-year course of education and training to become a teacher in primary and junior secondary schools in Austria confers
         entitlement to a grade Lasalary in the relevant pay scale. Teachers who have completed only a two-year course of education
         and training must successfully complete further training and pass further examinations in certain subjects on the curriculum
         of education colleges.
         
            
 The Verwaltungsgericht Stuttgart states that, as at the date of the order for reference, Directive 92/has not been transposed
         into national law. It therefore discusses the possibility of directly applying the provisions of that directive. Moreover,
         it raises the question whether the probationary training period may be taken into account for the purposes of showing that
         the total period of post-secondary education and training required for access to the teaching profession in Baden-Württemberg
         exceeds four years. In that case, the final subparagraph of Article of Directive 92/would preclude application of the
         rules laid down in that article.
         
            
 In the light of all the foregoing considerations, the Verwaltungsgericht Stuttgart decided to stay proceedings and refer to
         the Court for a preliminary ruling the following questions: 
         ‘1.     Is Article 3, in conjunction with Article 4, of Directive 89/48/EEC … directly applicable so that a national of a Member State
         may rely directly on the provisions of the directive where it has not been correctly transposed into national law?
          2.       Is Article 3, in conjunction with Article 4, of Directive 92/51/EEC … directly applicable so that, in the absence of implementing
         measures enacted within the period prescribed for that purpose, a national of a Member State may rely on those provisions
         of the directive as against all national provisions that are not in conformity with the directive?
                    If the answer to question and/or question is in the affirmative:
          3.       Does Council Directive 89/48/EEC … or Directive 92/51/EEC … preclude national legislation (in this instance, the EU-EWR-LehrerVO,
         transposing Directive 89/48/EEC in respect of the teaching profession, …) which makes recognition of a professional teaching
         qualification awarded or recognised in another Member State of the European Union 
         (a)     conditional, without exception, on completion of higher education and training of at least three years’ duration, 
         (b)     require the qualification to comprise at least two of the subjects stipulated for the teaching profession in question in Baden-Württemberg?
                    If the answer to question is in the affirmative:
          4.       Is the second subparagraph of Article 1(a) of Directive 89/48/EEC to be interpreted as meaning that the qualification for
         the profession of primary school teacher awarded on the basis of the former two-year system of education and training in Austria
         is to be treated in the same way as a diploma within the meaning of the first subparagraph of Article 1(a) of Directive 89/48/EEC
         where the competent authority in Austria confirms that the examination certificate awarded following education and training
         of two years’ duration is recognised, for the purposes of the application of the second subparagraph of Article 1(a) of Directive
         89/48/EEC, as being of a level equivalent to the diploma (examination certificate) currently awarded after three years’ study
         and confers the same rights in Austria in respect of the taking up or pursuit of the profession of primary school teacher?
                    If the answer to question is in the affirmative:
          5.       Is [the final subparagraph of] Article of Directive 92/51/EEC to be interpreted, with regard to the recognition of professional
         teaching qualifications, as meaning that the prerequisite of a “post-secondary course of more than four years’ duration”,
         specified in that provision, only encompasses the prescribed higher education and training (higher-education studies) or as
         meaning that the probationary period of teaching practice (“Lehramtsreferendariat”) counts towards the “post-secondary course
         of more than four years’ duration”?
          6.       If Article 3, first subparagraph, of Directive 92/51/EEC applies to professional teaching qualifications awarded after only
         two years’ (higher) education and training in Austria:
          In the event of failure to transpose Directive 92/51/EEC within the period prescribed in Article thereof, does Article
         3(a) of that directive give rise to an entitlement to have a teaching qualification awarded in a Member State treated in the
         same way as the corresponding qualification for a teaching career in the host Member State without the host Member State being
         permitted ─ where the particular conditions are fulfilled ─ first of all to require compensatory measures to be applied under
         Article of the directive?’
         
The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 By its questions, the referring court asks essentially whether a national of a Member State who holds a qualification for
         entry to the teaching profession, obtained in her Member State of origin following a two-year period of education and training,
         may rely directly on the provisions of Directive 89/or Directive 92/in seeking recognition by the competent authority
         of the host Member State of her entitlement to pursue the profession of teacher in the schools of that State under the same
         conditions as the nationals of that State.
         
            
 It should be noted as a preliminary point that, as is apparent in particular from the first recital of the preambles to Directives
         89/and 92/51, the primary objective of those directives is the abolition of obstacles to freedom of movement for persons
         and services within the Community. Those recitals emphasise that, amongst other things, freedom of movement for persons and
         services entails, for nationals of the Member States, the possibility of pursuing a profession, whether in a self-employed
         or employed capacity, in a Member State other than that in which they acquired their professional qualifications. It also
         follows from the third and fourth recitals of the preamble to Directive 89/that the introduction of a general system of
         recognition of diplomas is intended to facilitate the pursuit by Community citizens of all professional activities which in
         the host Member State are dependent upon the completion of a particular education and training. Recital of the preamble
         to Directive 92/moreover confirms that the aim of the general system of recognition of diplomas implemented by that directive,
         like the first general system implemented by Directive 89/48, is to eliminate obstacles to the taking up of regulated professions.
         
            
 Since it is necessary to determine whether, in circumstances such as those in the main proceedings, the conditions for the
         direct application of the relevant provisions of Directive 89/are met, it is first necessary to examine the fourth question
         referred for a preliminary ruling, concerning the interpretation of the second subparagraph of Article 1(a) of that directive.
         As is apparent from its title, this lays down a general system for the recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on
         completion of professional education and training of at least three years’ duration, whereas, in the present case, the claimant
         in the main proceedings followed a period of education and training in Austria of just two years. Accordingly, if the reply
         to the fourth question is in the negative, the applicant cannot rely on the rights conferred by that directive.
         
The fourth question
            
 By this question, the referring court asks whether the second subparagraph of Article 1(a) of Directive 89/should be interpreted
         as meaning that a qualification for the profession of teacher such as that formerly awarded on the basis of a two-year period
         of education and training in Austria is to be treated in the same way as a diploma within the meaning of the first subparagraph
         of that provision, where the competent authority of that State certifies that the diploma awarded following education and
         training of two years’ duration is recognised as being of a level equivalent to the diploma currently awarded after three
         years’ study and confers the same rights in that Member State in respect of the taking up or pursuit of the profession of
         teacher. 
         
            
 According to Ms Beuttenmüller, the Austrian Government and the Commission, the reply to that question should be in the affirmative,
         whilst the Land  Baden-Württemberg appears to submit that a two-year period of education and training completed in an Austrian college of education
         cannot fall within the equivalence clause laid down by the second subparagraph of Article 1(a) of Directive 89/48. In any
         event it considers that that provision does not apply in the dispute in the main proceedings. Ms Beuttenmüller and the Austrian
         Government are of the opposite view. The Commission, for its part, submits that it is for the national court to determine
         whether the conditions to which that directive subjects the equivalence of diplomas are satisfied in the dispute in the main
         proceedings.
         
            
 It should be noted in this connection that the term ‘diploma’ for the purposes of Directive 89/is defined in Article 1(a)
         thereof, which has two subparagraphs. The first subparagraph sets out the conditions which must be satisfied by diplomas,
         certificates or other evidence of formal qualifications in order to fall within the definition of ‘diploma’. Amongst those
         conditions should be noted that concerning the minimum period of post-secondary study to which such a diploma attests. Under
         the second subparagraph of that provision, any diploma, certificate or other evidence of formal qualification which does not
         satisfy the conditions of the first subparagraph is nevertheless to be treated in the same way as a diploma within the meaning
         of that subparagraph provided that it satisfies certain conditions. It must have been awarded by a competent authority in
         a Member State on successful completion of education and training received in the Community. Furthermore, such education and
         training must have been recognised by that competent authority as being of an equivalent level and the diploma, certificate
         or other evidence of formal qualifications must confer the same rights in respect of the taking up and pursuit of a regulated
         profession in that Member State.
         
            
 It must be noted that the conditions referred to in the preceding paragraph are satisfied by a diploma such as that awarded
         in Austria upon completion of a two-year period of education and training received entirely within that Member State provided
         that the competent authority certifies that that diploma is regarded as equivalent to the diploma currently granted after
         three years’ study and confers the same rights in respect of the taking up and pursuit of the profession of teacher in that
         State. The expression ‘education and training received in the Community’ covers both education and training received entirely
         in the Member State which awarded the diploma or certificate in question and that received partly or wholly in another Member
         State.
         
            
 That interpretation of the second subparagraph of Article 1(a) of Directive 89/48, which follows directly from the wording
         of that provision is, moreover, corroborated by the ‘Report to the European Parliament and to the Council on the state of
         application of the general system for the recognition of higher-education diplomas made in accordance with Article of Directive
         89/48/EEC (COM(96) final)’, which was presented by the Commission on February 1996. According to point III(v) of that
         report, the second subparagraph of Article 1(a) of that directive was included to take account of persons who had not undergone
         three years of higher education and training, but who hold qualifications giving them the same professional rights as if they
         had completed such a course. It is apparent from point III(vi) of that report that that situation exists in several Member
         States. It is moreover apparent from this that that provision also applies where, in a Member State, a course of education
         and training which does not fall within the first subparagraph of Article 1(a) is replaced by one leading to a diploma within
         the meaning of that subparagraph, provided that national legislation explicitly recognises that the old education and training
         was of an equivalent level to that of the new education and training and that it confers on the holders of the ‘old’ diplomas
         the same rights to take up and pursue the profession in question as those of the holders of the new diplomas.
         
            
 With regard to the doubts raised by the referring court and the Land Baden-Württemberg in the course of the present proceedings concerning the verification of the final condition laid down by
         the second subparagraph of Article 1(a) of Directive 89/48, it is not for the Court to determine that question by way of a
         preliminary ruling. It is for the national court to determine in the light of the evidence submitted by the person concerned
         pursuant to Article 8(1) of that directive, and the relevant national provisions for the assessment of such evidence, whether
         that condition must be regarded as satisfied in the main proceedings.
         
            
 It should, however, be stated, as the Austrian Government rightly pointed out, that that condition concerns the right to pursue
         a regulated profession and not the remuneration and other employment conditions applicable in the Member State which recognises
         the equivalence of the old and new education and training. The reference in the second subparagraph of Article 1(a) of Directive
         89/to ‘the same rights in respect of the … pursuit of a regulated profession’ is intended specifically to take account
         of the situation of those who retain the right to pursue the profession in question even if the diplomas or certificates which
         they hold no longer entitle them to take up that profession in the territory of the Member State which awarded or recognised
         them. That interpretation is in accordance with the objective of the protection of acquired rights which underpins the second
         subparagraph of Article 1(a) of Directive 89/48. It is also confirmed by the use of the conjunction ‘or’ in the wording of
         that provision, which distinguishes between, on the one hand, ‘the taking up … of a regulated profession’ and on the other,
         the ‘pursuit’ thereof.
         
            
 The reply to the fourth question must therefore be that the second subparagraph of Article 1(a) of Directive 89/must be
         interpreted as meaning that a qualification for the profession of teacher, such as that formerly awarded on the basis of a
         two-year period of education and training in Austria, is to be treated in the same way as a diploma within the meaning of
         the first subparagraph of that provision where the competent authority of that Member State certifies that the diploma awarded
         following education and training of two years’ duration is recognised as being of a level equivalent to the diploma currently
         awarded after three years’ study and confers the same rights in that Member State in respect of the taking up or pursuit of
         the profession of teacher. It is for the national court to determine, in the light of the evidence submitted by the applicant
         in accordance with Article 8(1) of that directive and the national provisions applicable to the assessment of such evidence,
         whether the final condition laid down by the second subparagraph of Article 1(a) must be regarded as satisfied in the case
         in the main proceedings. That condition concerns the right to take up a regulated profession and not the remuneration and
         other employment conditions applicable in the Member State which recognises the equivalence of the old and new education and
         training. 
         
The first and third questions
            
 By its first and third questions, which should be considered together, the referring court asks essentially whether Article
         in conjunction with Article of Directive 89/may be relied on by a national of a Member State as against national provisions
         which do not comply with that directive and whether that directive precludes provisions such as those contained in the EU-EWR-LehrerVO,
         which transpose that directive as regards the teaching profession, in that, in order to recognise a qualification for the
         teaching profession awarded or recognised in another Member State, those national provisions require without exception the
         completion of higher education and training of at least three years’ duration and comprising at least two of the subjects
         stipulated for the teaching profession in question in the host Member State.
         
            
 Ms Beuttenmüller, the Austrian Government and the Commission consider that the EU-EWR-LehrerVO incorrectly transposes Directive
         89/and submit that Article 3(a) thereof may be relied upon by a national of a Member State for the purpose of having national
         provisions which are incompatible with that directive disapplied. The Land Baden-Württemberg for its part submits that the EU-EWR-LehrerVO satisfies the requirements of that directive in all respects
         and, consequently, the provisions of the directive cannot be applied directly. 
         
            
 It should be borne in mind that Article 3(a) of Directive 89/provides that the competent authority of the host Member State
         may not, on grounds of inadequate qualifications, refuse to authorise a national of a Member State to take up or pursue a
         regulated profession on the same conditions as apply to its nationals if the applicant holds the diploma required in another
         Member State for the taking up or pursuit of the profession in question in its territory, such diploma having been awarded
         in a Member State.
         
            
 As stated in paragraph of the present judgment, the term ‘diploma’ within the meaning of Directive 89/48, used inter alia
         in Article 3(a) thereof, covers not only diplomas, certificates or other evidence of formal qualifications which satisfy the
         conditions laid down by the first subparagraph of Article 1(a) of that directive, but also those which are to be treated in
         the same way as diplomas, certificates or other evidence of formal qualifications pursuant to the second subparagraph of that
         provision. Consequently, in accordance with Article 3(a), the competent authority of the host Member State is required to
         recognise the professional qualifications giving the right to take up a regulated profession where the applicant holds a diploma
         treated in the same way pursuant to the second subparagraph of Article 1(a) of that directive, even if that diploma is awarded
         upon successful completion of a period of education and training of less than three years and/or where the corresponding studies
         were not followed in a higher-education establishment or another establishment of a similar level.
         
            
 It follows that Directive 89/48, in particular Article 3(a) thereof, precludes national provisions such as those set out in
         the EU-EWR-LehrerVO which require, without exception, for the purposes of the recognition of professional teaching qualifications
         that a teacher complete higher education and training of at least three years’ duration.
         
            
 Directive 89/also precludes national provisions which make the recognition of a professional qualification acquired in
         another Member State dependent upon that education and training having a particular content, such as the provisions laid down
         by the EU-EWR-LehrerVO which require that the education and training demonstrated by the applicant cover two of the subjects
         stipulated for the teaching profession in Baden-Württemberg.
         
            
 The Commission rightly pointed out that the system of mutual recognition of diplomas established by Directive 89/does not
         imply that diplomas awarded by the other Member States certify an education and training similar or comparable to that required
         in the host Member State. According to that system, a diploma is not recognised on the basis of the intrinsic value of the
         education and training to which it attests, but because it gives the right to take up a regulated profession in the Member
         State where it was awarded or recognised. Differences in the organisation or content of teacher education and training acquired
         in another Member State by comparison with that provided in the host Member State are not therefore sufficient to justify
         a refusal to recognise the professional qualification concerned. At most, where those differences are substantial, they may
         justify the host Member State requiring that the applicant satisfy one or other of the compensatory measures set out in Article
         of the directive.
         
            
 It is not in dispute in the main proceedings that Paragraph 1(1)(2) of the EU-EWR-LehrerVO makes recognition of a teaching
         qualification dependent upon the education and training acquired in another Member State covering at least two of the subjects
         stipulated in the host Member State, even if the applicant wishes to teach only one subject covered by her education and training.
         That requirement is likely to prevent a great number of Community nationals from entering the teaching profession in the host
         Member State in question, even though they have the qualifications necessary to pursue that profession in their Member State
         of origin. Furthermore, it amounts to requiring that the education and training acquired in a Member State other than the
         host Member State be similar or comparable to that provided in the latter State, which is clearly contrary to the system of
         recognition of diplomas established by Directive 89/and the express wording of Article 3(a) thereof.
         
            
 According to the Court’s case-law, wherever the provisions of a directive appear, as far as their subject-matter is concerned,
         to be unconditional and sufficiently precise, those provisions may be relied upon by an individual against the State where
         that State has failed to implement the directive in national law by the end of the period prescribed or where it has failed
         to implement the directive correctly (see, inter alia, Case 103/Fratelli Costanzo [1989] ECR 1839, paragraph 29; Case C-141/Kügler [2002] ECR I-6833, paragraph 51; and Joined Cases C-465/00, C-138/and C-139/Österreichischer Rundfunk and Others [2003] ECR I-4989, paragraph 98). 
         
            
 In that regard, Article 3(a) of Directive 89/is a provision the subject-matter of which is unconditional and sufficiently
         precise. Individuals are therefore entitled to rely upon that provision before a national court in order to have national
         provisions inconsistent with the directive disapplied. 
         
            
 With regard to Article of Directive 89/48, it should be noted that in the case in the main proceedings, no compensatory
         measure under that article was imposed on Ms Beuttenmüller by the competent authority of the host Member State. In those circumstances,
         it is not appropriate for the Court to rule on the interpretation of that provision.
         
            
 In the light of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the first and third questions must be that Article 3(a) of Directive
         89/may be relied upon by a national of a Member State as against national provisions inconsistent with that directive.
         That directive precludes such provisions where, for the purpose of recognising a professional teaching qualification awarded
         or recognised in a Member State other than the host Member State, they require, without exception, completion of a period
         of higher education and training of at least three years’ duration and covering at least two of the subjects stipulated for
         the teaching profession in the host Member State. 
         
The second, fifth and sixth questions
            
 By its second, fifth and sixth questions, which should be examined together and which concern the interpretation of Articles
         and of Directive 92/51, the referring court asks essentially whether, in the absence of implementing measures enacted
         within the period prescribed in the first subparagraph of Article 17(1) of that directive, a national of a Member State may
         rely on Article 3(a) of that directive in order to obtain in the host Member State recognition of a professional teaching
         qualification such as that awarded in Austria following education and training of two-years’ duration or whether, on the contrary,
         that possibility is excluded by reason of the application in the case in the main proceedings of the derogation laid down
         by the final subparagraph of Article or is conditional upon the applicant first complying with any compensatory measures
         that may be required pursuant to Article of that directive.
         
            
 It should be borne in mind that, according to the information contained in the order for reference, the Land  Baden-Württemberg failed to transpose Directive 92/51, which, according to the first subparagraph of Article 17(1), the Member
         States should have been transposed before June 1994. Furthermore, it follows from Article 3(a) of that directive, the purpose
         and subject-matter of which are similar to those of Article 3(a) of Directive 89/48, that the competent authority of the host
         Member State must recognise the equivalence of a professional teaching qualification held by a national of a Member State
         if the applicant holds a diploma, as defined by Directive 92/or 89/48, which is required by a Member State for the taking
         up or pursuit of that profession in its territory. As is apparent from Article 1(a) of Directive 92/51, for the purposes of
         that directive, a diploma is any evidence of education and training which shows that the holder has successfully completed
         inter alia a post-secondary course other than that referred to in the second indent of Article 1(a) of Directive 89/48, of
         at least one year’s duration.
         
            
 In those circumstances, a national of a Member State can rely on Article 3(a) of Directive 92/to obtain recognition in
         the host Member State of a professional teaching qualification such as that awarded in Austria upon completion of a two-year
         period of education and training. It should however be pointed out that, where such a professional qualification also meets
         all the requirements laid down by the second subparagraph of Article 1(a) of Directive 89/in order to be treated in the
         same way as a diploma under the first subparagraph of that provision, the competent authority of the Member State must grant
         recognition under Article 3(a) of Directive 89/and not under Article 3(a) of Directive 92/51.
         
            
 The Land  Baden-Württemberg submits, however, that Article of Directive 92/does not apply in the case in the main proceedings because
         of the derogation laid down by the final subparagraph of that article. According to that provision, the host Member State
         is not required to apply that article where the taking up or pursuit of a regulated profession is subject in its country to
         possession of a diploma as defined in Directive 89/48, one of the conditions for the issue of which is the completion of a
         post-secondary course of more than four years’ duration. The Land  Baden-Württemberg submits in that context that the pursuit of the profession of teacher in its primary or junior secondary
         schools necessitates a three-year period of study in a higher college of education and a preparatory probationary period of
         at least months following those studies. Therefore, it does involve a post-secondary course of more than four years’ duration
         within the meaning of the last subparagraph of Article of Directive 92/51.
         
            
 That interpretation cannot be upheld.
         
            
 First, as the Advocate General pointed out in point of his Opinion, a Member State which has failed to fulfil its obligation
         to transpose the provisions of a directive into national law can no more rely, as against Community citizens, upon the limitations
         laid down by those provisions than it can require that they perform the obligations laid down by that directive. The Land  Baden-Württemberg cannot therefore rely upon the derogation laid down by the final subparagraph of Article of Directive
         92/as against an individual since it has failed to transpose that directive.
         
            
 Second, the interpretation of the final subparagraph of Article of Directive 92/put forward by the Land  Baden-Württemberg is, in any event, incorrect. It is apparent from several provisions of that directive, in particular Article
         1(g) and the first indent of Article 4(1)(a) thereof, that the term ‘post-secondary course’ is distinct from that of ‘probationary
         practice’, even though professional training may consist of a post-secondary course plus a period of probationary practice.
         There is no evidence to suggest that the final subparagraph of Article of that directive does not take account of that distinction.
         Furthermore, a provision which derogates from the general principle established by that directive, that the host Member State
         may not refuse the right to take up a regulated profession to a national of a Member State who possesses the qualification
         required by a Member State other than the host Member State in order to take up that profession, must be interpreted strictly
         (see, by analogy, Kügler, paragraph 28). Consequently, the final subparagraph of Article of Directive 92/must be regarded as referring only to
         the duration of the post-secondary course and the period of probationary practice may not be included in the calculation of
         the minimum period of four years, which is one of the conditions for the application of that derogation.
         
            
 As for making the recognition of a professional qualification conditional upon the applicant first complying with the compensatory
         measures that may be required pursuant to Article of Directive 92/51, it follows from paragraph of the present judgment
         that, where a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligation to transpose the provisions of a directive into national law,
         it cannot require individuals to perform the obligations laid down by those provisions. The Land  Baden-Württemberg cannot therefore refuse to recognise the equivalence of the diploma held by the claimant in the main proceedings
         by relying on any obligation on the part of that applicant first to submit to compensatory measures.
         
            
 Furthermore, it should be emphasised that the competent authority of the host Member State did not impose any of the compensatory
         measures referred to in Article of Directive 92/on Ms Beuttenmüller. In those circumstances, as has already been stated
         at paragraph of the present judgment in respect of Article of Directive 89/48, it is not appropriate for the Court to
         rule on the interpretation of the equivalent provision of Directive 92/51.
         
            
 In the light of all of the foregoing, the reply to the second, fifth and sixth questions must be that in the absence of implementing
         measures enacted within the period prescribed in the first subparagraph of Article 17(1) of Directive 92/51, a national of
         a Member State may rely on Article 3(a) of that directive in order to obtain in the host Member State recognition of a professional
         teaching qualification such as that awarded in Austria following education and training of two years’ duration. In circumstances
         such as those in the case in the main proceedings, that possibility is neither excluded by reason of the application of the
         derogation laid down by the final subparagraph of Article of that directive nor is it conditional upon the applicant first
         complying with any compensatory measures that may be required pursuant to Article of that directive. 
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the Austrian Government and by the Commission, which have submitted observations to the Court, are not
         recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the
         national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
 in answer to the questions referred to it by the Verwaltungsgericht Stuttgart by order of March 2002, hereby rules:
         
 
1.
The second subparagraph of Article 1(a) of Council Directive 89/48/EEC of December on a general system for the recognition
                     of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of professional education and training of at least three years’ duration
                     must be interpreted as meaning that a qualification for the profession of teacher, such as that formerly awarded on the basis
                     of a two-year period of education and training in Austria, is to be treated in the same way as a diploma within the meaning
                     of the first subparagraph of that provision where the competent authority of that Member State certifies that the diploma
                     awarded following education and training of two years’ duration is recognised as being of a level equivalent to the diploma
                     currently awarded after three years’ study and confers the same rights in that Member State in respect of the taking up or
                     pursuit of the profession of teacher. It is for the national court to determine, in the light of the evidence submitted by
                     the applicant in accordance with Article 8(1) of that directive and the national provisions applicable to the assessment of
                     such evidence, whether the final condition laid down by the second subparagraph of Article 1(a) must be regarded as satisfied
                     in the case in the main proceedings. That condition concerns the right to take up a regulated profession and not the remuneration
                     and other employment conditions applicable in the Member State which recognises the equivalence of the old and new education
                     and training. 
                  
 
2.
Article 3(a) of Directive 89/may be relied upon by a national of a Member State as against national provisions inconsistent
                     with that directive. That directive precludes such provisions where, for the purpose of recognising a professional teaching
                     qualification awarded or recognised in a Member State other than the host Member State, they require, without exception, 
                     completion of a period of higher education and training of at least three years’ duration and covering at least two of the
                     subjects stipulated for the teaching profession in the host Member State.
                  
 
3.
In the absence of implementing measures enacted within the period prescribed in the first subparagraph of Article 17(1) of
                     Council Directive 92/51/EEC of June on a second general system for the recognition of professional education and training
                     to supplement Directive 89/48, a national of a Member State may rely on Article 3(a) of that directive in order to obtain
                     in the host Member State recognition of a professional teaching qualification such as that awarded in Austria following education
                     and training of two years’ duration. In circumstances such as those in the case in the main proceedings, that possibility
                     is neither excluded by reason of the application of the derogation laid down by the final subparagraph of Article of that
                     directive nor is it conditional upon the applicant first complying with any compensatory measures that may be required pursuant
                     to Article of that directive.
                  
Jann
Timmermans
Rosas
La Pergola
von Bahr
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on April 2004.
         
R. Grass
V. Skouris
Registrar
President
 –
            
Language of the case: German.
Top  
 