
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-201/Commission of the European Communities
v
Kingdom of Sweden
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Disposal of waste oils – Failure to transpose Directive 75/439/EEC)
Summary of the Judgment
Member States – Obligations – Implementation of directives – Failure to fulfil obligations – National system pleaded as justification
            – Not permissible
(Art. EC)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)March 2004(1)
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations  –  Disposal of waste oils  –  Failure to transpose Directive 75/439/EEC)
 In Case C-201/03,
            
Commission of the European Communities, represented by  L. Ström and M. Konstantinidis, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg, 
            
applicant,
v
Kingdom of Sweden, represented by A. Kruse, acting as Agent,                              
            
defendant,
 APPLICATION for a declaration that by failing to adopt the necessary measures under Article 3(1) of Council Directive 75/439/EEC
            of June on the disposal of waste oils (OJ L 194, p. 23), as amended by Council Directive 87/101/EEC of December
            (OJ L 42, p. 43), to ensure that priority is given to the processing of waste oils by regeneration where technical,
            economic and organisational constraints so allow, the Kingdom of Sweden has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive,
            
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
 composed of: C. Gulmann, President of the Chamber,  S. von Bahr and  R. Silva de Lapuerta (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
 Advocate General:  C. Stix-Hackl, Registrar: R. Grass,
            
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By application lodged at the Court Registry on May 2003, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action under
         Article EC for a declaration that, by failing to adopt the necessary measures under Article 3(1) of Council Directive
         75/439/EEC of June on the disposal of waste oils (OJ L 194, p. 23), as amended by Council Directive 87/101/EEC
         of December (OJ L 42, p. 43) (hereinafter ‘Directive 75/439’), to ensure that priority is given to the processing
         of waste oils by regeneration where technical, economic and organisational constraints so allow, the Kingdom of Sweden has
         failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive. 
         
            
 Pursuant to Article of Directive 87/101, Member States were required to take the measures necessary to comply with that
         Directive with effect from January 1990.
         
            
 As it took the view that Article 3(1) of Directive 75/had not been transposed into Swedish law within the prescribed period,
         the Commission brought infringement proceedings against the Kingdom of Sweden. Having called upon the latter to submit its
         observations, the Commission sent it a reasoned opinion on March inviting it to take the necessary measures to comply
         with that opinion within two months of its notification. As the information provided by the Swedish authorities disclosed
         that the directive in question had not been transposed, the Commission decided to bring this action. 
         
            
 While it did not deny that the directive had not been transposed, the Swedish Government claimed that the failure to do so
         resulted from the consideration being given by the competent authorities to the appropriate procedures for ensuring that priority
         was given to the disposal of waste oils by regeneration.
         
            
 The Court has consistently held that a Member State cannot rely on provisions, practices or circumstances in its own legal
         order to justify failure to implement a directive within the prescribed period (see, inter alia, Case C-276/Commission  v Portugal [2001] ECR I-1699, paragraph 20, and Case C-352/Commission  v Spain [2002] ECR I‑10263, paragraph 8).
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Commission’s application must be held to be well founded.
         
            
 It must accordingly be held that, by failing to adopt the necessary measures under Article 3(1) of Directive 75/to ensure
         that priority is given to the processing of waste oils by regeneration where technical, economic and organisational constraints
         so allow, the Kingdom of Sweden has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive.
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs against the Kingdom of Sweden
         and the latter has been unsuccessful, it should be ordered to pay the costs.
         
On those grounds,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
 hereby:
         
1)
Declares that by failing to take the necessary measures under Article 3(1) of Council Directive 75/439/EEC of June on the disposal of waste oils, as amended by Council Directive 87/101/EEC of December 1986, to ensure that priority is
                     given to the processing of waste oils by regeneration where technical, economic and organisational constraints so allow, the
                     Kingdom of Sweden has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive;
                  
2)
Orders the Kingdom of Sweden to pay the costs. 
Gulmann
von Bahr
Silva de Lapuerta
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on March 2004.
         
R. Grass
C. Gulmann
Registrar
President of the Fifth Chamber
 –
            
Language of the case: Swedish.
Top  
 