
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
April ?(1)
      
(Veterinary and zootechnical sector – Regulation (EC) No 998/– Animal health conditions applicable to non-commercial movement of pet animals – Decision 2003/803/EC – Model passport for the intra-Community movements of dogs, cats and ferrets)
In Joined Cases C‑42/10, C‑45/and C‑57/10,
REFERENCES for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Raad van State (Belgium), made by decisions of January
         2010,  received at the Court on and January 2010, in the proceedings 
      
Vlaamse Dierenartsenvereniging VZW (C‑42/10, C‑45/and C‑57/10),
      
Marc Janssens (C-42/and C-45/10)
      
v
Belgische Staat, 
intervening party:
Luk Vangheluwe (C-42/10),
      
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, D. Šváby (Rapporteur), G. Arestis, J. Malenovský and T. von Danwitz, Judges,
Advocate General: Y. Bot,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on February 2011,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        the Vlaamse Dierenartsenvereniging VZW, by R. Gielen, advocaat,
–        the Belgian Government, by J.-C. Halleux, acting as Agent, assisted by J.‑F. De Bock, avocat,
–        the European Commission, by A. Marcoulli and B. Burggraaf, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
These references for a preliminary ruling concern the interpretation of Articles 3(b), 4(2), and the second paragraph of
         Article of Regulation (EC) No 998/of the European Parliament and of the Council of May on the animal health
         requirements applicable to the non-commercial movement of pet animals and amending Council Directive 92/65/EEC (OJ L
         146, p. 1), of Commission Decision 2003/803/EC of November establishing a model passport for the intra-Community movements
         of dogs, cats and ferrets (OJ L 312, p. 1) and of Article of Directive 98/34/EC of the European Parliament and of the
         Council laying down a procedure for the provision of information in the field of technical standards and regulations and of
         rules on Information Society services (OJ L 204, p. 37), as amended by Directive 98/48/EC of the European Parliament
         and of the Council of July (OJ L 217, p. 18; ‘Directive 98/34’). 
      
The references have been made in the course of proceedings between, firstly, the Vlaamse Dierenartsenvereniging VZW (‘the
         VDV’) and Mr Janssens (Cases C‑42/and C-45/10) and the Belgische Staat, and secondly, the VDV and the Belgische Staat (Case
         C-57/10), seeking annulment of the Royal Decree of September amending the Royal Decree of February regulating
         the veterinary control of rabies (Moniteur belge, September 2004, p. 69208; ‘the Decree of September 2004’) (Case C-42/10), of the Royal Decree of May on the
         identification and registration of dogs (Moniteur belge, June 2004, p. 43185; ‘the Decree of May 2004’) (Case C-45/10) and of the Royal Decree of May on the model and
         methods of distribution of passports for the intra‑Community movement of cats and ferrets (Moniteur belge, May 2004, p. 40130; ‘the Decree of May 2004’) (Case C-57/10). 
      
By order of the President of the Court of March 2010, Cases C‑42/10, C‑45/and C‑57/were joined for the purposes of
         the written and oral procedure and the judgment, on account of the connection between them, in accordance with Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court.
      
 Legal context
 European Union legislation
 Regulation No 998/Article of Regulation No 998/provides:
      
‘For the purposes of this Regulation:
…
(b)      “passport” means any document enabling the pet animal to be clearly identified and including the points that enable its status
         with regard to this Regulation to be checked, which is to be drawn up in accordance with the second paragraph of Article 17;
      
…’.
Article 4(2) of that regulation is worded in the following terms:
      
‘Whatever form the animal identification system takes, provision shall also be made for the indication of details identifying
         the name and address of the animal’s owner.’ 
      
Article of that regulation reads as follows:
      
‘When being moved, pet animals of the species listed in parts A and B of Annex I must, without prejudice to the requirements
         laid down in Article 6: 
      
(a)      be identified in accordance with Article 4, and 
(b)      be accompanied by a passport issued by a veterinarian authorised by the competent authority certifying valid anti-rabies vaccination,
         or revaccination if applicable, in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturing laboratory, carried out on the
         animal in question with an inactivated vaccine of at least one antigenic unit per dose (WHO standard). 
      
2.      Member States may authorise the movement of animals listed in parts A and B of Annex I which are under three months old and
         unvaccinated, if they are accompanied by a passport and have stayed in the place in which they were born since birth without
         contact with wild animals likely to have been exposed to the infection or are accompanied by their mothers on whom they are
         still dependent.’ 
      
The second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 998/states:
      
‘The model passports which must accompany animals of the species listed in parts A and B of Annex I which are being moved
         shall be drawn up in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 24(2).’ 
      
Annex I, parts A and B, to that regulation refers to dogs, cats and ferrets. 
      
 Decision 2003/Pursuant to Article thereof, Decision 2003/establishes the model passport for the movement of dogs, cats and ferrets
         between Member States. 
      
By a reference to Article of that decision, Annex I thereto requires the cover and the first to third pages of that model
         passport to be in the following format:
      
Article of Decision 2003/provides that the model passport must comply with the additional requirements set out in Annex
         II thereto.
      
In that regard, Annex II, A, point states:
      
‘The format of the model passport shall be uniform.’
Annex II, B, point 2(c) reads as follows:
      
‘The number of the model passport, comprising the ISO code of the Member State of issue followed by a unique number, shall
         be printed on the cover of the model passport.’ 
      
Annex II, C, point states that the size and the shape of the boxes of the model passport set out in Annex I are indicative
         and not binding. 
      
 Directive 98/Article of Directive 98/provides:
      
‘For the purposes of this Directive, the following meanings shall apply:
(1)      “product”, any industrially manufactured product and any agricultural product, including fish products;
(2)      “service”, any Information Society service, that is to say, any service normally provided for remuneration, at a distance,
         by electronic means and at the individual request of a recipient of services.
      
…
(3)      “technical specification”, a specification contained in a document which lays down the characteristics required of a product
         such as levels of quality, performance, safety or dimensions, including the requirements applicable to the product as regards
         the name under which the product is sold, terminology, symbols, testing and test methods, packaging, marking or labelling
         and conformity assessment procedures. 
      
…
(4)      “other requirements”, a requirement, other than a technical specification, imposed on a product for the purpose of protecting,
         in particular, consumers or the environment, and which affects its life cycle after it has been placed on the market, such
         as conditions of use, recycling, reuse or disposal, where such conditions can significantly influence the composition or nature
         of the product or its marketing; 
      
…
(11)      “technical regulation”, technical specifications and other requirements or rules on services, including the relevant administrative
         provisions, the observance of which is compulsory, de jure or de facto, in the case of marketing, provision of a service, establishment of a service operator or use in a Member State or a major
         part thereof, as well as laws, regulations or administrative provisions of Member States, except those provided for in Article
         10, prohibiting the manufacture, importation, marketing or use of a product or prohibiting the provision or use of a service,
         or establishment as a service provider. 
      
…’
Article of Directive 98/states:
      
‘1.      Subject to Article 10, Member States shall immediately communicate to the Commission any draft technical regulation, except
         where it merely transposes the full text of an international or European standard, in which case information regarding the
         relevant standard shall suffice; they shall also let the Commission have a statement of the grounds which make the enactment
         of such a technical regulation necessary, where these have not already been made clear in the draft.
      
Where appropriate, and unless it has already been sent with a prior communication, Member States shall simultaneously communicate
         the text of the basic legislative or regulatory provisions principally and directly concerned, should knowledge of such text
         be necessary to assess the implications of the draft technical regulation. 
      
Member States shall communicate the draft again under the above conditions if they make changes to the draft that have the
         effect of significantly altering its scope, shortening the timetable originally envisaged for implementation, adding specifications
         or requirements, or making the latter more restrictive. 
      
…
The Commission shall immediately notify the other Member States of the draft and all documents which have been forwarded to
         it; it may also refer this draft, for an opinion, to the Committee referred to in Article and, where appropriate, to the
         committee responsible for the field in question. 
      
…
3.      Member States shall communicate the definitive text of a technical regulation to the Commission without delay. 
…’
 National legislation
Article 3(2) of the Decree of May provides:
      
‘All passports shall bear a unique number. That number shall consist of characters, namely, the ISO code for Belgium, “BE”,
         followed by the identification number of the distributor consisting of two digits and a serial number consisting of nine digits.’
         
      
The second subparagraph of Article 2(2) of the Decree of May states:
      
‘Proof of identification and registration of dogs identified and registered after the entry into force of this Decree shall
         be provided by the passport, the model for which is laid down in Annex II to this Decree, supplied with the definitive certificate
         of identification and registration referred to in Article 19. The model definitive certificate of identification and registration
         is laid down in Annex III to this Decree.’ 
      
By a reference from Article thereof to Annex II of that Decree, the format of the model passport of pages for pet animals
         is established. The second and third pages thereof are in the following format: 
      
Article of the Decree of May reads as follows:
      
‘The definitive certificate of identification and registration consists of two self‑adhesive stickers which are affixed to
         pages and of the passport.’
      
Article of that Decree provides:
      
‘Following receipt of the yellow copy of the temporary certificate of identification, the holder of the central register shall
         register the dog’s details and those of its owner in the central register and shall send the owner a definitive certificate
         of identification and registration and an insert entitled “Change of owner/Amendment of details/Death”, the model of which
         is laid down in Annex IV to this Decree. Immediately upon receipt, the owner shall affix the definitive certificate of identification
         and registration in the passport.’ 
      
Article of that Decree states:
      
‘If ownership of a dog is transferred, the original owner shall complete the insert “Change of owner/Amendment of details/Death”
         and shall send it within eight days to the holder of the central register. The passport shall immediately be passed to the
         new owner. The holder of the central register shall send proof of the change to the new owner, together with an insert “Change
         of owner/Amendments of details/Death”. Immediately upon receipt, the new owner shall affix the new definitive certificate
         of identification and registration in the passport.’ 
      
Under Article of that Decree:
      
‘In the situations set out in Article or 7, the identifying person shall send, as soon as possible and in any event within
         eight days, the insert “Change of owner/Amendment of details/Death”, stating the new identification mark, to the holder of
         the central register. As proof of registration under that new identification mark, the holder shall send to the owner a new
         definitive certificate of identification and registration, together with an insert “Change of owner/Amendment of details/Death”.’
         
      
Article of the Decree of September amends Article of the Royal Decree of February regulating the veterinary
         control of rabies (Moniteur belge, February 1967, p. 1966; ‘the Decree of February 1967’), the amended wording of which is as follows: 
      
‘Paragraph 1. The authorised veterinarian who has administered any vaccination shall issue a certificate in the format of the model annexed
         to the present Decree. 
      
Paragraph 2. For a dog, cat or ferret bearing a tattoo or readable microchip or which is identified at the time of vaccination, the authorised
         veterinarian shall issue a passport which, as appropriate, has been distributed by an authorised legal entity pursuant to
         the provisions of [the Decree of May 2004] or by the holder of the central register for the identification of dogs, designated
         pursuant to Article of [the Decree of May 2004]. After identification or after verification of the identification, the
         authorised veterinarian shall state in the abovementioned passport which vaccination he has administered.
      
If the dog, cat or ferret already has a passport as referred to in the first subparagraph, the authorised veterinarian who
         has administered the vaccination shall, after checking the identification data, add to that passport the necessary information
         concerning the vaccination administered.
      
Paragraph 3. The owners and keepers of animals which must be vaccinated shall be required to present, as appropriate, the vaccination certificate
         or the passport referred to above upon request of one of the authorities referred to in Article 27.’ 
      
 The actions in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 Case C‑42/Brought on November by the VDV and Mr Janssens, the action in the main proceedings in Case C-42/seeks annulment
         of the Decree of September in so far as it requires, in Article of the Decree of February as amended, vaccination
         against rabies to be entered in a pet passport meeting the conditions laid down in the Decree of May or those laid
         down in the Decree of May 2004. 
      
In that regard, the applicants in the main proceedings submit that the Decree of September infringes the principles
         of free movement of persons, goods and services and the principle of free competition by creating a monopolistic position
         for the Belgische Vereniging voor Identificatie en Registratie van Honden (‘the BVIRH’), and also infringes Regulation No
         998/and Decision 2003/803.
      
On that point, the applicants argue that the Decree of September prevents the entry of vaccinations in a foreign pet
         passport or in the pet passport distributed by the VDV. They also submit that the reference to the Decrees of and May
         should not have been made, since the latter contain requirements additional to those set out in the pet passport, as
         defined by Regulation No 998/2003. Those Decrees link to that passport a duty to register and the notion of traceability.
         The passport referred to in that regulation has, however, a purely health-related purpose. Moreover, such a supplementary
         purpose was never part of the intentions of the European Union legislature since the identification of the animal is necessary
         only for the purposes of linking it with a health certificate. Furthermore, the affixing of stickers by third parties to a
         health document, as provided for in the Decree of May 2004, is not permitted. By providing that passports issued in Belgium
         must bear a unique number of digits, the Decree of May introduces an obligation not required at European Union level.
         
      
The defendant in the main proceedings contends that the passport referred to in Regulation No 998/is, above all, an identification
         document and that it is perfectly logical that it should have taken measures to ensure a consistent and uniform policy making
         obligatory a single document which, in Belgium, acts as an identification and registration document and, for intra-Community
         movements, as a health and identification document. It submits, with regard to the alleged monopolistic position held by the
         BVIRH, that that association is not the only one recognised by the State. 
      
It was in those circumstances that the Raad van State (Council of State) (Belgium) decided to stay the proceedings and refer
         the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘1.      Do Articles 3(b), 4(2), and the second paragraph of Article of [Regulation No 998/2003] and the articles of and annexes
         to [Decision 2003/803] preclude national legislation regulating passports for cats and ferrets from … referring to the model
         and the additional requirements laid down in [Decision 2003/803], yet … also prescribing that every passport must bear a unique
         number consisting of characters, namely, “BE”, being the ISO code for Belgium, followed by the identification number of
         the distributor consisting of two digits and a serial number consisting of nine digits?
      
2.      Do Articles 3(b), 4(2), and the second paragraph of Article of [Regulation No 998/2003] and the articles of and annexes
         to [Decision 2003/803] preclude national legislation from also using the model of the European pet passport as proof of both
         the identification and the registration of dogs and, in that connection, making provision for third parties to insert changes
         with regard to the identification of the owner and the animal in Parts I to III of a European pet passport attested by an
         authorised veterinarian by means of identification stickers which are superimposed on the previous identification details?’
         
      
 Case C-45/Brought on July by the VDV and Mr Janssens, the action in the main proceedings in Case C‑45/seeks annulment of
         the Decree of May 2004.
      
To that end, the applicants in the main proceedings argue, firstly, that that Decree creates a monopolistic situation in favour
         of the BVIRH as regards the distribution of passports for dogs, which has the consequence of preventing veterinarians from
         having their pet passports printed in a Member State other than the Kingdom of Belgium. That Decree is also a source of fraud
         and gives rise to discrimination by linking the identification of dogs contained in the passports at issue in the main proceedings
         to an obligation to register and a notion of traceability, when that obligation does not exist in respect of cats or ferrets,
         and despite the fact that the European Union legislation treats those animal species identically. In addition, the direct
         effect of that legislation requires the VDV to take all necessary steps to ensure that its members are able to comply with
         that legislation and also, as a consequence, renders the Decree of May inapplicable. Next, those applicants submit
         that the use of self-adhesive stickers runs counter to the objective pursued by Decision 2003/803, which is to enable ease
         of monitoring by the competent authorities. Finally, they argue that the principle of subsidiarity cannot be relied on by
         the Member State concerned. 
      
Furthermore, the applicants in the main proceedings submit that the provisions of the Decree of May 2004, which use the
         model of the pet passport laid down in Decision 2003/as proof of the identification and registration of dogs, which provide
         for the affixing of self-adhesive stickers in the passport for the purposes of identifying the owner and the animal and which
         depart from that model passport as regards the space provided for information concerning a new owner, constitute technical
         regulations within the meaning of Directive 98/which, under Article of thereof, should have been communicated to the
         European Commission prior to their adoption. In that regard, those applicants submit that dogs, together with their passport,
         must be regarded as goods.
      
In a judgment of January (No 336), dismissing the application for the suspension of the enforcement of the contested
         Decree, the national court held that the mere fact that a particular matter is regulated by directly binding provisions at
         the European Union level does not prevent the competent national authority, with a view to promoting the general domestic
         interest, from enacting a supplementary legislative measure of its own in respect of aspects not contained in the European
         Union legislative measure or when that measure does not preclude a supplementary domestic legislative measure. The defendant
         in the main proceedings could, therefore, in the view of that court, enact a domestic legislative measure provided that the
         latter did not prevent the European Union legislation from being wholly effective. Since neither Regulation No 998/nor
         Decision 2003/contained any provision relating to the production and distribution to veterinarians of passports for dogs,
         the Decree of May does not depart from the framework created by that decision. Similarly, as regards the affixing
         of self-adhesive stickers in the passports, that court observed that neither Regulation No 998/nor Decision 2003/prohibits the recording of individualised data in the passport by means of self-adhesive stickers provided that in so doing
         there is no deviation from the model passport laid down in Decision 2003/803.
      
Since the applicants in the main proceedings maintained their arguments as to the incompatibility of the Decree of May
         with the European Union legislation, the Raad van State decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘1.      Do Articles 3(b), 4(2), and the second paragraph of Article of [Regulation No 998/2003] and the articles of and annexes
         to [Decision 2003/803] preclude a national legislative measure which also uses the model of the European pet passport as proof
         of the identification and registration of dogs and in so doing makes provision for third parties to make changes regarding
         the identification of the owner and the animal in Parts I to III of a European pet passport attested by an authorised veterinarian
         by means of identification stickers which are superimposed on the previous identification details?
      
2.      Are national provisions which also use the model of the European pet passport, as contained in [Decision 2003/803], as proof
         of the identification and registration of dogs and in so doing make provision for third parties to make changes regarding
         the identification of the owner and the animal in Parts I to III of such a passport by means of identification stickers, technical
         regulations within the meaning of Article of [Directive 98/34], which under Article of that directive must be communicated
         to the European Commission before they are enacted?’ 
      
 Case C-57/Brought on June by the VDV, the action in the main proceedings in Case C‑57/seeks annulment of the Decree of May
         2004. 
      
In that regard, the applicant in the main proceedings submits that that Decree infringes Articles 3(g) EC, EC, EC and
         EC, the principles of free movement of goods, services, persons and capital, Regulation No 998/2003, Decision 2003/and Directive 98/34.
      
By setting a more detailed method for determining the unique number of the pet passport than that provided for by the European
         Union legislation, the Decree of May 2004, firstly, fails to have regard to the direct effect of European Union regulations
         and decisions laid down in Article EC and, secondly, constitutes a technical standard which, in disregard of Directive
         98/34, has not been communicated to the Commission. 
      
The defendant in the main proceedings submits that, in accordance with Regulation No 998/2003, the national authorities have
         some discretion as regards determination of that unique number which authorises them to adopt supplementary decisions with
         a view to establishing an appropriate procedure for identification. It also takes the view that the Decree of May does
         not fall within the scope of Directive 98/34.
      
In a judgment of January (No 163), dismissing the application for suspension of the enforcement of that Decree,
         the national court held that the mere fact that a particular matter is regulated by directly binding provisions at the European
         Union level does not prevent the competent national authority, with a view to promoting the general domestic interest, from
         enacting supplementary legislative measures of its own in respect of aspects which are not contained in the European Union
         legislative measure or when that measure does not preclude a supplementary domestic legislative measure. The defendant in
         the main proceedings was able therefore, in the view of that court, to enact a domestic legislative measure provided that
         the latter did not prevent the European Union legislation from being wholly effective. Since neither Regulation No 998/nor Decision 2003/contained any provision relating to the production and distribution to veterinarians of passports for
         cats and ferrets, the Decree of May does not depart from the framework created by that decision. 
      
Since the applicant in the main proceedings maintained its arguments as to the incompatibility of the Decree of May with the European Union legislation, the Raad van State decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘1.      Do Articles 3(b), 4(2), and the second paragraph of Article of [Regulation No 998/2003] and the articles of and annexes
         to [Decision 2003/803] preclude national legislation regulating passports for cats and ferrets from referring to the model
         and the additional requirements laid down in [Decision 2003/803], yet also prescribing that every passport must bear a unique
         number consisting of characters, namely, “BE”, being the ISO code for Belgium, followed by the identification number of
         the distributor consisting of two digits and a serial number consisting of nine digits?
      
2.      Is national legislation which in regard to the passport for cats and ferrets refers to the model and the additional requirements
         laid down in [Decision 2003/803], yet in addition prescribes that every passport must bear a unique number consisting of characters, namely, “BE”, the ISO code for Belgium, followed by the identification number of the distributor consisting of
         two digits and a serial number consisting of nine digits, a technical regulation within the meaning of Article of [Directive
         98/34] which, under Article of that Directive, must be communicated to the … Commission before its enactment?’ 
      
 Consideration of the questions referred
 Preliminary observations 
In its observations, the VDV, the applicant in the three sets of main proceedings, sets out two additional questions on which,
         because of their importance, it also wishes the Court to rule.
      
In that regard, it must be borne in mind that, in the context of the cooperation between the Court and the national courts
         provided for by Article TFEU, it is solely for the national court before which the dispute has been brought, and which
         must assume responsibility for the subsequent judicial decision, to determine in the light of the particular circumstances
         of the case both the need for a preliminary ruling in order to enable it to deliver judgment and the relevance of the questions
         which it submits to the Court (see, to that effect, Case C‑138/Hochtief and Linde-Kca-Dresden [2009] ECR I‑9889, paragraph and the case-law cited). 
      
The right to determine the questions to be put to the Court thus devolves upon the national court alone and the parties may
         not change their tenor (Hochtief and Linde-Kca-Dresden, paragraph and the case-law cited). 
      
In addition, to alter the substance of the questions referred for a preliminary ruling, or to answer the additional questions
         mentioned by the applicants in the main proceedings in their observations, would be incompatible with the Court’s function
         under Article TFEU and with its duty to ensure that the governments of the Member States and the parties concerned are
         given the opportunity to submit observations under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, bearing in mind that
         under that provision only the order of the national court is notified to the interested parties (see, to that effect, Hochtief and Linde-Kca-Dresden, paragraph and the case-law cited). 
      
It follows that the Court cannot undertake an analysis of the additional questions raised by the VDV.
      
 The first questions in Cases C‑42/and C‑57/In its first questions in Cases C‑42/and C‑57/10, the national court asks, in essence, whether Articles 3(b), 4(2), and
         the second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 998/and the articles of and annexes to Decision 2003/must be
         interpreted as precluding national legislation, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which lays down a numbering
         system for pet passports comprising a unique number consisting of the two-letter ISO code for the Kingdom of Belgium (BE)
         followed by the identification number of the authorised distributor consisting of two digits and a serial number consisting
         of nine digits. 
      
In that regard, it must be borne in mind that, by virtue of the very nature of regulations and of their function in the system
         of sources of European Union law, the provisions of regulations generally have immediate effect in the national legal systems
         without it being necessary for the national authorities to adopt measures of application or without it being necessary for
         the European Union legislature to adopt supplementary legislation (Case C‑367/SGS Belgium and Others [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and the case-law cited). 
      
Some of the provisions of a regulation, even if supplemented by an implementing decision, may, however, necessitate, for their
         implementation, the adoption of national measures of application (see, by analogy, Case C-403/Monte Arcosu [2001] ECR I-103, paragraph 26). 
      
That is manifestly the case of Article 5(1)(b) of Regulation No 998/2003, read in conjunction with Annex II, B, point 2(c)
         to Decision 2003/803.
      
Apart from the obligation to state the ISO code of the Member State of issue at the head of the series of digits comprising
         the unique number to be entered on the pet passport, those provisions of Regulation No 998/and of Decision 2003/do
         not lay down any specific method for determining that number. They therefore place on the Member States the obligation of
         defining the method for determining that number.
      
It must be held that the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings meets the requirements concerning the numbering
         of the passports laid down in Article 5(1)(b) of Regulation No 998/2003, read in conjunction with Annex II, B, point 2(c)
         to Decision 2003/803. That national legislation provides, firstly, that each passport is to have a unique number and, secondly,
         that the first two characters of that number are to consist of the two-letter ISO code for the Kingdom of Belgium (BE). The
         national legislation at issue, by implementing the provisions of European Union law referred to above and by specifying, in
         addition, the numbering system for the other characters comprising the passport number, ensures that those provisions have
         their full effect. 
      
It follows from the foregoing that the answer to the first questions in Cases C‑42/and C‑57/is that Articles 3(b), 4(2),
         and the second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 998/and the articles of and annexes to Decision 2003/must
         be interpreted as meaning that they do not preclude national legislation which lays down a numbering system for pet passports
         comprising a unique number consisting of the two-letter ISO code for the Member State concerned followed by the identification
         number of the authorised distributor consisting of two digits and a serial number consisting of nine digits. 
      
 The second question in Case C‑42/and the first question in Case C‑45/By its second question in Case C‑42/and its first question in Case C‑45/10, the national court asks, in essence, whether
         Articles 3(b), 4(2), and the second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 998/and the articles of and annexes to
         Decision 2003/preclude legislation, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, under which, firstly, a pet passport
         is used not only as a travel document pursuant to the European Union legislation but also as proof of identification and registration of
         dogs at a national level and, secondly, the format of the identifying details of the owner and the animal entered therein
         differ from that provided for in Decision 2003/and the amendment thereof is carried out by affixing the new details over
         the old using self-adhesive stickers. 
      
Firstly, with regard to the use of a pet passport as proof of identification and registration of dogs at the national level,
         it is appropriate to point out that what is at issue is the use of that passport for parallel purposes different from those
         underlying the European Union legislation, that is to say, the harmonisation of animal health requirements applicable to the
         non-commercial intra-Community movement of pet animals. 
      
In that regard, it must be noted that neither the letter nor the spirit of Regulation No 998/and Decision 2003/permits
         the conclusion that a pet passport has the unique and exclusive function of meeting the objectives pursued by the European
         Union legislation or that, therefore, use of that passport, at national level, for other purposes is prohibited. On the contrary,
         it is apparent from recitals (3) and (4) in the preamble to Decision 2003/and from the model passport annexed to that
         decision that it includes pages enabling the inscription of data unconnected to the European Union legislation. Thus, it provides
         for certifications of vaccinations not required under Regulation No 998/and sections entitled ‘clinical examination’
         and ‘legalisation’ so that the pet passports can also be used for the movement of animals outside the European Union. 
      
Accordingly, use of that passport for purposes other than those referred to in the European Union legislation cannot, in principle,
         be prohibited. 
      
Nevertheless, it is important that that use does not adversely affect either the effective application of Regulation No 998/or Decision 2003/or the objectives which they pursue. It is neither shown nor even alleged by the parties to the main
         proceedings or by the interested parties referred to in Article of the Statute of the Court who have submitted observations
         that use of the passport for purposes of identification and registration of dogs at a national level would have such an effect.
         
      
Secondly, as regards entry of the identifying details of the owner and the animal, which are amended by affixing the new details
         over the old using self-adhesive stickers, it must be held that legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings
         has the effect of establishing a pet passport which differs in its format from that of the model passport provided for in
         Decision 2003/803. 
      
Thus, while Annex I to Decision 2003/provides that the first page of the model passport is to comprise three fields for
         entry of the identity and address of three successive owners of the animal, the legislation at issue in the main proceedings
         provides that the first page of the pet passport is to have only one field, over which self-adhesive stickers must be successively
         affixed when the address or identity of the animal’s owner changes. 
      
In that regard, it must be borne in mind that, pursuant to the fourth paragraph of Article TFEU, a Commission decision
         addressed to the Member States is to be binding in its entirety. 
      
In addition, it follows from the very object of Decision 2003/803, from the model passport set out in Annex I thereto and
         from Annex II, A, point 1, to that decision, which states that ‘[t]he format of the model passport shall be uniform’, that
         the purpose of that decision is to establish a uniform document, no matter which Member State issues it, and the format and
         content of which the Member States are required to follow, subject to minor adaptations exhaustively listed in Annex II, C,
         point 4, to that decision. 
      
By laying down the format of the first page of the pet passport on which there is only one field available for entry of the
         identity and address of the first owner of the animal and to which any later amendments are made by affixing self-adhesive
         stickers, legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings fails to have regard to the requirement for a uniform
         format provided for in the form of the model passport, which requires in particular that the first page of the pet passport
         have fields and a format enabling the identity and address of three successive owners of the animal to be entered.
      
Furthermore, as the Commission submitted at the hearing, placing self-adhesive stickers one on top of the other prevents identification
         of the successive owners of the animal when such identification is decisive in the field of animal health and Regulation No
         988/and Decision 2003/specifically lay down requirements in that regard. 
      
Similarly, the use of self-adhesive stickers such as those provided for in the legislation at issue in the main proceedings,
         which gives rise to a change to the format laid down in the model passport, also has the effect of hindering the transfer
         of pets outside the Member State of origin by requiring, in such situations, the issue of a new passport in the Member State
         of destination. 
      
Having regard to the foregoing considerations, the answer to the second question in Case C‑42/and the first question in
         Case C‑45/is that Articles 3(b), 4(2), and the second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 998/and the articles
         of and annexes to Decision 2003/must be interpreted as: 
      
–        not precluding legislation, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, under which a pet passport is used not only as
         a travel document pursuant to European Union legislation but also as proof of identification and registration of dogs at a
         national level, 
      
–        precluding legislation, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, under which only one field is available in the pet
         passport for entry of the identity and address of the owner of the animal and to which any later amendments are made by affixing
         self-adhesive stickers. 
      
 The second questions in Cases C‑45/and C‑57/By its second questions in Cases C‑45/and C‑57/10, the national court asks, in essence, whether national provisions, such
         as those in the Belgian legislation concerning the pet passport and relating to the use thereof as proof of identification
         and registration of dogs, and to the use of self-adhesive stickers to amend the identity details of the owner and the animal,
         on the one hand, and to those relating to the determination of a unique number for cats and ferrets, on the other, must be
         regarded as technical standards within the meaning of Directive 98/34. 
      
In that regard, it must be borne in mind, as is apparent from the legal basis of Directive 98/34, namely, Article 100a of
         the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC), and from recitals (2) and (4) in the preamble to that directive, that
         the European Union legislation laying down a procedure for the provision of information in the field of technical standards
         and regulations and of rules on Information Society services contributes to the proper functioning of the internal market
         by ensuring, in particular, the free movement of goods. 
      
In addition, the Court has had occasion to point out that only products which can be valued in money and which are capable,
         as such, of forming the subject of commercial transactions fall within the scope of the free movement of goods (see, to that
         effect, inter alia, Case 7/Commission v Italy [1968] ECR 617, 626, and Case C‑65/Commission v Greece [2006] ECR I‑10341, paragraphs to 25). 
      
It is not in dispute that pet passports, since they bear a unique number and identify a specific animal, cannot, as such,
         be the object of commercial transactions. 
      
Those passports cannot therefore be classified as ‘products’ within the meaning of the case-law of the Court; nor can Directive
         98/apply to them. Consequently, specifications such as those contained in the Belgian legislation at issue in the main
         proceedings cannot be classified as technical specifications which, in accordance with Article of that directive, must be
         communicated in advance to the Commission and, failing that, must not be applied by the national court (see, to that effect,
         Case C‑20/Schwibbert [2007] ECR I‑9447, paragraphs and and the case-law cited). 
      
It follows from the foregoing considerations that the answer to the second questions in Cases C‑45/and C‑57/is that
         national provisions, such as those in the legislation at issue in the main proceedings, concerning the pet passport and relating
         to its use as proof of identification and registration of dogs, and to the use of self-adhesive stickers to amend the identity
         details of the owner and the animal, on the one hand, and to those relating to the determination of a unique number for cats
         and ferrets, on the other, do not constitute technical standards within the meaning of Article of Directive 98/which,
         in accordance with Article thereof, must be communicated in advance to the Commission. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Articles 3(b), 4(2), and the second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 998/of the European Parliament and of
            the Council of May on the animal health requirements applicable to the non-commercial movement of pet animals and
            amending Council Directive 92/65/EEC and the articles of and annexes to Commission Decision 2003/803/EC of November establishing a model passport for the intra-Community movements of dogs, cats and ferrets must be interpreted as meaning that
            they do not preclude national legislation which lays down a numbering system for pet passports comprising a unique number
            consisting of the two-letter ISO code for the Member State concerned followed by the identification number of the authorised
            distributor consisting of two digits and a serial number consisting of nine digits, provided that that legislation guarantees
            the uniqueness of that identification number. 
2.      Articles 3(b), 4(2), and the second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 998/and the articles of and annexes to
            Decision 2003/must be interpreted as: 
–        not precluding legislation, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, under which a pet passport is used not only as
            a travel document pursuant to European Union legislation but also as proof of identification and registration of dogs at a
            national level, 
–        precluding legislation, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, under which only one field is available in the pet
            passport for entry of the identity and address of the owner of the animal and to which any later amendments are made by affixing
            self-adhesive stickers.
3.      National provisions, such as those in the legislation at issue in the main proceedings, concerning the pet passport and relating
            to its use as proof of identification and registration of dogs, and to the use of self-adhesive stickers to amend the identity
            details of the owner and the animal, on the one hand, and to those relating to the determination of a unique number for cats
            and ferrets, on the other, do not constitute technical standards within the meaning of Article of Directive 98/of the
            European Parliament and of the Council laying down a procedure for the provision of information in the field of technical
            standards and regulations and of rules on Information Society services, as amended by Directive 98/48/EC of the European Parliament
            and of the Council of July 1998, which, in accordance with Article thereof, must be communicated in advance to the Commission.
[Signatures]
1? Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 