
Avis juridique important
|
61986JJudgment of the Court of July 1988.  -  Commission of the European Communities v Italian Republic.  -  Failure by a Member State to fulfil its obligations - Failure to transpose Council Directive 78/659/EEC into national law - Protection of the quality of fresh waters capable of supporting fish life.  -  Case 322/86.  
European Court reports Page Parties
Grounds
Decision on costs
Operative part
Keywords
++++Measures adopted by the institutions - Directives - Implementation by the Member States - Necessity of complete transposition  ( EEC Treaty, Art . 189, third paragraph )  
Parties
In Case 322/Commission of the European Communities, represented by Enrico Traversa, a member of its Legal Department, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of G . Kremlis, a member of the Commission' s Legal Department, Jean Monnet Building, Kirchberg,  applicant,  v  Italian Republic, represented by Luigi Ferrari Bravo, Head of the Department for Contentious Diplomatic Affairs, acting as Agent, assisted by Pier Giorgio  Ferri, Avvocato dello Stato, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Italian Embassy,  defendant,  APPLICATION for a declaration that by failing to adopt within the prescribed period the measures necessary to comply with the provisions of Council Directive 78/659/EEC of July on the quality of fresh waters needing protection or improvement in order to support fish life ( Official Journal 1978, L 222, p . ) the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty,  THE COURT  composed of : Lord Mackenzie Stuart, President, G . Bosco, J . C . Moitinho de Almeida and G . C . Rodríguez Iglesias ( Presidents of Chambers ), T . Koopmans, U . Everling, Y . Galmot, C . Kakouris and F . Schockweiler, Judges,  Advocate General : C . O . Lenz  Registrar : H . A . Ruehl, Principal Administrator  having regard to the Report for the Hearing and further to the hearing on February 1988,  after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General delivered at the sitting on March 1988,  gives the following  Judgment  
Grounds
By an application lodged at the Court Registry on December 1986, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action under Article of the EEC Treaty for a declaration that by failing to adopt within the prescribed period the measures necessary to comply with Council Directive 78/659/EEC of July on the quality of fresh waters needing protection or improvement in order to support fish life ( Official Journal 1978, L 222, p . ) the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty .  The aim of the directive is to protect or improve the quality of running or standing fresh waters which support or, if pollution were reduced or eliminated, would become capable of supporting fish belonging to certain species . Under Article ( ), the directive applies to waters designated by the Member States as needing such protection or improvement . Article provides that Member States are, initially within a two-year period following the notification of the directive, to designate salmonid waters and cyprinid waters . Article provides that, by means of programmes to be established by Member States in order to reduce pollution, designated waters are to conform within five years following designation to the values set by the Member States for the physical and chemical parameters set out in Annex to the directive . Under Article 17, Member States are to bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with the directive within two years of its notification and are forthwith to inform the Commission thereof . Since the directive was notified to the Member States on July 1978, that period expired on July .  Since it had received no communication from the Italian Government concerning measures to implement the directive, on March the Commission addressed to it a formal letter calling on it to submit its observations . By a letter of November the Italian Permanent Representation to the European Communities replied that a group of experts of the interministerial committee for the protection of waters against pollution had been given the task of drawing up a draft law to transpose the provisions of the directive into the Italian legal system . The Commission received no further communication relating to the adoption of that draft law, and on February it issued a reasoned opinion under the first paragraph of Article of the EEC Treaty . In response to that reasoned opinion, the Italian Government stated in a letter dated July from the Italian Permanent Representation that the procedure for the enactment of the draft law had been suspended and that the Government had approved and transmitted to the Italian Parliament on May a draft law, Article of which delegated to the Government the authority to adopt, by decree, a consolidated text intended to restructure, with due regard to relevant Community directives, the whole of the Italian legislation in force relating to the protection of waters against pollution and the disposal of waste . As this consolidated text has not been adopted by the Italian Government, the Commission has brought these proceedings for failure to fulfil obligations .  Reference is made to the Report for the Hearing for a more detailed account of the facts of the case, the course of the procedure and the submissions and arguments of the parties, which are mentioned or discussed hereinafter only in so far as is necessary for the Court' s reasoning .  The Italian Government acknowledges that it has not fulfilled its obligations but observes that on the basis of the relevant legislation in force the Italian public authorities responsible for the management and protection of public waters, namely the State and the regions, have all the powers necessary for implementing the provisions of the directive, in particular Article 4, on the designation of salmonid and cyprinid waters . In this connection, it states that by a decree of January the Minister of Agriculture and Forestry designated a certain number of fresh waters in the territory of the autonomous province of Bolzano deemed capable of supporting fish life . As regards the action to be taken in respect of the designated waters in order to comply with the obligations flowing from Article of the Directive, the Italian Government points out that Article ( d ) of Law No of May ( Official Gazette of the Italian Republic No of May ) provides for the drawing up of regional and national rehabilitation programmes for waters under which all the measures necessary for the protection of waters against pollution will be taken . Consequently, the failure to fulfil obligations lies only in the incomplete transposition of the directive, inasmuch as the designation of waters needing protection is inadequate .  As the Court has held, most recently in its judgment of March in Case 309/( Commission v Italian Republic ECR ), the transposition into domestic law of Community directives must effectively guarantee their full application . However, it must be acknowledged that the measures adopted by the Italian Government in order to transpose the directive in question into the Italian legal order are insufficient . No salmonid or cyprinid waters situated on Italian territory have been designated other than those in the autonomous province of Bolzano . The Government has also failed to set, for these waters, specific values for the parameters laid down in Annex of the directive, and to draw up programmes in order to ensure that these parameters conform to the values set .  It must therefore be held that by failing to adopt within the prescribed period the measures necessary in order to comply with Council Directive 78/659/EEC of July the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty .  
Decision on costs
Costs  Under Article ( ) of the Rules of Procedure the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs . Since the defendant has failed in its submissions, it must be ordered to pay the costs .  
Operative part
On those grounds,  THE COURT  hereby :  ( ) Declares that by failing to adopt within the prescribed period the measures necessary in order to comply with Council Directive 78/659/EEC of July on the quality of fresh waters needing protection or improvement in order to support fish life the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the Treaty .  ( ) Orders the Italian Republic to pay the costs .  
Top  
 