
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-472/Staatssecretaris van Financiën
v
Arthur Andersen & Co. Accountants c.s.
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden)
(Sixth VAT directive – Article 13B(a) – Exemption of services related to insurance transactions by insurance brokers and insurance agents – Life assurance – ‘Back office’ activities)
Opinion of Advocate General Poiares Maduro delivered on January Judgment of the Court (First Chamber), March Summary of the Judgment
Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax – Exemptions provided for by the
            Sixth Directive – Exemption for services related to insurance transactions by insurance brokers and insurance agents – Meaning
            – ‘Back office’ activities consisting in assisting an insurance company in the performance of its activities – Excluded
(Council Directive 77/388, Art. 13B( a))
Article 13B(a) of Sixth Directive 77/388, relating to the exemption from value added tax of insurance and reinsurance transactions,
         including certain related services, must be interpreted as meaning that ‘back office’ activities, consisting in rendering
         services, for payment, to an insurance company, do not constitute the performance of services relating to insurance transactions
         carried out by an insurance broker or an insurance agent within the meaning of that provision. 
      
Since, first, those services have specific aspects, such as the setting and payment of commission for insurance agents, the
         maintenance of contact with them, the handling of aspects relating to reinsurance and the supply of information to insurance
         agents and to the tax authorities, and, secondly, essential aspects of the work of an insurance agent, such as the finding
         of prospects and their introduction to the insurer are lacking, the activities in question must be regarded as a form of cooperation
         consisting in assisting an insurance company in the performance of activities which would normally be carried out by it, but
         without having a contractual relationship with the insured parties, and constitute a division of the activities of the insurance
         company and not the performance of services carried out by an insurance agent.
      
(see paras 35-36, 38-39, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)March 2005(1)
(Sixth VAT directive  –  Article 13B(a)  –  Exemption of services related to insurance transactions by insurance brokers and insurance agents  –  Life assurance  –  ‘Back office’ activities)
 In Case C-472/03,REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden (Netherlands), made by decision
            of November 2003, received at the Court on November 2003, in the proceedings
            
Staatssecretaris van Financiën
v
Arthur Andersen & Co. Accountants c.s.,
            
THE COURT (First Chamber),,
 composed of P. Jann, President of the Chamber, K. Lenaerts (Rapporteur), N. Colneric, K. Schiemann and E. Juhász, Judges,
            
 Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro,Registrar:  M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator,
             having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on November 2004,after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
            
–
 Arthur Andersen & Co. Accountants c.s., by R. Vos and P.J.B.G. Schrijver, advocaten,
            
–
 the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster and N.A.J. Bel, acting as Agents,
            
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by R. Lyal, A. Weimar and L. Ström-van Lier, acting as Agents,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 The reference for a preliminary ruling relates to the interpretation of Article 13B(a) of Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC
         of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes – Common system of value added
         tax: uniform basis of assessment (OJ L 145, p. 1) (‘the Sixth Directive’).
         
            
 That reference was made in the course of proceedings concerning the refusal of the Staatssecretaris van Financiën (Netherlands
         State Secretary for Finance) to exempt from value added tax (‘VAT’) ‘back office’ activities performed by Arthur Andersen
         & Co. Accountants c.s. (‘the defendant’) in the life assurance sector.
         
Legal background
Community legislation
            
 According to Article 4(1) of the Sixth Directive, a taxable person means any person who independently carries out in any place
         any economic activity specified in paragraph of that article, whatever the purpose or the results of that activity.
         
            
 Article 4(4) provides that the term ‘independently’ in paragraph excludes employed and other persons from the tax in so
         far as they are bound to an employer by a contract of employment or by any other legal ties creating the relationship of employer
         and employee as regards working conditions, remuneration and the employer’s liability.
         
            
 Article B of the Sixth Directive states:
         ‘Without prejudice to other Community provisions, Member States shall exempt the following under conditions which they shall
         lay down for the purpose of ensuring the correct and straightforward application of the exemptions and of preventing any possible
         evasion, avoidance or abuse: 
         
(a)
insurance and reinsurance transactions, including related services performed by insurance brokers and insurance agents …’
            
 Article of Council Directive 77/92/EEC of December on measures to facilitate the effective exercise of freedom of
         establishment and freedom to provide services in respect of the activities of insurance agents and brokers (ex ISIC Group
         630) and, in particular, transitional measures in respect of those activities (OJ L 26, p. 14), in force at the material
         time, provided:
         ‘1.     This Directive shall apply to the following activities falling within ex ISIC Group in Annex III to the General Programme
         for the abolition of restrictions on freedom of establishment:
         
(a)
professional activities of persons who, acting with complete freedom as to their choice of undertaking, bring together, with
               a view to the insurance or reinsurance of risks, persons seeking insurance or reinsurance and insurance or reinsurance undertakings,
               carry out work preparatory to the conclusion of contracts of insurance or reinsurance and, where appropriate, assist in the
               administration and performance of such contracts, in particular in the event of a claim; 
            
(b)
professional activities of persons instructed under one or more contracts or empowered to act in the name and on behalf of,
               or solely on behalf of, one or more insurance undertakings in introducing, proposing and carrying out work preparatory to
               the conclusion of, or in concluding, contracts of insurance, or in assisting in the administration and performance of such
               contracts, in particular in the event of a claim; 
            
…
          2.       This Directive shall apply in particular to activities customarily described in the Member States as follows:
         …
         (b)     activities referred to in paragraph 1(b):
                   …
         
–
in the Netherlands: 
–
Gevolmachtigd agent, 
–
Verzekeringsagent; 
…’
         
National legislation
            
 Article of the Wet op de omzetbelasting (Law of on turnover tax) provides:
         ‘The following are exempt from taxation on the conditions laid down by general administrative measures:
         …
         (k) insurance and the performance of services carried out by insurance agents.’
         
The background to the dispute and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 At the material time in the main proceedings, the defendant, which was established in Rotterdam (Netherlands), included a
         private company established under Netherlands law called Andersen Consulting Management Consultants (‘ACMC’).
         
            
 On May 1997, Royal Nederland Verzekeringsgroep NV, Universal Leven NV (‘UL’), a company active on the life assurance market
         through insurance agents, and ACMC concluded a collaboration agreement, which provided that ACMC would undertake on behalf
         of UL various activities designated in that agreement as ‘back office’ activities.  ACMC delegated these activities to one
         of its divisions, Accenture Insurance Services (‘AIS’), which shares premises with UL.
         
            
 The ‘back office’ activities in question are described as follows in the order for reference: the acceptance of applications
         for insurance, the handling of amendments to contracts and premiums, the issuing, management and rescission of policies, the
         management of claims, the setting and paying of commission to insurance agents, the organisation and management of information
         technology, the supply of information to UL and to insurance agents and the drafting of reports for insured parties and third
         parties, such as the Fiscale Inlichtingen- en Opsporingsdienst (Tax inquiry and inspection service).    When the information
         supplied by an applicant for insurance shows that a medical examination is necessary, the decision on acceptance of the risk
         is made by UL, otherwise that decision is made by ACMC and binds UL.  AIS is in charge of almost all contact with the insurance
         agents.
         
            
 UL has staff corresponding to the equivalent of 2.full-time staff (‘FTS’), whilst AIS has FTS working on the ‘back office’
         activities.  The AIS staff are trained in life assurance.
         
            
 The collaboration agreement provides for the formation of two committees, the ‘Review Committee’ and the ‘Operating Committee’,
         composed of representatives of UL and of ACMC, with the tasks of assessing the cooperation between UL and ACMC, ensuring compliance
         with the terms of the agreement, planning the ‘back office’ activities, discussing developments in insurance and their impact
         on those activities and resolving any disputes relating to that agreement.  It provides for the appointment of a ‘Service
         manager’ and an ‘Operational manager’, who are to oversee the day-to-day cooperation between UL and AIS in order to ensure
         the efficiency of the ‘back office’ activities.  It contains an exclusivity clause prohibiting ACMC from performing for third
         parties ‘back office’ activities comparable to those performed for UL.  It provides for remuneration, calculated on the basis
         of the insurance portfolio and premiums received, for those ‘back office’ activities and a minimum remuneration.
         
            
 In its declaration for the month of September 1998, the defendant stated that it had paid the amount of NLG in respect
         of turnover tax.  That sum corresponded to the difference between, on the one hand, the turnover tax calculated on the payment
         invoiced to UL for the ‘back office’ activities carried out during that period and, on the other, the turnover tax deducted
         in that respect.
         
            
 Considering that the ‘back office’ activities carried out for UL were exempt from turnover tax, the defendant sought from
         the relevant inspector reimbursement of the sum of NLG 000, which was refused.  It appealed against that refusal to the
         Gerechtshof te ‘s-Gravenhage (Regional Court of Appeal, The Hague) (Netherlands), which upheld its claim by judgment of October 2001.  That court considered that, by their collaboration, UL and ACMC intended jointly to make use of their skills
         in a common purpose, namely the joint operation of an insurance company.  Thus, according to that court, the activities carried
         out by ACMC for UL cannot be regarded as the provision of financial services subject to turnover tax.
         
            
 The Netherlands State Secretary for Finance appealed on a point of law against the judgment of the Gerechtshof te ’s-Gravenhage
         to the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden (Supreme Court of the Netherlands).  The defendant cross-appealed.
         
            
 The Hoge Raad der Nederlanden considers that the activities in question cannot be exempt from VAT as insurance transactions.
          To that effect, it observes, firstly, that according to the documents in the file and the findings of the Gerechtshof te
         ’s-Gravenhage UL alone bears the risks inherent in the performance of insurance activities and, secondly, that the insurance
         contracts are underwritten in the name of UL and not of ACMC.
         
            
 However, it is unsure as to the concept of ‘services performed by an insurance agent’ within the meaning of Article 13B(a)
         of the Sixth Directive.   It observes that certain elements characteristic of that concept, such as the requirement for a
         direct link between the taxable person and the insured party, do indeed appear to be lacking in the present case.  However,
         it adds that the activities in question constitute services relating to insurance transactions in which ACMC intervenes to
         a great extent as an agent.  According to it, ACMC acts as such firstly between the insurance agents and UL by handling the
         insurance applications sent by them and very often by finalising them in the name of UL, and secondly between the latter and
         the insured parties by acting on behalf of UL with regard to those insured parties during the lifetime of the contract and
         when it is rescinded.
         
            
 In those circumstances the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following question to the
         Court for a preliminary ruling:
         ‘Where a taxable person has concluded an agreement with a (life) assurance company, such as the agreement at issue between
         ACMC and UL, under which that taxable person undertakes, for a certain remuneration and with the aid of qualified personnel
         who are expert in the insurance field, most of the actual activities related to insurance ─ including, as a rule, the taking
         of decisions that bind the insurance company to enter into insurance contracts and maintaining contact with the agents and,
         as the occasion arises, with the insured ─ while the insurance contracts are concluded in the name of the insurance company
         and the insurance risk is borne by the latter, are the activities undertaken by that taxable person in execution of the agreement
         “related services performed by insurance brokers and insurance agents” within the meaning of Article 13B(a) of the Sixth Directive?’
         
            
 By a letter of January 2004, the national court asked the parties whether they considered that the judgment of November
         in Case C-8/Taksatorringen [2003] ECR I-meant that the question referred for a preliminary ruling should be withdrawn.  By letter of February
         2004, after having heard the views of the parties, it informed the Court that it wished to maintain its reference for a preliminary
         ruling. 
         
The question referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 First of all, it is necessary to reject the argument in the defendant’s written observations that ACMC was bound to UL by
         a relationship of subordination such as to exempt the activities in question from VAT under Article 4(4) of the Sixth Directive.
         
            
 The reference in that provision to the concepts of ‘employer’ and ‘employee’ shows that the exemption from taxation provided
         for therein presupposes the existence of an employment relationship, which is clearly lacking between ACMC and UL.
         
            
 Furthermore, as stated in the order for reference and not contested by the defendant, ACMC has no contractual relationship
         with the insured parties, since the insurance contracts are underwritten by UL.  The national court was therefore correct
         to consider that ACMC’s activities do not constitute insurance transactions within the meaning of Article 13B(a) of the Sixth
         Directive (see, to that effect, Case C-240/Skandia [2001] ECR I-1951, paragraphs and 43). 
         
            
 Consequently, in the present case the Court is requested to interpret exclusively the concept of ‘services related to insurance
         transactions performed by insurance brokers and insurance agents’ within the meaning of Article 13B(a) of the Sixth Directive
         and to state whether that concept, which is not defined in that directive, covers activities such as those at issue in the
         main proceedings.
         
            
 The terms used to specify the exemptions provided for by Article of the Sixth Directive are to be interpreted strictly,
         since they constitute exceptions to the general principle that VAT is to be levied on all services supplied for consideration
         by a taxable person (Skandia, paragraph 32, and Taksatorringen, paragraph 36).
         
            
 It is also settled law that those exemptions constitute independent concepts of Community law whose purpose is to avoid divergences
         in the application of the VAT system as between one Member State and another and must be placed in the general context of
         the common system of VAT (Skandia, paragraph 23).
         
            
 In this case, the defendant emphasises the fact that the staff of AIS, to whom the activities in question were delegated by
         ACMC, are skilled in the field of life assurance and that those activities are related to insurance transactions.
         
            
 However, as the defendant itself admitted at the hearing, those two factors are not sufficient to make ACMC an insurance agent.
          It is in fact necessary to assess also whether the activities in question correspond to those of such an agent.
         
            
 The defendant contends that this is the case.  It adds that ACMC has a relationship both with the insurer, UL, and with the
         insured parties and beneficiaries.
         
            
 In that regard, it should be noted that, according to the information in the order for reference, ACMC is bound, in the pursuit
         of its activities, by an exclusivity clause in favour of UL (see paragraph of the present judgment).  Therefore it does
         not have complete freedom as to choice of insurer, a characteristic of the professional activity described in Article 2(1)(a)
         of Directive 77/corresponding to that of an insurance broker.
         
            
 The defendant submits that ACMC’s activities are identical to those of the ‘gevolmachtigd agent’ (agent) referred to in Article
         2(2)(b) of Directive 77/that are described in Article 2(1)(b).  At the hearing, it emphasised that ACMC has the power,
         both upon signature of the contract and execution thereof, to render UL liable with regard to the insured parties and beneficiaries.
         
            
 In that connection, it should be noted that it was indeed held, in relation to the Sixth Directive, that the professional
         activity described in Article 2(1)(b) of Directive 77/‘involves the power to render the insurer liable in respect of an
         insured person who has incurred a loss’ (Taksatorringen, paragraph 45).
         
            
 However, as the Advocate General points out in point of his Opinion, it cannot be inferred from that case-law that the
         existence of a power to render the insurer liable is the determining criterion for recognition of an insurance agent within
         the meaning of Article 13B(a) of the Sixth Directive.  Recognition of a person as an insurance agent presupposes an examination
         of what the activities in question comprise.
         
            
 In that regard, irrespective of whether, as part of its activities, ACMC has a relationship with both the insurer and the
         insured parties, as required by the case-law for recognition as an insurance agent (Taksatorringen, paragraph 44), it is apparent from the information contained in the order for reference, as supplemented by the information
         provided by the defendant in its written observations, that ACMC’s activities consist in handling insurance applications,
         assessing the risks to be insured, determining whether a medical examination is required, deciding whether to accept the risk
         where such an examination is deemed unnecessary, issuing, managing and rescinding insurance policies and making amendments
         to contracts and modifying premiums, receiving premiums, managing claims, setting and paying commission for insurance agents
         and maintaining contact with them, handling aspects relating to reinsurance and supplying information to insured parties and
         insurance agents and to other interested parties, such as the tax authorities.
         
            
 In the light of that information, it must be held that, although they contribute to the essence of the activities of an insurance
         company, the services rendered by ACMC to UL, which are not insurance transactions within the meaning of Article 13B(a) of
         the Sixth Directive (see paragraph of the present judgment), do not constitute services that typify an insurance agent
         either.
         
            
 The services in question have specific aspects, such as the setting and payment of commission for insurance agents, the maintenance
         of contact with them, the handling of aspects relating to reinsurance and the supply of information to insurance agents and
         to the tax authorities, which, quite clearly, are not part of the activities of an insurance agent.
         
            
 Furthermore, as the Commission of the European Communities stated in its written observations and as the Advocate General
         pointed out in point of his Opinion, essential aspects of the work of an insurance agent, such as the finding of prospects
         and their introduction to the insurer, are clearly lacking in the present case.  It is apparent from the order for reference
         – and the defendant has not disputed – that the activity of ACMC starts only when it handles the applications for insurance
         sent to it by the insurance agents through whom UL seeks prospects in the Netherlands life assurance market.
         
            
 As the Commission submitted in its written observations and at the hearing, the agreement between ACMC and UL must be regarded
         as a contract for subcontracted services under which ACMC provides UL with the human and administrative resources which it
         lacks, and supplies it with a series of services to assist it in the tasks inherent in its insurance activities.  In that
         regard, it is important to note, on reading the information supplied by the national court, that the staff of UL corresponds
         to only 2.FTS, whereas AIS has FTS working on the ‘back office’ activities, and that the staff of AIS and UL share the
         same premises.
         
            
 Consequently, the services rendered by ACMC to UL must be regarded as a form of cooperation consisting in assisting UL, for
         payment, in the performance of activities which would normally be carried out by it, but without having a contractual relationship
         with the insured parties.  Such activities constitute a division of UL’s activities and not the performance of services carried
         out by an insurance agent (see, by analogy, Case C-235/CSC Financial Services [2001] ECR I-10237, paragraph 40).
         
            
 In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the question referred to the Court must be that Article 13B(a) of the Sixth Directive
         must be interpreted as meaning that ‘back office’ activities, consisting in rendering services, for payment, to an insurance
         company do not constitute the performance of services relating to insurance transactions carried out by an insurance broker
         or an insurance agent within the meaning of that provision.
         
Costs
            
 Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court.  The costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than
         those of the parties to the main proceedings, are not recoverable.
         
 On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
         Article 13B(a) of Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States
               relating to turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax: uniform basis of assessment must be interpreted as meaning
               that ‘back office’ activities, consisting in rendering services, for payment, to an insurance company do not constitute the
               performance of services relating to insurance transactions carried out by an insurance broker or an insurance agent within
               the meaning of that provision.[Signatures]
      
 –
            
Language of the case: Dutch.
Top  
 