
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-159/Gregory Paul Turner
v
Felix Fareed Ismail Grovit and Others
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the House of Lords)
(Brussels Convention – Proceedings brought in a Contracting State – Proceedings brought in another Contracting State by the defendant in the existing proceedings – Defendant acting in bad faith in order to frustrate the existing proceedings – Compatibility with the Brussels Convention of the grant of an injunction preventing the defendant from continuing the action
         in another Member State)
      
Summary of the Judgment
Convention on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments – Injunction granted by a court of a Contracting State prohibiting
            a party from commencing or continuing legal proceedings before a court in another Contracting State – Not permissible – Incompatible
            with the principle of mutual cooperation underlying the Convention
(Brussels Convention of September 1968)
The Convention of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters, as amended
         by the Convention of October on the Accession of the Kingdom of Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
         and Northern Ireland, by the Convention of October on the Accession of the Hellenic Republic and by the Convention
         of May on the Accession of the Kingdom of Spain and the Portuguese Republic, is to be interpreted as precluding the
         grant of an injunction whereby a court of a Contracting State prohibits a party to proceedings pending before it from commencing
         or continuing legal proceedings before a court of another Contracting State, even where that party is acting in bad faith
         with a view to frustrating the existing proceedings. 
      
Such an injunction constitutes interference with the jurisdiction of the foreign court which, as such, is incompatible with
         the system of the Convention. That interference cannot be justified by the fact that it is only indirect and is intended to
         prevent an abuse of process by the party concerned, because the judgment made as to the abusive nature of that conduct implies
         an assessment of the appropriateness of bringing proceedings before a court of another Member State, which runs counter to
         the principle of mutual trust which underpins the Convention and prohibits a court, except in special cases occurring only
         at the stage of the recognition and enforcement of foreign judgments, from reviewing the jurisdiction of the court of another
         Member State. 
      
(see paras 26-28, 31, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (FULL COURT)April 2004(1)
(Brussels Convention  –  Proceedings brought in a Contracting State  –  Proceedings brought in another Contracting State by the defendant in the existing proceedings  –  Defendant acting in bad faith in order to frustrate the existing proceedings  –  Compatibility with the Brussels Convention of the grant of an injunction preventing the defendant from continuing the action
                  in another Member State)
               
 In Case C-159/02,
             REFERENCE to the Court under the Protocol of June on the interpretation by the Court of Justice of the Convention of
            September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters, by the House of Lords
            (United Kingdom), for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending before that court between
            
Gregory Paul Turner
and
Felix Fareed Ismail Grovit,Harada Ltd,Changepoint SA,
            
 on the interpretation of the abovementioned Convention of September (OJ L 304, p. 36), as amended by the Convention
            of October on the Accession of the Kingdom of Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
            Ireland (OJ L 304, p. 1, and – amended version – p. 77), by the Convention of October on the Accession of the
            Hellenic Republic (OJ L 388, p. 1) and by the Convention of May on the Accession of the Kingdom of Spain and
            the Portuguese Republic (OJ L 285, p. 1),
THE COURT (FULL COURT),,
 composed of: V. Skouris, President, P. Jann (Rapporteur), C.W.A. Timmermans, C. Gulmann, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues and A. Rosas,
            Presidents of Chambers, A. La Pergola, J.-P. Puissochet, R. Schintgen, N. Colneric and S. von Bahr, Judges,
            
 Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
–
 Mr Grovit, Harada Ltd and Changepoint SA, by R. Beynon, Solicitor, and T. de La Mare, Barrister,
               
–
 the United Kingdom Government, by K. Manji, acting as Agent, assisted by S. Morris QC,
               
–
 the German Government, by R. Wagner, acting as Agent,
               
–
 the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by O. Fiumara, vice avvocato generale dello Stato,
               
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by C. O'Reilly and A.-M. Rouchaud-Joët, acting as Agents,
               
after hearing the oral observations of Mr Turner and of the United Kingdom Government, of Mr Grovit, of Harada Ltd and of
               Changepoint SA, and of the Commission, at the hearing on September 2003,
            
after hearing the Advocate General at the sitting on November 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By order of December 2001, received at the Court on April 2002, the House of Lords referred to the Court of Justice
         for a preliminary ruling under the Protocol of June on the interpretation by the Court of Justice of the Convention
         of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters a question on the interpretation
         of that convention (OJ L 304, p. 36), as amended by the Convention of October on the accession of the Kingdom
         of Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (OJ L 304, p. 1, and – amended text
         – p. 77), by the Convention of October on the accession of the Hellenic Republic (OJ L 388, p. 1) and by the
         Convention of May on the accession of the Kingdom of Spain and the Portuguese Republic (OJ L 285, p. 1, ‘the
         Convention’).
         
            
 That question was raised in proceedings between Mr Turner, on the one hand and, on the other, Mr Grovit, Harada Limited (‘Harada’)
         and Changepoint SA (‘Changepoint’) concerning breach of Mr Turner’s employment contract with Harada.
         
The dispute in the main proceedings
            
 Mr Turner, a British citizen domiciled in the United Kingdom, was recruited in as solicitor to a group of undertakings
         by one of the companies belonging to that group.
         
            
 The group, known as Chequepoint Group, is directed by Mr Grovit and its main business is running bureaux de change. It comprises several companies established in different countries, one being China Security Ltd, which initially recruited
         Mr Turner, Chequepoint UK Ltd, which took over Mr Turner’s contract at the end of 1990, Harada, established in the United
         Kingdom, and Changepoint, established in Spain.
         
            
 Mr Turner carried out his work in London (United Kingdom). However, in May 1997, at his request, his employer allowed him
         to transfer his office to Madrid (Spain).
         
            
 Mr Turner started working in Madrid in November 1997. On November 1998, he submitted his resignation to Harada, the company
         to which he had been transferred on December 1997.
         
            
 On March Mr Turner brought an action in London against Harada before the Employment Tribunal. He claimed that he had
         been the victim of efforts to implicate him in illegal conduct, which, in his opinion, were tantamount to unfair dismissal.
         
            
 The Employment Tribunal dismissed the objection of lack of jurisdiction raised by Harada. Its decision was confirmed on appeal.
         Giving judgment on the substance, it awarded damages to Mr Turner.
         
            
 On July 1998, Changepoint brought an action against Mr Turner before a court of first instance in Madrid. The summons was
         served on Mr Turner around December 1998. Mr Turner did not accept service and protested the jurisdiction of the Spanish
         court.
         
            
 In the course of the proceedings in Spain, Changepoint claimed damages of ESP million from Mr Turner as compensation for
         losses allegedly resulting from Mr Turner’s professional conduct.
         
            
 On December Mr Turner asked the High Court of Justice of England and Wales to issue an injunction under section 37(1)
         of the Supreme Court Act 1981, backed by a penalty, restraining Mr Grovit, Harada and Changepoint from pursuing the proceedings
         commenced in Spain. An interlocutory injunction was issued in those terms on December 1998. On February 1999, the High
         Court refused to extend the injunction.
         
            
 On appeal by Mr Turner, the Court of Appeal (England and Wales) on May issued an injunction ordering the defendants
         not to continue the proceedings commenced in Spain and to refrain from commencing further proceedings in Spain or elsewhere
         against Mr Turner in respect of his contract of employment. In the grounds of its judgment, the Court of Appeal stated, in
         particular, that the proceedings in Spain had been brought in bad faith in order to vex Mr Turner in the pursuit of his application
         before the Employment Tribunal.
         
            
 On June 1999, in compliance with that injunction, Changepoint discontinued the proceedings pending before the Spanish court.
         
            
 Mr Grovit, Harada and Changepoint then appealed to the House of Lords, claiming in essence that the English courts did not
         have the power to make restraining orders preventing the continuation of proceedings in foreign jurisdictions covered by the
         Convention.
         
The order for reference and the questions submitted to the Court
            
 According to the order for reference, the power exercised by the Court of Appeal in this case is based not on any presumed
         entitlement to delimit the jurisdiction of a foreign court but on the fact that the party to whom the injunction is addressed
         is personally amenable to the jurisdiction of the English courts.
         
            
 According to the analysis made in the order for reference, an injunction of the kind issued by the Court of Appeal does not
         involve a decision upon the jurisdiction of the foreign court but rather an assessment of the conduct of the person seeking
         to avail himself of that jurisdiction. However, in so far as such an injunction interferes indirectly with the proceedings
         before the foreign court, it can be granted only where the claimant shows that there is a clear need to protect proceedings
         pending in England.
         
            
 The order for reference indicates that the essential elements which justify the exercise by the Court of Appeal of its power
         to issue an injunction in this case were that:
         
–
the applicant was a party to existing legal proceedings in England;
–
the defendants had in bad faith commenced and proposed to prosecute proceedings against the applicant in another jurisdiction
               for the purpose of frustrating or obstructing the proceedings in England;
            
–
the Court of Appeal considered that in order to protect the legitimate interest of the applicant in the English proceedings
               it was necessary to grant the applicant an injunction against the defendants.
            
            
 Taking the view, however, that the case raised a problem of interpretation of the Convention, the House of Lords stayed its
         proceedings pending a preliminary ruling from the Court of Justice on the following question:
         ‘Is it inconsistent with the Convention on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters signed
         at Brussels on September (subsequently acceded to by the United Kingdom) to grant restraining orders against defendants
         who are threatening to commence or continue legal proceedings in another Convention country when those defendants are acting
         in bad faith with the intent and purpose of frustrating or obstructing proceedings properly before the English courts?’
         
The question referred to the Court
            
 By its question, the national court seeks in essence to ascertain whether the Convention precludes the grant of an injunction
         by which a court of a Contracting State prohibits a party to proceedings pending before it from commencing or continuing legal
         proceedings before a court in another Contracting State even where that party is acting in bad faith in order to frustrate
         the existing proceedings.
         
Observations submitted to the Court
            
 The defendants in the main proceedings, the German and Italian Governments and the Commission submit that an injunction of
         the kind at issue in the main proceedings is not compatible with the Convention. They consider, in essence, that the Convention
         provides a complete set of rules on jurisdiction. Each court is entitled to rule only as to its own jurisdiction under those
         rules but not as to the jurisdiction of a court in another Contracting State. The effect of an injunction is that the court
         issuing it assumes exclusive jurisdiction and the court of another Contracting State is deprived of any opportunity of examining
         its own jurisdiction, thereby negating the principle of mutual cooperation underlying the Convention.
         
            
 Mr Turner and the United Kingdom Government observe, first, that the question on which a ruling is sought concerns only injunctions
         prompted by an abuse of procedure, addressed to defendants who are acting in bad faith and with the intention of frustrating
         proceedings before an English court. In pursuit of the aim of protecting the integrity of the proceedings before the English
         court, only an English court is in a position to decide whether the defendant’s conduct undermines or threatens that integrity.
         
            
 In common with the House of Lords, Mr Turner and the United Kingdom Government also submit that the injunctions at issue do
         not involve any assessment of the jurisdiction of the foreign court. They should be regarded as procedural measures. In that
         regard, referring to the judgment in Case C-391/Van Uden [1998] ECR I-7091, they contend that the Convention imposes no limitation on measures of a procedural nature which may be
         adopted by a court of a contracting State, provided that that court has jurisdiction under the Convention over the substance
         of a case.
         
            
 Finally, Mr Turner and the United Kingdom Government maintain that the grant of an injunction may contribute to attainment
         of the objective of the Convention, which is to minimise the risk of conflicting decisions and to avoid a multiplicity of
         proceedings.
         
Findings of the Court
            
 At the outset, it must be borne in mind that the Convention is necessarily based on the trust which the Contracting States
         accord to one another’s legal systems and judicial institutions. It is that mutual trust which has enabled a compulsory system
         of jurisdiction to be established, which all the courts within the purview of the Convention are required to respect, and
         as a corollary the waiver by those States of the right to apply their internal rules on recognition and enforcement of foreign
         judgments in favour of a simplified mechanism for the recognition and enforcement of judgments (Case C-116/Gasser [2003] ECR I-0000, paragraph 72). 
         
            
 It is inherent in that principle of mutual trust that, within the scope of the Convention, the rules on jurisdiction that
         it lays down, which are common to all the courts of the Contracting States, may be interpreted and applied with the same authority
         by each of them (see, to that effect, Case C-351/Overseas Union Insurance and Others [1991] ECR I-3317, paragraph 23, and Gasser,  paragraph 48).
         
            
 Similarly, otherwise than in a small number of exceptional cases listed in the first paragraph of Article of the Convention,
         which are limited to the stage of recognition or enforcement and relate only to certain rules of special or exclusive jurisdiction
         that are not relevant here, the Convention does not permit the jurisdiction of a court to be reviewed by a court in another
         Contracting State (see, to that effect, Overseas Union Insurance and Others, paragraph 24).
         
            
 However, a prohibition imposed by a court, backed by a penalty, restraining a party from commencing or continuing proceedings
         before a foreign court undermines the latter court’s jurisdiction to determine the dispute. Any injunction prohibiting a claimant
         from bringing such an action must be seen as constituting interference with the jurisdiction of the foreign court which, as
         such, is incompatible with the system of the Convention.
         
            
 Notwithstanding the explanations given by the referring court and contrary to the view put forward by Mr Turner and the United
         Kingdom Government, such interference cannot be justified by the fact that it is only indirect and is intended to prevent
         an abuse of process by the defendant in the proceedings in the forum State. In so far as the conduct for which the defendant
         is criticised consists in recourse to the jurisdiction of the court of another Member State, the judgment made as to the abusive
         nature of that conduct implies an assessment of the appropriateness of bringing proceedings before a court of another Member
         State. Such an assessment runs counter to the principle of mutual trust which, as pointed out in paragraphs to of this
         judgment, underpins the Convention and prohibits a court, except in special circumstances which are not applicable in this
         case, from reviewing the jurisdiction of the court of another Member State.
         
            
 Even if it were assumed, as has been contended, that an injunction could be regarded as a measure of a procedural nature intended
         to safeguard the integrity of the proceedings pending before the court which issues it, and therefore as being a matter of
         national law alone, it need merely be borne in mind that the application of national procedural rules may not impair the effectiveness
         of the Convention (Case C-365/Hagen [1990] ECR I-1845, paragraph 20). However, that result would follow from the grant of an injunction of the kind at issue
         which, as has been established in paragraph of this judgment, has the effect of limiting the application of the rules on
         jurisdiction laid down by the Convention.
         
            
 The argument that the grant of injunctions may contribute to attainment of the objective of the Convention, which is to minimise
         the risk of conflicting decisions and to avoid a multiplicity of proceedings, cannot be accepted. First, recourse to such
         measures renders ineffective the specific mechanisms provided for by the Convention for cases of lis alibi pendens and of related actions. Second, it is liable to give rise to situations involving conflicts for which the Convention contains
         no rules. The possibility cannot be excluded that, even if an injunction had been issued in one Contracting State, a decision
         might nevertheless be given by a court of another Contracting state. Similarly, the possibility cannot be excluded that the
         courts of two Contracting States that allowed such measures might issue contradictory injunctions.
         
            
 Consequently, the answer to be given to the national court must be that the Convention is to be interpreted as precluding
         the grant of an injunction whereby a court of a Contracting State prohibits a party to proceedings pending before it from
         commencing or continuing legal proceedings before a court of another Contracting State, even where that party is acting in
         bad faith with a view to frustrating the existing proceedings.
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the United Kingdom, German and Italian Governments, and by the Commission, which have submitted observations
         to the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings
         pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court.
         
On those grounds,
THE COURT
 in answer to the questions referred to it by the House of Lords by order of December 2001, hereby rules:
         The Convention of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters, as amended
               by the Convention of October on the accession of the Kingdom of Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
               and Northern Ireland, by the Convention of October on the accession of the Hellenic Republic and by the Convention
               of May on the accession of the Kingdom of Spain and the Portuguese Republic, is to be interpreted as precluding the
               grant of an injunction whereby a court of a Contracting State prohibits a party to proceedings pending before it from commencing
               or continuing legal proceedings before a court of another Contracting State, even where that party is acting in bad faith
               with a view to frustrating the existing proceedings.
Skouris
Jann
Timmermans
Gulmann
Cunha Rodrigues
Rosas
La Pergola
Puissochet
Schintgen
Colneric
von Bahr
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on April 2004.
         
R. Grass
V. Skouris
Registrar
President
 –
            
Language of the case: English.
Top  
 