
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-313/Christine MorgenbesservConsiglio dell'Ordine degli avvocati di Genova(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Corte suprema di cassazione (Italy))
         
«(Freedom of establishment – Enrolment in the register of praticanti – Recognition of diplomas – Access to regulated professions)»
Opinion of Advocate General Stix-Hackl delivered on March Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber), November Summary of the Judgment
1..
Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Lawyers – Practice of the profession on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the qualification was acquired – Directive 98/– Scope – Trainee lawyer – Not included  (Directive 98/of the European Parliament and the Council) 
2..
Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Workers – Recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of professional education and training of at least three years'
                     duration – Scope of Directive 89/– Concept of regulated profession – Trainee lawyer – Not included  
                  (Council Directive 89/48) 
3..
Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Lawyers – Access to the profession – Enrolment of trainee lawyers in the professional register – Requirement of a law degree issued, confirmed or recognised as equivalent by the authorities of the Member State concerned – Not permissible  (Arts EC and EC) 
1.
 Directive 98/to facilitate practice of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in
         which the qualification was obtained concerns only lawyers fully qualified as such in their Member State of origin, and therefore
         does not apply to persons who have not yet acquired the professional qualification necessary to practise the profession of
         lawyer but are carrying out a period of practice necessary for admission to the bar. see para. 2.
 A profession must be regarded as regulated, within the meaning of Directive 89/48, on a general system for the recognition
         of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of professional education and training of at least three years' duration,
         where access to, or pursuit of, the professional activity in question is governed by laws, regulations or administrative provisions
         that create a system under which that professional activity is expressly reserved for those who fulfil certain conditions
         and access to it is prohibited to those who do not fulfil them. However, even if it is reserved for persons who fulfil certain conditions and prohibited to those who do not, the period of
         practice necessary for admission to the bar cannot be regarded as a  
         regulated profession within the meaning of Directive 89/48, since it is limited in time and is designed to constitute the practical part of the
         training necessary for access to the profession of lawyer, and, unless an aptitude test is passed before that period expires,
         pursuit of the activities carried out during that period is not authorised. see paras 49-3.
 Community law precludes the authorities of a Member State from refusing to enrol the holder of a legal diploma obtained in
         another Member State in the register of persons undertaking the necessary period of practice for admission to the bar solely
         on the ground that it is not a legal diploma issued or confirmed by a university of the first State. Recognition, for academic and civil purposes, of the equivalence of a diploma obtained in one Member State may be relevant,
         and even decisive, for enrolment with the bar of another Member State. However, the taking into account of the diploma of
         the person concerned must be carried out in the context of the assessment of the whole of the training, academic and professional,
         which that person is able to demonstrate. In that respect, it is the duty of the competent authority to examine whether, and
         to what extent, the knowledge certified by the diploma granted in another Member State and the qualifications or professional
         experience obtained there, together with the experience obtained in the Member State in which the candidate seeks enrolment,
         must be regarded as satisfying, even partially, the conditions required for access to the activity concerned. see paras 64, 66-67, 72, operative part
      
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)November (1)
((Freedom of establishment – Enrolment in the register of praticanti – Recognition of diplomas – Access to regulated professions))
In Case C-313/01, 
 REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Corte suprema di cassazione (Italy) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings
            pending before that court between 
            
 Christine Morgenbesser
and
 Consiglio dell'Ordine degli avvocati di Genova,
 on the interpretation of Articles EC, EC, EC, EC, EC and EC,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),,
 composed of: D.A.O. Edward (Rapporteur), acting for the President of the Fifth Chamber, A. La Pergola and S. von Bahr Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: C. Stix-Hackl, Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
 Ms Morgenbesser, by G. Borneto, avvocato, 
               
─
 the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, assisted by G. Fiengo, avvocato dello Stato, 
               
─
 the Danish Government, by J. Molde, acting as Agent, 
               
─
 the Commission of the European Communities, by E. Traversa and M. Patakia, acting as Agents, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of Ms Morgenbesser, represented by G. Conte, avvocato, and G. Borneto, of the Consiglio
               dell'Ordine degli avvocati di Genova, represented by M. Condinanzi, avvocato, of the Italian Government, represented by A.
               Cingolo, avvocato dello Stato, and of the Commission, represented by E. Traversa, at the hearing on January 2003,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2003, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By order of April 2001, received at the Court on August 2001, the Corte suprema di cassazione (Supreme Court of Cassation)
         referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC a question on the interpretation of Articles EC, EC, EC, EC, EC and EC. 
         
            
 That question was raised in connection with an appeal by Ms Morgenbesser against the decision of the Consiglio Nazionale Forense
         (National Bar Council) (Italy), confirming the decision of the Consiglio dell'Ordine degli avvocati di Genova (Bar Council
         of Genoa) to refuse her enrolment in the register of  
         praticanti. 
         
Legal background
            
 Council Directive 89/48/EEC of December on a general system for the recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded
         on completion of professional education and training of at least three years' duration (OJ L 19, p. 16) applies, according
         to Article thereof, to any national of a Member State wishing to pursue a regulated profession in a host Member State in
         a self-employed capacity or as an employed person. 
         
            
 According to Article of Directive 89/48: For the purposes of this Directive the following definitions shall apply:
         
(a)
 diploma: any diploma, certificate or other evidence of formal qualifications or any set of such diplomas, certificates or
         other evidence: 
         
─
 which has been awarded by a competent authority in a Member State, designated in accordance with its own laws, regulations
                  or administrative provisions; 
               
─
 which shows that the holder has successfully completed a post-secondary course of at least three years' duration, or of an
                  equivalent duration part-time, at a university or establishment of higher education or another establishment of similar level
                  and, where appropriate, that he has successfully completed the professional training required in addition to the post-secondary
                  course, and 
               
─
 which shows that the holder has the professional qualifications required for the taking up or pursuit of a regulated profession
                  in that Member State, provided that the education and training attested by the diploma, certificate or other evidence of formal qualifications were
                  received mainly in the Community ... ... 
               
...
         
(c)
 a regulated profession: the regulated professional activity or range of activities which constitute this profession in a Member
         State; 
         
(d)
 regulated professional activity: a professional activity, in so far as the taking up or pursuit of such activity or one of
         its modes of pursuit in a Member State is subject, directly or indirectly by virtue of laws, regulations or administrative
         provisions, to the possession of a diploma. The following in particular shall constitute a mode of pursuit of a regulated
         professional activity: 
         
─
 pursuit of an activity under a professional title, in so far as the use of such a title is reserved to the holders of a diploma
                  governed by laws, regulations or administrative provisions, ... 
               
...
         
(f)
 adaptation period: the pursuit of a regulated profession in the host Member State under the responsibility of a qualified
         member of that profession, such period of supervised practice possibly being accompanied by further training. This period
         of supervised practice shall be the subject of an assessment. The detailed rules governing the adaptation period and its assessment
         as well as the status of a migrant person under supervision shall be laid down by the competent authority in the host Member
         States; 
         
(g)
 aptitude test: a test limited to the professional knowledge of the applicant, made by the competent authorities of the host
         Member State with the aim of assessing the ability of the applicant to pursue a regulated profession in that Member State.
         In order to permit this test to be carried out, the competent authorities shall draw up a list of subjects which, on the basis
         of a comparison of the education and training required in the Member State and that received by the applicant, are not covered
         by the diploma or other evidence of formal qualifications possessed by the applicant. The aptitude test must take account of the fact that the applicant is a qualified professional in the Member State of origin
         or the Member State from which he comes. It shall cover subjects to be selected from those on the list, knowledge of which
         is essential in order to be able to exercise the profession in the host Member State. The test may also include knowledge
         of the professional rules applicable to the activities in question in the host Member State. The detailed application of the
         aptitude test shall be determined by the competent authorities of that State with due regard to the rules of Community law.
         The status, in the host Member State, of the applicant who wishes to prepare himself for the aptitude test in that State shall
         be determined by the competent authorities in that State.
         
            
 According to subparagraph (a) of the first paragraph of Article of Directive 89/48: Where, in a host Member State, the taking up or pursuit of a regulated profession is subject to possession of a diploma, the
         competent authority may not, on the grounds of inadequate qualifications, refuse to authorise a national of a Member State
         to take up or pursue that profession on the same conditions as apply to its own nationals:
         
(a)
 if the applicant holds the diploma required in another Member State for the taking up or pursuit of the profession in question
         in its territory, such diploma having been awarded in a Member State; ...
         
            
 Article of Directive 89/authorises the host Member State to impose certain conditions on the taking up of a regulated
         profession.  Thus, under Article 4(1)(b), Article of the directive does not preclude the host Member State from requiring
         the applicant  
         to complete an adaptation period not exceeding three years or take an aptitude test. 
         
            
 The second sub-subparagraph of Article 4(1)(b) provides further that,  
         for professions whose practice requires precise knowledge of national law and in respect of which the provision of advice
         and/or assistance concerning national law is an essential and constant aspect of the professional activity, the host Member
         State may [by way of derogation from this principle] stipulate either an adaptation period or an aptitude test. 
         
            
 On February 1998, the European Parliament and the Council adopted Directive 98/5/EC to facilitate practice of the profession
         of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the qualification was obtained (OJ L 77, p.
         36). 
          National legislation
          The basic provisions concerning the profession of  
         avvocato
         
            
 The basic provisions on enrolment and practice as a member of the bar in Italy are contained in Regio Decreto Legge No 1578,
         Ordinamento delle professioni di avvocato e procuratore (Royal Decree-Law No on the organisation of the professions of
          
         avvocato and  
         procuratore) of November (GURI No of December 1933, p. 5521; hereinafter  
         Decree-Law No 1578/33). (The status of procuratore was abolished as a result of Law No of February 1997.) 
         
            
 Points and to of the first paragraph of Article of Decree-Law No 1578/provide that, in order to be enrolled as
         a member of the bar, a person must: 
         
─
 be an Italian national; 
         
─
 hold a diploma in law (
            laurea in giurisprudenza) issued or confirmed by a university in the Italian Republic; 
         
─
 after obtaining that diploma, have completed a period of practice (
            periodo di pratica) of at least two consecutive years in the office of an  
            avvocato, involving attendance at hearings in civil and criminal proceedings, or, over the same period, have carried on the activities
            of legal representation and defence (
            esercitato il patrocinio) before the courts; and 
         
─
 have passed the aptitude examination for pursuing the profession. 
         
            
 The nationality condition under the above provision is deemed to have been repealed, in respect of Community nationals, by
         Legge No 146, Disposizioni per l'adempimento di obblighi derivanti dall'appartenanza dell'Italia alla Comunità europea, legge
         comunitaria (Law No laying down rules for fulfilment of the obligations arising from Italy's membership of the European
         Community, Community Law 1993), of February (Ordinary Supplement to GURI No of March 1994), but the text of that
         provision has not been amended. 
         
            
 The period of practice is governed by Article of Decree-Law No 1578/33.  Law graduates who undertake that period (
         praticanti) are registered in a special register held by the bar of the court for the area where they are resident.  They are subject
         to the disciplinary authority of that bar. 
         
            
 Under the second paragraph of Article of Decree-Law No 1578/33, in order to be enrolled in the register of  
         praticanti, it is also necessary to hold a legal diploma issued or confirmed by an Italian university. 
         
            
 In accordance with Article of Decree-Law No 1578/33, praticanti are allowed, after one year's enrolment, within certain
         limits and  
         for a period not exceeding six years, to carry out legal representation and defence before the courts of the district of the bar council concerned.  In criminal
         matters, they may be officially assigned as defence lawyers before the same courts and, within the same limits, may exercise
         the functions of public prosecutor, and may lodge appeals either as defence lawyers or as representatives of the prosecution
         service.  Praticanti who are permitted after one year to carry on those activities before the courts are called  
         praticanti-patrocinanti. 
          The provisions transposing Directives 89/and 98/Legislative Decree No of January (GURI No of February 1992, p. 6;  
         Legislative Decree No 115/92) is designed to transpose Directive 89/48. 
         
            
 Article of that legislative decree, headed  
         Recognition of professional training diplomas acquired in the European Community provides: 
         
1.
 Under the conditions laid down by the provisions of this decree, recognition shall be granted in Italy to diplomas issued
         in a Member State of the European Community certifying professional training and the holding of which is made a precondition
         for the pursuit of a profession by the legislation of that State ...
         
2.
 Recognition shall be granted in favour of Community nationals for the purposes of pursuing in Italy, in a self-employed capacity
         or as an employed person, the profession corresponding to that for which they are qualified in the country which issued the
         diploma referred to in the preceding paragraph.
         
3.
 Diplomas shall be recognised if they certify that the applicant has successfully completed a post-secondary course of at least
         three years' duration ... at a university or establishment of higher education or another establishment of similar level.
         
            
 Article of Legislative Decree No 115/provides: For the purposes of this decree, the following shall be considered to be professions:
         
(a)
 activities the pursuit of which requires enrolment in a register or list maintained by an authority or public body, where
         enrolment is conditional upon completion of professional training satisfying the requirements of Article 1(3); 
         ...
         
(c)
 activities pursued with a professional title the use of which is reserved for persons who have completed professional training
         in accordance with the conditions laid down in Article 1(3).
         
            
 According to Article 5(1) of Legislative Decree No 115/92: Professional training certified by recognised diplomas and satisfying the criteria under Article 1(3) or Article of this
         decree may consist of:
         
(a)
 satisfactory completion of a post-secondary course of study; 
         
(b)
 a professional training period carried out under the direction of a trainer, and the satisfactory completion of which is marked
         by an examination; 
         
(c)
 a period of professional activity carried out under the direction of a qualified professional ...
         
            
 The second paragraph of Article of Legislative Decree No 115/provides: Recognition shall be subject to passing an aptitude test in the case of the professions ... of avvocato ...
         
            
 According to Article 8(1) and (2) of Legislative Decree No 115/92: 
         
1.
 The aptitude test shall consist of an examination designed to measure the professional and ethical knowledge of the applicant
         and to assess his capacity to pursue the profession, taking account of the fact that the applicant is a professional qualified
         in his State of origin or provenance.
         
2.
 The subjects covered by the examination shall be chosen by reference to their fundamental importance for pursuing the profession.
         
            
 Article of Legislative Decree No 115/provides: Provisions and general directives for the application of Articles 5, 6, and 8, by reference to the various professions and
         forms of professional training involved, shall be promulgated by decrees of the competent minister, within the meaning of
         Article 11, in cooperation with the Minister for Coordination of Community Policies and the Minister for Universities and
         Scientific and Technical Research, following the advice of the Consiglio di Stato.
         
            
 Concerning the legal professions, Annex A to Legislative Decree No 115/provides that recognition of the title of  
         avvocato is a matter for the Minister of Justice. 
         
            
 The procedure for recognition is governed by Article of Legislative Decree No 115/92, according to which the application
         for recognition, accompanied by the documentation concerning the titles to be recognised, is to be submitted to the competent
         minister, who is to take a decision by decree within a period of four months from the submission of the application. 
         
            
 Legislative Decree No of February (Ordinary Supplement to GURI No of April 2001) transposed Directive 98/5.
          The provisions of that decree do not govern the status of praticanti and patrocinanti. 
         The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred
            
 Ms Morgenbesser, a French national living in Italy, applied to the Bar Council of Genoa on October for enrolment in
         the register of praticanti.  In support of her application, she produced a diploma of maîtrise en droit obtained in France
         in 1996.  In April 1998, after doing legal work for eight months in a Paris law office, she joined a firm of avvocati registered
         with the Genoa Bar, where she was continuing to practise at the time of the hearing before the Court. 
         
            
 On November 1999, her application was rejected by the Bar Council of Genoa, which cited point of the first paragraph of
         Article of Decree-Law No 1578/33, making enrolment in the register of praticanti subject to the holding of a legal diploma
         issued or confirmed by an Italian university. 
         
            
 Ms Morgenbesser appealed against that decision to the Consiglio Nazionale Forense, which, by decision of May 2000, dismissed
         her appeal on the ground that she was not qualified to carry on the profession of avocat in France and did not hold the necessary
         professional qualification for enrolment in the register of praticanti in Italy. 
         
            
 Ms Morgenbesser then applied to the Università degli Studi of Genoa for recognition of her maîtrise en droit.  The Consiglio
         di Corso di Laurea in Giurisprudenza (law faculty) of that university made such recognition subject to her completing a shortened
         course of two years, passing examinations, and writing a final thesis. 
         
            
 Ms Morgenbesser appealed against that latter decision before the Tribunale Amministrativo Regionale della Liguria (Italy),
         the judgment of which, upholding that appeal, was itself challenged before the Consiglio di Stato (Italy). 
         
            
 In the meantime, Ms Morgenbesser appealed on a point of law against the decision of the Consiglio Nazionale Forense of May 2000. 
         
            
 On that appeal, the Corte suprema di cassazione decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following question to the Court
         of Justice for a preliminary ruling: Irrespective of recognition and confirmation of equivalence, can a diploma issued to a Community national in a Member State
         (in this case, France) automatically be relied upon for the purposes [of obtaining enrolment in the register of persons undertaking
         the necessary period of practice for admission to the bar] in another Member State (in this case Italy), by virtue of the
         rules of the EC Treaty ... on freedom of establishment and the freedom to provide services (Articles EC, EC, EC,
         EC and EC ...) and by virtue of Article EC ...?
         The question referred
            
 The order for reference shows that Articles EC, EC, EC, EC, EC and EC are mentioned in the question referred
         only because they were cited by Ms Morgenbesser. 
         
            
 It is, however, clear from that order that the question referred by the Corte suprema di cassazione essentially asks whether
         Community law precludes the authorities of a Member State from refusing to enrol the holder of a legal diploma obtained in
         another Member State in the register of persons undertaking the necessary period of practice for admission to the bar solely
         on the ground that it is not a legal diploma issued or confirmed by a university of the first State. 
         
            
 According to its own wording, that question is asked  
         [i]rrespective of recognition and confirmation of equivalence.  Indeed, the application for recognition of the maîtrise en droit diploma obtained by Ms Morgenbesser in France forms the
         subject-matter of another dispute, pending before the Consiglio di Stato (see paragraphs and of this judgment). 
          Observations submitted to the Court
         
            
 Ms Morgenbesser argues that the activity of a praticante, and more particularly of a praticante-patrocinante, falls within
         the definition of a  
         regulated profession within the meaning of Directive 89/48, firstly because those activities include the independent management of current cases,
         advice to clients and, in certain instances, their representation and defence, and, secondly, because the professional rules
         of the bar apply. 
         
            
 In her submission, the requirement for prior recognition of the diploma by an Italian university, laid down in point of
         the first paragraph of Article of Decree-Law No 1578/33, infringes Directive 89/48.  She argues that that directive makes
         it sufficient for her to present a diploma obtained in a Member State in order to pursue a profession in another Member State,
         since diplomas which fulfil the conditions laid down by the directive are automatically equivalent.  
         
            
 Should Directive 89/not apply, Ms Morgenbesser argues, citing Case C-234/Fernández de Bobadilla  [1999] ECR I-4773, that Article EC requires the authority responsible for handling applications for access to the profession,
         in this case the Bar Council of Genoa, to make an assessment and comparative examination of the applicant's knowledge by reference
         exclusively to her diploma of maîtrise en droit. 
         
            
 The Bar Council of Genoa argues that praticanti do not pursue either a  
         regulated profession within the meaning of Directive 89/or an  
         activity within the meaning of Article EC et seq., but are in a simple training relationship. 
         
            
 The Danish Government takes the view that Directive 89/does not apply to the main proceedings in this case, since the necessary
         training for access to the profession has not been completed.  The principles set out by the Court of Justice in Case C-340/Vlassopoulou  [1991] ECR I-do not require automatic recognition of the foreign diploma, but only a comparative examination of the
         knowledge and qualifications certified by the diploma obtained in another Member State.  However, a period of practical training
         carried out in another Member State might be recognised under Article of Directive 89/43. 
         
            
 The Italian Government argues that the dispute in the main proceedings concerns the recognition of academic qualifications,
         which should be distinguished from the recognition of professional qualifications. 
         
            
 The Commission takes the view that only activities which are habitually pursued in a long-term and definitive manner can be
         regarded as a  
         regulated profession within the meaning of Directive 89/48.  The Commission doubts whether the activity of a praticante, at issue in the main
         proceedings, can fall within that concept. 
         
            
 Should Directive 89/not apply, the general principles for interpreting Article EC, set out in  
          Vlassopoulou , cited above, and in Case C-55/Gebhard  [1995] ECR I-4165, might preclude national legislation which makes enrolment in the register of persons pursuing a period
         of practice conditional on a university of the Member State where the applicant intends to undertake that period recognising
         a legal diploma issued in another Member State, where that recognition requires the person concerned to complete a shortened
         course, pass examinations and write a final thesis.  Moreover, Ms Morgenbesser did not have the opportunity to argue that,
         at the time when she submitted her application for enrolment in the register of praticanti, she had already worked full-time
         in Italian law firms. 
          The Court's reply
         
            
 In order to reply to the question referred, it must first be examined whether a person such as the applicant in the main proceedings
         can benefit from the provisions of Directive 98/concerning the profession of lawyer or from those of Directive 89/on
         the mutual recognition of diplomas.  If those directives do not apply, it will then be necessary to examine whether Articles
         EC and EC, as interpreted by the Court of Justice, particularly in its judgment in  
          Vlassopoulou , cited above, can be relied on in a situation such as that at issue in the main proceedings. 
         
            
 It should be noted at the outset, having regard to the wording of the question referred, that neither Directive 98/5, nor
         Directive 89/48, nor Articles EC and EC require recognition of a diploma to be purely  
         automatic. 
         
            
 Directive 98/concerns only lawyers fully qualified as such in their Member State of origin, and therefore does not apply
         to persons who have not yet acquired the professional qualification necessary to practise the profession of lawyer.  It is
         therefore not applicable in a case such as that at issue in the main proceedings. 
         
            
 According to Article of Directive 89/48, that directive applies to any national of a Member State wishing to pursue a  
         regulated profession in a host Member State in a self-employed capacity or as an employed person. 
         
            
 Ms Morgenbesser argues that she is not claiming access to the profession of  
         avvocato as such, but, at this stage, to that of praticante.  She maintains that the activities of a praticante fall within the definition
         of a  
         regulated profession within the meaning of Directive 89/48.  Since, she argues, the only precondition for access to that profession is a legal
         diploma, she can rely on her maîtrise en droit in order to obtain that access.  She points out that a significant number of
         praticanti and praticanti-patrocinanti who have not passed the final examination continue to carry on their legal activities
         without being removed from the register of praticanti. 
         
            
 According to the definition given in Article 1(c) of Directive 89/48, a regulated profession is  
         the regulated professional activity or range of activities which constitute this profession in a Member State and, according to the definition appearing in Article 1(d), a regulated professional activity is  
         a professional activity, in so far as the taking up or pursuit of such activity or one of its modes of pursuit in a Member
         State is subject, directly or indirectly by virtue of laws, regulations or administrative provisions, to the possession of
         a diploma. 
         
            
 A profession must therefore be regarded as regulated, within the meaning of Directive 89/48, where access to, or pursuit of,
         the professional activity in question is governed by laws, regulations or administrative provisions that create a system under
         which that professional activity is expressly reserved for those who fulfil certain conditions and access to it is prohibited
         to those who do not fulfil them (Case C-164/Aranitis  [1996] ECR I-135, paragraph 19, and  
          Fernández de Bobadilla , paragraph 17). 
         
            
 Access to the activities of praticante and praticante-patrocinante which are at issue in the main proceedings, and the pursuit
         of those activities, are governed by legal provisions establishing a system which reserves those activities for persons who
         fulfil certain conditions and prohibits access to persons who do not fulfil them. 
         
            
 However, it follows from those provisions that the pursuit of those activities is designed to constitute the practical part
         of the training necessary for access to the profession of  
         avvocato.  If, at the end of those six years, the praticante-patrocinante does not pass the examination prescribed by point of the
         first paragraph of Article of Decree-Law No 1578/33, he will no longer be authorised, under those provisions, to pursue
         the activities which he carried on in that capacity. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, the activity of praticante-patrocinante cannot be described as a  
         regulated profession within the meaning of Directive 89/separate from that of  
         avvocato. 
         
            
 The fact that a significant number of praticanti-patrocinanti who have not passed the final examination continue to exercise
         legal activities and are not removed from the register of praticanti cannot have the effect of qualifying the activities of
         praticante or patrocinante, considered in isolation, as a regulated profession within the meaning of Directive 89/48. 
         
            
 It also appears that, since Ms Morgenbesser has not obtained in France the certificat d'aptitude à la profession d'avocat
         (CAPA), she does not hold the professional qualifications for access to the status of  
         stagiaire at the bar of that Member State.  In those circumstances, the maîtrise en droit which she holds does not, in itself, constitute
         a  
         diploma, certificate or other evidence of formal qualifications within the meaning of Article 1(a) of Directive 89/48. 
         
            
 It follows that Ms Morgenbesser is not able to rely on Directive 89/48. 
         
            
 Having regard to the above, it needs to be examined whether Articles EC and EC apply in the circumstances of the case
         in the main proceedings.  Only if those provisions do not apply will it be necessary to examine the other provisions of the
         Treaty mentioned by the referring court in its question. 
         
            
 According to the case-law the principles of which were set out in  
          Vlassopoulou , the authorities of a Member State, when considering a request by a national of another Member State for authorisation to
         exercise a regulated profession, must take into consideration the professional qualification of the person concerned by making
         a comparison between the qualifications certified by his diplomas, certificates and other formal qualifications and by his
         relevant professional experience and the professional qualifications required by the national rules for the exercise of the
         profession in question (see, most recently, Case C-232/Commission  v  
          Spain  [2002] ECR I-4235, paragraph 21). 
         
            
 That obligation extends to all diplomas, certificates and other evidence of formal qualifications as well as to the relevant
         experience of the person concerned, irrespective of whether they were acquired in a Member State or in a third country, and
         it does not cease to exist as a result of the adoption of directives on the mutual recognition of diplomas (Case C-238/Hocsman  [2000] ECR I-6623, paragraphs and 31;  
          Commission  v  
          Spain , paragraph 22). 
         
            
 According to the Bar Council of Genoa, the activity of praticante is a training activity, to which the provisions of Articles
         EC and EC do not apply. 
         
            
 However, the period of practice at issue in the main proceedings comprises the pursuit of activities, normally remunerated
         by the client or by the firm for which the praticante works, with a view to access to a regulated profession to which Article
         EC applies.  In so far as the remuneration of the praticante takes the form of a salary, Article EC may also apply.
         
         
            
 Both Article EC and Article EC may therefore apply to a situation such as that in the main proceedings.  However, the
         analysis does not differ according to whether it is freedom of movement for workers or the freedom of establishment which
         is relied upon in opposing the refusal, on the part of the Bar Council of Genoa acting in its capacity as the competent authority
         for enrolling praticanti on the register, to take the legal diploma obtained in another Member State and the professional
         experience acquired into account for the purposes of enrolment. 
         
            
 As the Court has already held, the exercise of the right of establishment is hindered if national rules fail to take account
         of learning, skills and qualifications already acquired by the person concerned in another Member State, so that the competent
         national authorities must measure whether such factors sufficiently demonstrate that missing learning and skills have been
         acquired (
          Vlassopoulou , paragraphs and 20;  
          Fernández de Bobadilla , paragraph 33). 
         
            
 In that context, contrary to what the Italian Government claims, a case such as that at issue in the main proceedings is not
         concerned with a simple question of recognising academic qualifications. 
         
            
 It is true that the recognition, for academic and civil purposes, of the equivalence of a diploma obtained in one Member State
         may be relevant, and even decisive, for enrolment with the bar of another Member State (Case 71/Thieffry  [1977] ECR 765). 
         
            
 It does not follow, however, that, for the purposes of the comparative examination which the competent authority of the host
         Member State must undertake in circumstances such as those in the main proceedings, it is necessary to examine the academic
         equivalence of the diploma relied upon by the person concerned in relation to the diploma normally required of nationals of
         that State. 
         
            
 The taking into account of the diploma of the person concerned, such as the maîtrise en droit granted by a French university,
         must therefore be carried out in the context of the assessment of the whole of the training, academic and professional, which
         that person is able to demonstrate. 
         
            
 It is therefore the duty of the competent authority to examine, in accordance with the principles set out by the Court of
         Justice in  
          Vlassopoulou  and  
          Fernández de Bobadilla , whether, and to what extent, the knowledge certified by the diploma granted in another Member State and the qualifications
         or professional experience obtained there, together with the experience obtained in the Member State in which the candidate
         seeks enrolment, must be regarded as satisfying, even partially, the conditions required for access to the activity concerned.
         
         
            
 That examination procedure must enable the authorities of the host Member State to assure themselves, on an objective basis,
         that the foreign diploma certifies that its holder has knowledge and qualifications which are, if not identical, at least
         equivalent to those certified by the national diploma.  That assessment of the equivalence of the foreign diploma must be
         carried out exclusively in the light of the level of knowledge and qualifications which its holder can be assumed to possess
         having regard to that diploma, having regard to the nature and duration of the studies and practical training to which the
         diploma relates (Case 222/Heylens and Others  [1987] ECR 4097, paragraph 13;  
          Vlassopoulou , paragraph 17).  
         
            
 In the course of that examination, a Member State may, however, take into consideration objective differences relating to
         both the legal framework of the profession in question in the Member State of origin and to its field of activity.  In the
         case of the profession of lawyer, a Member State may therefore carry out a comparative examination of diplomas, taking account
         of the differences identified between the national legal systems concerned (
          Vlassopoulou , paragraph 18). 
         
            
 If that comparative examination of diplomas results in the finding that the knowledge and qualifications certified by the
         foreign diploma correspond to those required by the national provisions, the Member State must recognise that diploma as fulfilling
         the requirements laid down by its national provisions. If, on the other hand, the comparison reveals that the knowledge and
         qualifications certified by the foreign diploma and those required by the national provisions correspond only partially, the
         host Member State is entitled to require the person concerned to show that he has acquired the knowledge and qualifications
         which are lacking (
          Vlassopoulou , paragraph 19). 
         
            
 By the same token, the competent national authorities must measure whether the learning and skills acquired in the host Member
         State, either through a course of study or by way of practical experience, sufficiently demonstrate that the missing knowledge
         and qualifications have in the meantime been acquired (
          Vlassopoulou , paragraph 20). 
         
            
 In the light of the above, the answer to the referring court must be that Community law precludes the authorities of a Member
         State from refusing to enrol the holder of a legal diploma obtained in another Member State in the register of persons undertaking
         the necessary period of practice for admission to the bar solely on the ground that it is not a legal diploma issued, confirmed
         or recognised as equivalent by a university of the first State. 
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the Italian and Danish Governments and by the Commission, which have submitted observations to the Court,
         are not recoverable.  Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings pending
         before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
 in answer to the question referred to it by the Corte suprema di cassazione by order of April 2001, hereby rules: 
         
Edward
La Pergola 
von Bahr 
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on November 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
V. Skouris  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: Italian.
Top  
 