
Case C-14/Ingenieurbüro Michael Weiss und Partner GbR
v
Industrie- und Handelskammer Berlin
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Bundesgerichtshof)
(Judicial cooperation in civil matters – Regulation (EC) No 1348/– Service of judicial and extrajudicial documents – Annexes to the document not translated – Consequences)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Judicial cooperation in civil matters – Service of judicial and extrajudicial documents – Regulation No 1348/– Document
            instituting proceedings – Definition
(Council Regulation No 1348/2000, Art. 8(1))
2.        Judicial cooperation in civil matters – Service of judicial and extrajudicial documents – Regulation No 1348/– Service
            of a document written in a language other than the official language of the Member State addressed
(Council Regulation No 1348/2000, Art. 8(1))
3.        Judicial cooperation in civil matters – Service of judicial and extrajudicial documents – Regulation No 1348/– Service
            of a document written in a language other than the official language of the Member State addressed
(Council Regulation No 1348/2000, Art. 8(1)(b))
4.        Judicial cooperation in civil matters – Service of judicial and extrajudicial documents – Regulation No 1348/– Service
            of a document written in a language other than the official language of the Member State addressed
(Council Regulation No 1348/2000, Art. 8(1))
1.        The term ‘document to be served’ in Article 8(1) of Regulation No 1348/on the service in the Member States of judicial
         and extrajudicial documents in civil and commercial matters is to be interpreted, where such a document is a document instituting
         the proceedings, as meaning the document or documents which must be served on the defendant in due time in order to enable
         him to assert his rights in legal proceedings in the State of transmission. Such a document must make it possible to identify
         with a degree of certainty at the very least the subject‑matter of the claim and the cause of action as well as the summons
         to appear before the court or, depending on the nature of the pending proceedings, to be aware that it is possible to appeal.
         Documents which have a purely evidential function and are not necessary for the purpose of understanding the subject-matter
         of the claim and the cause of action do not form an integral part of the document instituting the proceedings within the meaning
         of that regulation. 
      
(see para. 73)
2.        Article 8(1) of Regulation No 1348/on the service in the Member States of judicial and extrajudicial documents in civil
         and commercial matters is to be interpreted as meaning that the addressee of a document instituting proceedings which is to
         be served does not have the right to refuse to accept that document, provided that it enables the addressee to assert his
         rights in legal proceedings in the Member State of transmission, where annexes are attached to that document consisting of
         documentary evidence which is not in the language of the Member State addressed or in a language of the Member State of transmission
         which the addressee understands, but which has a purely evidential function and is not necessary for understanding the subject‑matter
         of the claim and the cause of action. 
      
First of all, it follows from an examination of a number of provisions of the Hague Convention, the Brussels Convention
         of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters, as amended, the Convention
         of May on the service in the Member States of the European Union of judicial and extrajudicial documents in civil
         or commercial matters, Regulations No 1348/and No 44/and the information communicated by Member States under Article
         14(2) of Regulation No 1348/that it is not considered to be a necessary component of the exercise of the defendant’s
         right of defence that the applicant provide a translation of the document instituting the proceedings, since the defendant
         must simply be given sufficient time to enable him to have that document translated and to prepare his defence. 
      
Secondly, it is apparent from an autonomous interpretation of the term ‘document instituting proceedings’ that such a document
         must consist of the document or documents, where they are intrinsically linked, enabling the defendant to understand the subject‑matter
         and grounds of the plaintiff’s application and to be aware of the existence of legal proceedings in which he may assert his
         rights. On the other hand, documents which have a purely evidential function, distinct from the purpose of service itself,
         and are not intrinsically linked to the application in so far as they are not necessary for understanding the subject‑matter
         of the claim and the cause of action, do not form an integral part of the document instituting the proceedings within the
         meaning of that provision. It is for the national court to determine whether the content of the document instituting the proceedings
         is sufficient to enable the defendant to assert his rights or whether it is necessary for the party instituting the proceedings
         to remedy the fact that a necessary annex has not been translated.
      
(see paras 52, 56, 64-65, 69, 75, 78, operative part 1)
3.        Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 1348/on the service in the Member States of judicial and extrajudicial documents in
         civil and commercial matters is to be interpreted as meaning that the fact that the addressee of a document served has agreed
         in a contract concluded with the applicant in the course of his business that correspondence is to be conducted in the language
         of the Member State of transmission does not give rise to a presumption of knowledge of that language, but is evidence which
         the court may take into account in determining whether that addressee understands the language of the Member State of transmission
         in such a way as to enable him to assert such rights. 
      
(see para. 88, operative part 2)
4.        Article 8(1) of Regulation No 1348/on the service in the Member States of judicial and extrajudicial documents in civil
         and commercial matters is to be interpreted as meaning that the addressee of a document served may not in any event rely on
         that provision in order to refuse acceptance of annexes to the document which are not in the language of the Member State
         addressed or in a language of the Member State of transmission which the addressee understands, where the addressee concluded
         a contract in the course of his business in which he agreed that correspondence was to be conducted in the language of the
         Member State of transmission and the annexes concern that correspondence and are written in the agreed language.
      
It may be necessary to translate annexes if the content of that document which has been translated is insufficient to enable
         the subject‑matter of the claim and the cause of action to be identified so that the defendant can assert his rights. However,
         such a translation is not needed where it is apparent from the factual circumstances that the addressee of the document instituting
         the proceedings is familiar with the content of those annexes. That is the case where the addressee is the author of those
         documents or can be presumed to understand the content, for example because he signed a contract in the course of his business
         in which he agreed that correspondence was to be conducted in the language of the Member State of transmission and the annexes
         concern that correspondence and are written in the agreed language. 
      
(see paras 90-92, operative part 3)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Judicial cooperation in civil matters – Regulation (EC) No 1348/– Service of judicial and extrajudicial documents – Annexes to the document not translated – Consequences)
In Case C‑14/07,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Articles EC and EC from the Bundesgerichtshof (Germany), made by decision
         of December 2006, received at the Court on January 2007, in the proceedings
      
Ingenieurbüro Michael Weiss und Partner GbR
v
Industrie- und Handelskammer Berlin,
joined party:
Nicholas Grimshaw & Partners Ltd,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of A. Rosas (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, U. Lõhmus, J. Klučka, P. Lindh and A. Arabadjiev, Judges,
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: B. Fülöp, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on October 2007,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Ingenieurbüro Michael Weiss und Partner GbR, by N. Tretter, Rechtsanwalt,
–        Industrie- und Handelskammer Berlin, by H. Raeschke-Kessler, Rechtsanwalt,
–        Nicholas Grimshaw & Partners Ltd, by P.-A. Brand and U. Karpenstein, Rechtsanwälte,
–        the Czech Government, by T. Boček, acting as Agent,
–        the French Government, by G. de Bergues and A.-L. During, acting as Agents,
–        the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and W. Ferrante, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Slovak Government , by J. Čorba, acting as Agent,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by W. Bogensberger, and subsequently by A.-M. Rouchaud-Joët and S. Grünheid, acting
         as Agents,
      
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on November 2007,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 1348/of
         May on the service in the Member States of judicial and extrajudicial documents in civil or commercial matters (OJ
         L 160, p. 37).
      
The reference has been made in the context of proceedings between Industrie- und Handelskammer Berlin (‘IHK Berlin’) and the
         firm of architects Nicholas Grimshaw & Partners (‘Grimshaw’), a company governed by English law, concerning an action for
         damages for defective design of a building, the latter company joining Ingenieurbüro Michael Weiss und Partner GbR (‘Weiss’),
         established in Aachen, to the proceedings. 
      
 Legal context
 Community and international law
Recitals and in the preamble to Regulation No 1348/are worded as follows:
      
‘(8)      To secure the effectiveness of this Regulation, the possibility of refusing service of documents is confined to exceptional
         situations.
      
…
(10)      For the protection of the addressee’s interests, service should be effected in the official language or one of the official
         languages of the place where it is to be effected or in another language of the originating Member State which the addressee
         understands.’
      
Article 4(1) of that regulation provides as follows:
      
‘Judicial documents shall be transmitted directly and as soon as possible between the agencies designated on the basis of
         Article 2.’
      
Article of the regulation, entitled ‘Translation of documents’, provides as follows:
      
‘1.       The applicant shall be advised by the transmitting agency to which he or she forwards the document for transmission that the
         addressee may refuse to accept it if it is not in one of the languages provided for in Article 8. 
      
2.       The applicant shall bear any costs of translation prior to the transmission of the document, without prejudice to any possible
         subsequent decision by the court or competent authority on liability for such costs.’ 
      
Article of Regulation No 1348/2000, entitled ‘Refusal to accept a document’, provides as follows:
      
‘1.      The receiving agency shall inform the addressee that he or she may refuse to accept the document to be served if it is in
         a language other than either of the following languages:
      
(a)       the official language of the Member State addressed or, if there are several official languages in that Member State, the
         official language or one of the official languages of the place where service is to be effected; or 
      
(b)      a language of the Member State of transmission which the addressee understands.
2.       Where the receiving agency is informed that the addressee refuses to accept the document in accordance with paragraph 1, it
         shall immediately inform the transmitting agency by means of the certificate provided for in Article and return the request
         and the documents of which a translation is requested.’
      
Article 19(1) of the regulation provides as follows:
      
‘Where a writ of summons or an equivalent document has had to be transmitted to another Member State for the purpose of service,
         under the provisions of this Regulation, and the defendant has not appeared, judgment shall not be given until it is established
         that:
      
(a)      the document was served by a method prescribed by the internal law of the Member State addressed for the service of documents
         in domestic actions upon persons who are within its territory; or
      
(b)       the document was actually delivered to the defendant or to his residence by another method provided for by this Regulation;
and that in either of these cases the service or the delivery was effected in sufficient time to enable the defendant to defend.’
The remaining paragraphs of Article of Regulation No 1348/are concerned with particular situations in which the defendant
         does not enter an appearance. 
      
Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 44/of December on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of
         judgments in civil and commercial matters (OJ L 12, p. 1) is worded in the following manner:
      
‘1.       Where a defendant domiciled in one Member State is sued in a court of another Member State and does not enter an appearance,
         the court shall declare of its own motion that it has no jurisdiction unless its jurisdiction is derived from the provisions
         of this Regulation. 
      
2.       The court shall stay the proceedings so long as it is not shown that the defendant has been able to receive the document instituting
         the proceedings or an equivalent document in sufficient time to enable him to arrange for his defence, or that all necessary
         steps have been taken to this end.
      
3.      Article of … Regulation (EC) No 1348/… shall apply instead of the provisions of paragraph if the document instituting
         the proceedings or an equivalent document had to be transmitted from one Member State to another pursuant to this Regulation.
         
      
4.      Where the provisions of Regulation (EC) No 1348/are not applicable, Article of the Hague Convention of November
         on the Service Abroad of Judicial and Extrajudicial Documents in Civil or Commercial Matters shall apply if the document
         instituting the proceedings or an equivalent document had to be transmitted pursuant to that Convention.’ 
      
Moreover, Article 34(2) of Regulation No 44/provides that a judgment given in one Member State is not to be recognised
         in another Member State where ‘it was given in default of appearance, if the defendant was not served with the document which
         instituted the proceedings or with an equivalent document in sufficient time and in such a way as to enable him to arrange
         for his defence, unless the defendant failed to commence proceedings to challenge the judgment when it was possible for him
         to do so’.
      
Provision was also made for such measures in the Convention of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments
         in Civil and Commercial Matters (OJ L 304, p. 36), as amended by the Convention of October on the Accession of
         the Kingdom of Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (OJ L 304, p. 1, and – amended
         version – p. 77), by the Convention of October on the Accession of the Hellenic Republic (OJ L 388, p. 1), by
         the Convention of May on the Accession of the Kingdom of Spain and the Portuguese Republic (OJ L 285, p. 1) and
         by the Convention of November on the Accession of the Republic of Austria, the Republic of Finland and the Kingdom
         of Sweden (OJ C 15, p. 1) (‘the Brussels Convention’). 
      
Article of that convention concerns the default procedure. 
      
Article of the convention provides as follows:
      
‘A judgment shall not be recognised:
…
2.      where it was given in default of appearance, if the defendant was not duly served with the document which instituted the proceedings
         or with an equivalent document in sufficient time to enable him to arrange for his defence 
      
…’
Article of The Hague Convention of November on the Service Abroad of Judicial and Extrajudicial Documents in Civil
         or Commercial Matters (‘the Hague Convention’), provides as follows:
      
‘The Central Authority of the State addressed shall itself serve the document or shall arrange to have it served by an appropriate
         agency, either:
      
(a)       by a method prescribed by its internal law for the service of documents in domestic actions upon persons who are within its
         territory, or
      
(b)       by a particular method requested by the applicant, unless such a method is incompatible with the law of the State addressed.
…
If the document is to be served under the first paragraph above, the Central Authority may require the document to be written
         in, or translated into, the official language or one of the official languages of the State addressed. …’
      
The first paragraph of Article of that convention provides as follows:
      
‘Where a writ of summons or an equivalent document had to be transmitted abroad for the purpose of service, under the provisions
         of the present convention, and the defendant has not appeared, judgment shall not be given until it is established that:
      
(a) the document was served by a method prescribed by the internal law of the State addressed for the service of documents
         in domestic actions upon persons who are within its territory, or
      
(b) the document was actually delivered to the defendant or to his residence by another method provided for by this Convention,
and that in either of these cases the service or the delivery was effected in sufficient time to enable the defendant to defend.’
Subparagraph (b) of the first paragraph of Article of the Hague Convention states that the Contracting States are
         not to be prevented from entering an agreement to dispense with the language requirements of, inter alia, the third paragraph
         of Article 5. 
      
 National law
A document instituting proceedings is defined in Paragraph of the Zivilprozessordnung (German Code of Civil Procedure).
         That provision is worded as follows:
      
‘(1) An action shall be commenced by the service of a written pleading (application). 
(2) The application must include:
1. the name of the parties and of the court 
2. a precise statement of subject-matter and the cause of action relied on as well as specific heads of claim.
(3) The application must also state, where the determination of the court having jurisdiction is at issue, the value of the
         subject-matter of the dispute, unless that consists of a fixed sum of money, and must state whether there are reasons for
         which judgment should not be given in the case by a single judge. 
      
(4) Furthermore, the general provisions relating to preparatory documents shall also be applicable to the application.’ 
Article of the Code of Civil Procedure is entitled ‘Annexed documents’. It is worded as follows:
      
‘(1) The documents held by a party to which the preparatory pleading refers must be attached to that pleading in the form
         of the original or a copy.
      
(2) Where only individual passages of a document are concerned, it is sufficient to attach an extract containing the introduction
         to the document, the extract which is relevant to the case, the purpose, date and signature. 
      
(3) If the other party is already familiar with those documents or if they are voluminous, it is sufficient to indicate precisely
         what those documents are and that they are available for consultation.’ 
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
IHK Berlin is pursuing an action for damages against Grimshaw for defective design on the basis of an architect’s contract.
         In the contract, Grimshaw undertook to draw up the plans for a construction project in Berlin. 
      
Paragraph 3.2.of the architect’s contract stipulates:
      
‘The services shall be provided in German. Correspondence between [IHK Berlin] and [Grimshaw] and the authorities and public
         institutions shall be in German.’
      
It is apparent from the documents before the court and was confirmed at the hearing that the contract is governed by German
         law (paragraph 10.of the contract) and that, in the event of a dispute, the courts having jurisdiction are the Berlin courts
         (paragraph 10.of the contract). 
      
Grimshaw joined Weiss to the proceedings.
      
IHK Berlin’s application, which forms part of the case-file submitted to the court, refers to the various items of evidence
         relied on in support of its submissions. That documentary evidence is annexed to the application in a file consisting of approximately
         pages. 
      
As stated by the Bundesgerichtshof, the content of those documents is partially reproduced in the application. The annexes
         include the architect’s contract concluded between the parties, an addendum and the draft thereof, an extract of the contractual
         specifications, a large number of documents or extracts such as technical reports or statements of account, as well as several
         letters, including some from Grimshaw, relating to the correspondence with the companies entrusted with establishing and repairing
         the defects complained of in the main proceedings. 
      
After Grimshaw had initially refused to accept the application on the ground that there was no English translation, an English
         translation of the application and the annexes in German, which were not translated, were delivered to it in London on May 2003. 
      
By written pleading of June 2003, Grimshaw complained that service was defective because the annexes had not been translated
         into English. For that reason, relying on Article 8(1) of Regulation No 1348/2000, it refused to accept the application and
         submits that the application was not properly served. Grimshaw raises the objection that the application is time-barred. 
      
The Landgericht Berlin held that the application was properly served on May 2003. Grimshaw’s appeal against that decision
         was dismissed by the Kammergericht Berlin. Weiss lodged an appeal on a point of law before the Bundesgerichtshof against the
         judgment on the appeal. 
      
The Bundesgerichtshof states that, under the German Code of Procedure, an application which refers to annexes attached forms
         a whole with those annexes and that all the evidence relied on by the applicant which is necessary for the defendant’s defence
         must be made available to him. It is not therefore appropriate to determine whether an application has been properly served
         without having regard to the service of the annexes, on the assumption that the essential information is already clear from
         the application and the right to be heard remains protected by virtue of the fact that the defendant can still adequately
         prepare his defence in the proceedings in so far as concerns the content of the annexes. 
      
An exception to that principle is permissible if the defendant’s need for information is not significantly prejudiced, for
         example, because an annex which was not attached to the application was sent at virtually the same time as the action was
         brought or because the defendant was already familiar with the documents before the proceedings were instituted. 
      
The Bundesgerichtshof states that, in the present case, Grimshaw was not familiar with all the documents, in particular those
         establishing the defects and how to remedy them as well as those relating to costs. Such documents cannot be regarded as insignificant
         since the decision on whether to submit a defence may be dependent on their content being assessed. 
      
The referring court is uncertain whether Grimshaw was correct to refuse the application. It states that none of the bodies
         authorised to represent that firm understands German. 
      
According to the Bundesgerichtshof, Article 8(1) of Regulation No 1348/can be interpreted as meaning that service cannot
         be refused on the ground that annexes have not been translated. 
      
That provision is in fact silent on the refusal to accept the service of annexes. Moreover, the standard form to be used pursuant
         to the first sentence of Article 4(3) of the regulation for requests for service in the Member States of the European Union
         requires information on the nature and language of the document only as regards the document to be served (Paragraphs 6.and 6.3) and not as regards the annexes attached to it, for which only the number is required to be stated (Paragraph 6.4).
         
      
Should it be possible to refuse service on the sole ground that the annexes have not been translated, the referring court
         states that, in its view, the right of the defendant to refuse to accept a document pursuant to Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation
         No 1348/cannot be denied simply because the contract between the applicant and the defendant provides that correspondence
         is to be in German. 
      
That clause does not mean that the defendant understands that language within the meaning of that regulation. However, as
         the referring court pointed out, academic opinion is divided, some writers considering that a clause specifying the use of
         a particular language in a contractual relationship may give rise to a presumption of knowledge of that language for the purpose
         of that regulation. 
      
Finally, where knowledge of the language in question cannot be inferred from a contractual provision, the Bundesgerichtshof
         is uncertain whether it is possible in all cases to refuse service of an application where the annexes are not translated
         or whether there are exceptions, for example, if the defendant already has a translation of the annexes or if the content
         of the annex is reproduced word-for-word in the translated application. 
      
That could also apply if the annexed documents were in a language which was validly chosen by the parties pursuant to a contract.
         The referring court also mentions the case of weaker parties who may need protection, such as cross-border consumers who have
         contractually agreed that correspondence is to be conducted in the language of the undertaking. 
      
The Bundesgerichtshof states, however, that in the case in the main proceedings Grimshaw concluded the contract in the course
         of its business. It sees no special need to protect that firm or therefore any need to recognise that it has a right to refuse
         to accept service. 
      
Against that background, the Bundesgerichtshof decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the
         Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1. Must Article 8(1) of … Regulation (EC) No 1348/… be interpreted as meaning that an addressee does not have the right
         to refuse to accept service where only the annexes to a document to be served are not in the language of the Member State
         addressed or in a language of the Member State of transmission which the addressee understands?
      
2. If the answer to the first question is in the negative:
Must Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 1348/be interpreted as meaning that the addressee is deemed to “understand” the
         language of a Member State of transmission within the meaning of that regulation where, in the course of his business, he
         agreed in a contract with the applicant that correspondence was to be conducted in the language of the Member State of transmission?
         
      
3. If the answer to the second question is in the negative:
Must Article 8(1) of Regulation No 1348/be interpreted as meaning that the addressee may not in any event rely on that
         provision in order to refuse acceptance of annexes to a document which are not in the language of the Member State addressed
         or in a language of the Member State of transmission which the addressee understands if the addressee concludes a contract
         in the course of his business in which he agrees that correspondence is to be conducted in the language of the Member State
         of transmission and the annexes concern that correspondence and are written in the agreed language?’
      
 The questions 
 The first question
By its first question, the Bundesgerichtshof asks whether Article 8(1) of Regulation No 1348/must be interpreted as meaning
         that the addressee of a document to be served does not have the right to refuse to accept service where only the annexes to
         the document are not in the language of the Member State addressed or in a language of the Member State of transmission which
         the addressee understands. 
      
A preliminary point to be noted is that Regulation No 1348/applies to documents to be served which can be very different
         in nature, depending on whether they are judicial or extrajudicial documents and, if the former, on whether it is a document
         instituting the proceedings, a judicial decision, an enforcement measure or any other document. The question referred to the
         Court concerns a document instituting proceedings. 
      
Since the role and importance of annexes to a document to be served may vary according to the nature of the document, the
         reasoning and answers in this judgment must be confined to documents instituting proceedings. 
      
It is apparent from the observations submitted to the Court that the number and nature of documents which must be annexed
         to a document instituting proceedings vary considerably according to the legal system concerned. Under some systems, such
         a document need only contain the subject-matter and a summary of the pleas of fact and law of the application, the documentary
         evidence being communicated separately, whereas under other legal systems, such as German law, the annexes must be produced
         at the same time as the application and form an integral part of it. 
      
Article of Regulation No 1348/does not refer to annexes to a document to be served. However, the reference in paragraph
         of that article to ‘documents of which a translation is requested’ indicates that a ‘document to be served’ may consist
         of a number of documents.
      
In the absence of useful guidance in the wording of Article of Regulation No 1348/2000, that provision must be interpreted
         in the light of its objectives and its context and, more generally, the objectives and context of Regulation No 1348/itself (see, to that effect, Case C‑287/Linster [2000] ECR I‑6917, paragraph 43). 
      
As is apparent from recital of the preamble, the objectives of Regulation No 1348/are to improve and expedite the transmission
         of documents. Those objectives are reiterated in recitals to 8. Recital thus states that ‘[t]o secure the effectiveness
         of this Regulation, the possibility of refusing service of documents is confined to exceptional situations’. In addition,
         Article 4(1) of that regulation provides that judicial documents are to be transmitted as soon as possible. 
      
However, those objectives cannot be attained by undermining in any way the rights of the defence (see, by analogy, with regard
         to Regulation No 44/2001, Case C-283/ASML [2006] ECR I‑12041, paragraph 24). Those rights, which derive from the right to a fair hearing guaranteed by Article of
         the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (‘ECHR’), constitute a fundamental right
         forming part of the general principles of law whose observance the Court ensures (see, inter alia, ASML, paragraph 26). 
      
Every effort must therefore be made to reconcile the objectives of effectiveness and speed in the transmission of procedural
         documents, which are necessary for the sound administration of justice, with that of the protection of the rights of the defence,
         in particular in interpreting Article of the Regulation No 1348/and, specifically, the term ‘document to be served’,
         where that is a document instituting proceedings, in order to be able to determine whether such a document must include annexes
         consisting of documentary evidence. 
      
It is clear that the term ‘document instituting the proceedings’ in the context of Article 8(1) of Regulation No 1348/cannot be interpreted in the light of the objectives of that regulation alone for the purpose of determining whether such
         a document can or must include annexes. Nor do those objectives make it possible to establish whether the translation of a
         document instituting the proceedings is a vital component of the defendant’s rights of defence, which might clarify the scope
         of the translation obligation referred to in Article of that regulation. 
      
However, the interpretation of Regulation No 1348/cannot be dissociated from the context of developments in the field
         of judicial cooperation in civil matters, which include that regulation, in particular Regulation No 44/2001, Article 26(3)
         and (4) of which expressly refers to Regulation No 1348/2000. 
      
Various provisions require the court, before delivering a default judgment or recognising a judicial decision, to verify whether
         the means by which a document instituting proceedings was served were such that the rights of the defence have been respected
         (see, inter alia, with regard to default judgments, Article 19(1) of Regulation No 1348/2000, Article 26(2) of Regulation
         No 44/and the second paragraph of Article of the Brussels Convention and, with regard to the recognition of judgments,
         Article 34(2) of Regulation No 44/and Article 27(2) of the Brussels Convention). 
      
Before Regulation No 1348/entered into force, cross-border service between the Member States was effected in accordance
         with the Hague Convention, to which Article 26(4) of Regulation No 44/and the third paragraph of Article of the
         Brussels Convention refer, or bilateral agreements concluded between Member States. However, The Hague Convention and the
         majority of those agreements do not lay down a general obligation to translate all the documents to be served, so that the
         national courts have considered that the rights of the defence are adequately protected if the addressee of a document served
         has had sufficient time to enable him to have it translated and prepare his defence. 
      
Moreover, Regulation No 1348/itself does not specify whether the right to refuse a document if it has not been translated
         also exists in the case of service by post effected in accordance with Article of that regulation. In order to interpret
         that provision, it is necessary to examine the Explanatory Report on the Convention on the service in the Member States of
         the European Union of judicial and extrajudicial documents in civil or commercial matters, drawn up by an act of the Council
         of the European Union dated May (OJ C 261, p. 1, ‘the Convention’; explanatory report, p. 26) on the basis
         of Article K.of the EU Treaty, on the text of which Regulation No 1348/is based (see, to that effect, Case C‑443/Leffler [2005] ECR I‑9611, paragraph 47). 
      
The commentary on Article 14(2) of the Convention concerning service by post states as follows:
      
‘This Article establishes the principle that service may be effected by post.
However, Member States may, in order to provide guarantees for persons residing in their territory, specify the conditions
         under which service may be effected in their regard by post. Such conditions might for instance include the use of registered
         post or the application of the Convention’s rules on the translation of documents.’
      
Some Member States, rightly or wrongly, have interpreted Article 14(1) of Regulation No 1348/as meaning that the document
         is not required to be translated if it is served by post and have considered it necessary to state, as permitted by Article
         14(2) of that regulation, that they do not accept service of judicial documents if they are not translated (see, in that regard,
         the Information communicated by Member States under Article of Regulation No 1348/(OJ C 151, p. 4) and the first
         update of the information communicated by Member States (OJ C 202, p. 10)). 
      
It follows from the examination of the provisions of the Hague Convention, the Brussels Convention and the Convention,
         Regulation Nos 1348/and 44/and the information communicated by the Member States under Article 14(2) of Regulation
         No 1348/that, in the areas covered by those provisions, neither the Community legislature nor the Member States consider
         it to be a necessary component of the exercise of the defendant’s rights of defence that the applicant provide a translation
         of the document instituting the proceedings, since the defendant must simply be given sufficient time to enable him to have
         that document translated and to prepare his defence. 
      
Such a choice on the part of the Community legislature and the Member States does not undermine the protection of fundamental
         rights, which is guaranteed by the ECHR. In fact, Article 6(3)(a) of that convention, which provides that everyone charged
         with a criminal offence has the minimum right to be informed promptly, in a language which he understands and in detail, of
         the nature and cause of the accusation against him, is applicable only in criminal matters. There is no provision in the ECHR
         requiring a document instituting proceedings in civil or commercial matters to be translated. 
      
Consequently, if the Community legislature chose, by Article of Regulation No 1348/2000, to permit the addressee of a document
         to refuse it if it is not translated into an official language of the Member State addressed or a language of the Member State
         of transmission which he understands, that is principally to establish in a consistent manner who is responsible for the translation
         of such a document and liable for the cost thereof at the stage when it is served. 
      
Since the examination of international and Community law concerning the scope of the principle of the protection of the rights
         of the defence, and in particular the need for a translation of a document instituting proceedings, has enabled the purpose
         of Article of Regulation No 1348/to be clarified, it is in the light of that purpose that it is necessary to determine
         what is covered by the term ‘document to be served’ within the meaning of that article where the document is a document instituting
         proceedings and whether such a document can or must include annexes consisting of documentary evidence.
      
Regulation No 1348/must be given an autonomous interpretation so that it may be applied in a uniform manner (Leffler, paragraphs and 46). The same applies to Regulation No 44/and, in particular, the term ‘document instituting the
         proceedings’ within the meaning of Articles and 34(2) of that regulation, as well as the corresponding provisions of the
         Brussels Convention.
      
Ruling on the interpretation of Article 27(2) of the Brussels Convention concerning recognition of judgments, the Court defined
         the term ‘document which instituted the proceedings or ... equivalent document’ within the meaning of that provision as meaning
         the document or documents which must be duly served on the defendant in due time in order to enable him to assert his rights
         before an enforceable judgment is given in the State of origin (see, to that effect, Case C‑474/Hengst Import [1995] ECR I‑2113, paragraph 19).
      
The Court thus held that in the case giving rise to the judgment in Hengst Import the document which instituted the proceedings was constituted by the combination of the order to pay (‘decreto ingiuntivo’) issued by an Italian court in accordance with Article of the Italian Code of Civil Procedure and the plaintiff’s application.
         It is the joint service of both those documents which starts time running for the defendant to oppose the order. Moreover,
         the plaintiff cannot obtain an enforceable order before the expiry of that time-limit (Hengst Import, paragraph 20). 
      
The Court stated that the ‘decreto ingiuntivo’ is just a form which, to be comprehensible, must be read with the application. Conversely, service of the application alone
         does not enable the defendant to decide whether to defend the action since, without the ‘decreto ingiuntivo’, he does not know whether the court had granted or refused the application. Moreover, the requirement for joint service
         of the ‘decreto ingiuntivo’ and the application was confirmed by Article of the Italian Code of Civil Procedure, according to which it marked the
         start of the proceedings (Hengst Import, paragraph 21).
      
It is apparent from that autonomous definition of the document instituting the proceedings, as interpreted by the Court, that
         such a document must consist of the document or documents, where they are intrinsically linked, enabling the defendant to
         understand the subject‑matter and grounds of the plaintiff’s application and to be aware of the existence of legal proceedings
         in which he may assert his rights, either by defending a pending action or, as was the case in the matter giving rise to the
         judgment in Hengst Import, by challenging a judgment delivered on the basis of an ex parte application. 
      
Moreover, as was pointed out at paragraph above, under some national legal systems there is no requirement for the documentary
         evidence in a case to be annexed to what is defined as a document instituting the proceedings and they may be communicated
         separately. Such documents are not therefore regarded as intrinsically linked to the document instituting the proceedings,
         in that they are essential to enable the defendant to understand the claim brought against him and to be aware of the existence
         of the legal proceedings, but have a probative function which is distinct from the purpose of service itself. 
      
It is appropriate to note that the conditions for recognition of judgments laid down in Regulation No 44/have been relaxed
         by comparison with the conditions laid down in the Brussels Convention. 
      
Article 34(2) of that regulation departed from the requirement in Article 27(2) of the Brussels Convention that the document
         instituting the proceedings be duly served, in order to place the emphasis on effective observance of the rights of the defence,
         which are considered to have been observed when the defendant is aware of the pending legal action and has been able to commence
         proceedings to challenge a judgment entered against him (see, to that effect, ASML, paragraphs and 21). 
      
That change in Regulation No 44/by comparison with the Brussels Convention supports the interpretation of the term ‘document
         to be served’ – where that consists of a document instituting the proceedings – that such a document must include the essential
         information enabling a defendant to be aware primarily of the existence of legal proceedings but not of every item of documentary
         evidence which makes it possible to prove the various facts and points of law on which the application is based. 
      
It follows from the above considerations that the term ‘document to be served’ in Article of Regulation No 1348/2000, where
         such a document consists of a document instituting the proceedings, must be interpreted as meaning that documentary evidence
         which has a purely evidential function and is not intrinsically linked to the application in so far as it is not necessary
         for understanding the subject‑matter of the claim and the cause of action does not form an integral part of that document.
         
      
It is possible from an examination of the term ‘document’, as follows from the ECHR and, in particular, Article 6(3)(a) of
         that convention, referred to at paragraph above, to reach a similar conclusion as regards criminal proceedings. According
         to the European Court of Human Rights, an indictment must enable the person charged to be informed not only of the cause of
         the accusation against him, that is the acts he is alleged to have committed and on which the accusation is based, but also
         of the detailed legal characterisation of those facts (see judgments of the European Court of Human Rights of March 1999,
         Pélissier and Sassi v France, ECHR 1999‑II, § 51, and of December 2006, Mattei v France, No 34043/02, § 34). On the other hand, the rights of the defence are not undermined by the mere fact that the indictment does
         not include the evidence in support of the facts on which the accused stands charged. 
      
Ruling in respect of Article 6(3)(e) of the ECHR, under which a person charged with a criminal offence has the right to an
         interpreter, the European Court of Human Rights has also held that that right does not go so far as to require a written translation
         of all items of written evidence or official documents in the procedure (judgment of December 1989, Kamasinski v Austria, Series A, No 168, § 74).
      
As is apparent from the conclusion at paragraph above, the requirements for the protection of the rights of the defence
         are not as stringent in civil and commercial matters as they are in criminal proceedings. 
      
In the light of all the foregoing considerations, the term ‘document to be served’ in Article 8(1) of Regulation No 1348/2000,
         where such a document is a document instituting the proceedings, must be interpreted as meaning the document or documents
         which must be served on the defendant in due time in order to enable him to assert his rights in legal proceedings in the
         State of transmission. Such a document must make it possible to identify with a degree of certainty at the very least the
         subject‑matter of the claim and the cause of action as well as the summons to appear before the court or, depending on the
         nature of the pending proceedings, to be aware that it is possible to appeal. Documents which have a purely evidential function
         and are not necessary for the purpose of understanding the subject-matter of the claim and the cause of action do not form
         an integral part of the document instituting the proceedings within the meaning of Regulation No 1348/2000. 
      
That interpretation is consistent with the objectives of Regulation No 1348/to improve and expedite the transmission
         of documents. Indeed, it can take a long time to translate supporting documents and, in any event, such translation is not
         necessary for the purposes of the action which will take place before the court of the Member State of transmission and in
         the language of that State. 
      
It is for the national court to determine whether the content of the document instituting the proceedings enables the defendant
         to assert his rights in the Member State of transmission and, in particular, to identify the subject-matter and the cause
         of action as well as to be aware of the existence of the legal proceedings. 
      
If the national court considers that the content is inadequate in that regard on the ground that certain necessary information
         relating to the application is to be found in the annexes, it must endeavour to resolve that problem in accordance with its
         national procedural law, taking care to ensure the full effectiveness of Regulation No 1348/2000, in compliance with its objective
         (see, to that effect, Leffler, paragraph 69), while according maximum protection to the interests of both parties to the dispute. 
      
The party issuing the document instituting the proceedings could thus be afforded the opportunity of remedying the lack of
         a translation of an essential annex by forwarding one as soon as possible in accordance with the rules laid down in Regulation
         No 1348/2000. The Court has held that the effect that sending a translation has on the date of service should be determined
         by analogy with the double-date system developed in Article 9(1) and (2) of Regulation No 1348/(Leffler, paragraphs to 67) in order to protect the parties’ interests.
      
In the light of all the foregoing  considerations, the answer to the first question must be that Article 8(1) of Regulation
         No 1348/is to be interpreted as meaning that the addressee of a document instituting proceedings which is to be served
         does not have the right to refuse to accept that document, provided that it enables the addressee to assert his rights in
         legal proceedings in the Member State of transmission, where annexes are attached to that document consisting of documentary
         evidence which is not in the language of the Member State addressed or in a language of the Member State of transmission which
         the addressee understands, but which has a purely evidential function and is not necessary for understanding the subject‑matter
         of the claim and the cause of action. It is for the national court to determine whether the content of the document instituting
         the proceedings is sufficient to enable the defendant to assert his rights or whether it is necessary for the party instituting
         the proceedings to remedy the fact that a necessary annex has not been translated. 
      
 The second question
By its second question, posed in the event that the answer to the first is that the addressee of a document may refuse to
         accept it if the annexes to that document are not translated, the Bundesgerichtshof asks whether Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation
         No 1348/must be interpreted as meaning that the addressee of a document to be served is deemed to ‘understand’ the language
         of a Member State of transmission within the meaning of that regulation where, in the course of his business, he agreed in
         a contract with the applicant that correspondence was to be conducted in the language of the Member State of transmission.
         In view of the reservation formulated to the answer to the first question, it is necessary to answer the second question.
         
      
In order to establish whether the addressee of a document served understands the language of the Member State of transmission
         in which the document is written, the court must examine all the relevant evidence submitted by the applicant.
      
The parties which have submitted observations are divided on the question whether the addressee of a document should be deemed
         to understand the language of the Member State of transmission because he has signed a clause agreeing to the use of that
         language, as described by the referring court. 
      
According to Grimshaw, it alone is in a position to say whether it understands the document served. IHK Berlin defends the
         opposite position, namely that signature of such a clause entails acceptance of that language as the language in which a judicial
         document is to be served, in the same way as a jurisdiction clause is valid between parties. 
      
The other parties which submitted observations are of the view that, while knowledge of the language of the document for the
         purpose of Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 1348/cannot be inferred from such a clause, it is an indication of knowledge
         of that language. Weiss and the Czech and Slovak Governments point out, inter alia, that the degree of knowledge of a language
         required for correspondence is not the same as that needed to defend an action.
      
Grimshaw’s interpretation cannot be accepted, as that would mean that whether service was effective was dependent on whether
         the addressee of the document was willing to accept it. 
      
Nor is it possible to accept IHK’s interpretation. In order for Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 1348/to be effective,
         the competent court must verify that the requirements of that provision are in fact met. The fact that a clause has been signed
         which provides that a particular language is to be used for correspondence and performance of the contract cannot give rise
         to a presumption of knowledge of the agreed language. 
      
On the other hand, the signature of such a clause must be regarded as evidence of knowledge of the language of the document
         served. Greater weight will attach to that evidence where the clause refers not only to correspondence between the parties
         but also to correspondence with the authorities and public institutions. It may be supported by other evidence, such as the
         fact that correspondence was actually conducted by the addressee of the document in the language of the document served, or
         the presence in the original contract of clauses conferring jurisdiction on the courts of the Member State of transmission
         in the event of dispute or making the contract subject to the law of that Member State. 
      
As stated by Weiss and the Czech and Slovak Governments, the degree of knowledge of a language required for correspondence
         is not the same as that needed to defend an action. However, that is a matter of fact to be taken into account by the court
         in determining whether the addressee of a document served is capable of understanding the document so as to be able to assert
         his rights. It is necessary for the court, in accordance with the principle of equivalence, to take account of the extent
         to which an individual domiciled in the Member State of transmission would understand a judicial document written in the language
         of that State. 
      
The answer to the second question must be that Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 1348/is to be interpreted as meaning
         that the fact that the addressee of a document served has agreed in a contract concluded with the applicant in the course
         of his business that correspondence is to be conducted in the language of the Member State of transmission does not give rise
         to a presumption of knowledge of that language, but is evidence which the court may take into account in determining whether
         that addressee understands the language of the Member State of transmission. 
      
 The third question
By its third question, posed in the event that the second question referred by the Bundesgerichtshof is answered in the negative,
         that court asks whether Article 8(1) of Regulation No 1348/must be interpreted as meaning that the addressee of a document
         served may not, in any event, rely on that provision in order to refuse acceptance of annexes to the document which are not
         in the language of the Member State addressed or in a language of the Member State of transmission which the addressee understands
         if the addressee concludes a contract in the course of his business in which he agrees that correspondence is to be conducted
         in the language of the Member State of transmission and the annexes concern that correspondence and are written in the agreed
         language. 
      
It follows from the answer given by the Court to the first question that it may be necessary to translate certain annexes
         to a document instituting proceedings which has been served if the content of that document which has been translated is insufficient
         to enable the subject‑matter of the claim and the cause of action to be identified, so that the defendant can assert his rights,
         on the ground that certain necessary information relating to the application is to be found in those annexes. 
      
However, such a translation is not needed where it is apparent from the factual circumstances that the addressee of the document
         instituting the proceedings is familiar with the content of those annexes. That is the case where the addressee is the author
         of those documents or can be presumed to understand the content, for example because he signed a contract in the course of
         his business in which he agreed that correspondence was to be conducted in the language of the Member State of transmission
         and the annexes concern that correspondence and are written in the agreed language. 
      
The answer to the third question must therefore be that Article 8(1) of Regulation No 1348/is to be interpreted as meaning
         that the addressee of a document served may not in any event rely on that provision in order to refuse acceptance of annexes
         to the document which are not in the language of the Member State addressed or in a language of the Member State of transmission
         which the addressee understands, where the addressee concluded a contract in the course of his business in which he agreed
         that correspondence was to be conducted in the language of the Member State of transmission and the annexes concern that correspondence
         and are written in the agreed language.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article 8(1) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1348/of May on the service in the Member States of judicial and extrajudicial
            documents in civil or commercial matters is to be interpreted as meaning that the addressee of a document instituting the
            proceedings which is to be served does not have the right to refuse to accept that document, provided that it enables the
            addressee to assert his rights in legal proceedings in the Member State of transmission, where annexes are attached to that
            document consisting of documentary evidence which is not in the language of the Member State addressed or in a language of
            the Member State of transmission which the addressee understands, but which has a purely evidential function and is not necessary
            for understanding the subject‑matter of the claim and the cause of action.
It is for the national court to determine whether the content of the document instituting the proceedings is sufficient to
            enable the defendant to assert his rights or whether it is necessary for the party instituting the proceedings to remedy the
            fact that a necessary annex has not been translated.
2.      Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 1348/is to be interpreted as meaning that the fact that the addressee of a document
            served has agreed in a contract concluded with the applicant in the course of his business that correspondence is to be conducted
            in the language of the Member State of transmission does not give rise to a presumption of knowledge of that language, but
            is evidence which the court may take into account in determining whether that addressee understands the language of the Member
            State of transmission.
3.      Article 8(1) of Regulation No 1348/is to be interpreted as meaning that the addressee of a document served may not in
            any event rely on that provision in order to refuse acceptance of annexes to the document which are not in the language of
            the Member State addressed or in a language of the Member State of transmission which the addressee understands where the
            addressee concluded a contract in the course of his business in which he agreed that correspondence was to be conducted in
            the language of the Member State of transmission and the annexes concern that correspondence and are written in the agreed
            language.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 