
Case C-494/Commission of the European Communities
v
Ireland
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Environment – Waste management – Directive 75/442/EEC, as amended by Directive 91/156/EC – Articles 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 12, and 14)
Opinion of Advocate General Geelhoed delivered on September Judgment of the Court (Grand Chamber), April 2005. 
Summary of the Judgment
1.     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations — Subject-matter of the dispute —Determination of the subject-matter in the course
            of the pre-litigation procedure — Failure of a general nature to comply with the provisions of a directive — Production before
            the Court of additional evidence intended to support the proposition that the failure is general and consistent — Whether
            permissible
(Art. EC)
2.     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations — Proof of failure — Burden of proof on the Commission — Submission of evidence
            that the obligation has not been fulfilled — Onus of rebuttal on the Member State proceeded against
(Art. EC)
3.     Member States — Obligations — Supervisory task entrusted to the Commission — Duty of the Member States — Cooperation with
            inquiries relating to the application of directives — Obligation to investigate and to provide information 
(Arts EC, EC and EC; Council Directive 75/442, as amended by Directive 91/156)
4.     Environment — Waste disposal — Directive 75/— Implementation by the Member States — Obligation to achieve a certain result
            — Obligation on operators to obtain a permit prior to any waste disposal or waste recovery operations — Obligation on the
            Member States to conduct checks 
(Art. 249, third para., EC; Council Directive 75/442, as amended by Directive 91/156, Arts and 10)
5.     Environment — Waste disposal — Directive 75/— Article — Requirement that the collection and transport of waste be subject
            either to a system of prior authorisation or to a registration procedure — Choice by a Member State of the authorisation system
            — Consequence — Irrelevance, as regards the correct implementation of the directive, of any registration
(Council Directive 75/442, as amended by Directive 91/156, Art. 12)
6.     Environment — Waste disposal — Directive 75/— Article — Obligation to establish an integrated and adequate network of
            disposal installations — Obligation not satisfied where a large number of installations lack a permit and the overall disposal
            capacity is insufficient
(Council Directive 75/442, as amended by Directive 91/156, Art. 5)
7.     Environment — Waste disposal — Directive 75/— Obligation on the Member States resulting from the first paragraph of Article
            — Obligation infringed in the event of persistent infringement of Articles and (Council Directive 75/442, as amended by Directive 91/156, Arts 4, first para., and 10)
8.     Environment — Waste disposal — Directive 75/— Article — Obligations on the Member States with regard to holders of waste
            — Obligations also applicable with regard to the operator or owner of an illegal tip, and not capable of being satisfied simply
            by penal action  
(Council Directive 75/442, as amended by Directive 91/156, Art. 8)
9.     Environment — Waste disposal — Directive 75/— Articles and — Obligation to make establishments carrying out disposal
            and recovery operations subject to periodic inspections — Aim of the inspections — Compliance with the conditions laid down
            in permits — Inspection not capable of meeting the requirements of the directive if the establishment does not hold the prescribed
            permit
(Council Directive 75/442, as amended by Directive 91/156, Arts and 14)
1.     The subject-matter of proceedings under Article EC is delimited by the pre-litigation procedure governed by that provision.
         Accordingly, the Commission cannot seek a declaration of a specific failure by a Member State to fulfil its obligations regarding
         a particular factual situation that has not been referred to in the course of the pre-litigation procedure.
      
However, in so far as an action seeks to raise a failure of a general nature to comply with a directive’s provisions, concerning
         in particular the national authorities’ systemic and consistent tolerance of situations not in accordance with that directive,
         the production by the Commission of additional evidence intended, at the stage of proceedings before the Court, to support
         the proposition that the failure thus alleged is general and consistent cannot be ruled out in principle.
      
Since the Commission may, in its application, clarify its initial grounds of complaint provided that it does not alter the
         subject-matter of the dispute, the production of fresh evidence intended to illustrate the grounds of complaint set out in
         its reasoned opinion, which allege a failure of a general nature to comply with the provisions of a directive, does not alter
         the subject-matter of the dispute. Thus, facts of which the Commission becomes aware after issue of the reasoned opinion may
         properly be mentioned by it in support of its application for the purpose of illustrating the failure of a general nature
         to fulfil obligations raised by it.
      
(see paras 35-39)
2.     In proceedings under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations it is incumbent upon the Commission to prove the allegation
         that the obligation has not been fulfilled. It is the Commission’s responsibility to place before the Court the information
         needed to enable the Court to establish that the obligation has not been fulfilled, and in so doing the Commission may not
         rely on any presumption. However, where the Commission has adduced sufficient evidence of certain matters in the territory
         of the defendant Member State which is such as to show that the Member State’s authorities have developed a repeated and persistent
         practice that is contrary to the provisions of a directive, it is incumbent on the Member State to challenge in substance
         and in detail the information produced and the consequences flowing therefrom.
      
(see paras 41, 44, 47)
3.     The Member States are required, under Article EC, to facilitate the achievement of the Commission’s tasks, which consist
         in particular, pursuant to Article EC, in ensuring that the provisions of the Treaty and the measures taken by the institutions
         pursuant thereto are applied. So far as concerns checking that the national provisions intended to ensure effective implementation
         of a directive that covers fields in respect of which the Commission does not have investigative powers of its own – as is
         the case with Directive 75/on waste, as amended by Directive 91/– are applied correctly in practice, the Commission
         is largely reliant on the information provided by any complainants and by the Member State concerned. In such circumstances,
         it is primarily for the national authorities to conduct the necessary on-the-spot investigations, in a spirit of genuine cooperation
         and mindful of each Member State’s duty to facilitate the general task of the Commission and to provide it with all the information
         requested for that purpose.
      
(see paras 42-43, 45, 197-198)
4.     Articles and of Directive 75/on waste, as amended by Directive 91/156, impose on the Member States obligations formulated
         in clear and unequivocal terms to achieve a certain result, under which undertakings or establishments which carry out waste
         disposal operations or waste recovery operations in those States must hold a permit. It follows that a Member State complies
         with its obligations under those provisions only if, in addition to having correctly transposed the provisions into domestic
         law, it checks that operators in fact have, before they carry out any disposal or recovery operations, a permit issued in
         accordance with Article 9, the absence of which cannot be made up for by the mere submission of an application. The Member
         State thus has the task of making sure that the permit system set up is actually applied and complied with, in particular
         by conducting appropriate checks for that purpose and ensuring that operations carried out without a permit are actually brought
         to an end and punished.
      
(see paras 116-118)
5.     Article of Directive 75/on waste, as amended by Directive 91/156, provides in particular that establishments or undertakings
         which collect or transport waste on a professional basis are to be registered with the competent authorities where they are
         not subject to authorisation. That provision thus requires the Member States to choose a permit system or a registration procedure.
      
Where a Member State has opted for a permit system, it cannot claim that, although, because of delays for which it could be
         held responsible, operators did not have a permit on the relevant date, it has complied with its obligations on the basis
         that the submission of an application for a permit is equivalent to registration.
      
(see paras 142, 144-145)
6.     In accordance with Article of Directive 75/on waste, as amended by Directive 91/156, the establishment of an integrated
         and adequate network of waste disposal installations, taking account of the best available technology not involving excessive
         costs, and the network having to enable waste to be disposed of in one of the nearest appropriate installations, is among
         the objectives pursued by that directive. Accordingly, a Member State which allows a large number of waste disposal installations
         to operate without a permit and on whose territory the disposal network, taken as a whole, is close to saturation point and
         not sufficient to absorb the waste produced in that territory fails to fulfil the obligations laid down in Article of the
         directive.
      
(see paras 149-158)
7.     While it is not possible, in principle, to draw the direct inference from the fact that a situation is not in conformity with
         the objectives laid down in the first paragraph of Article of Directive 75/on waste, as amended by Directive 91/156,
         that a Member State has necessarily failed to fulfil the obligations under that provision, namely to take the requisite measures
         to ensure that waste is disposed of without endangering human health and without harming the environment, it is nevertheless
         undisputed that if that situation persists, in particular if it leads to a significant deterioration in the environment over
         a protracted period without any action being taken by the competent authorities, that may indicate that the Member State has
         exceeded the discretion conferred by that provision.
      
Where a Member State has generally and persistently failed to fulfil its obligation to ensure a correct implementation of
         Articles and of the directive which relate to permit systems for waste disposal and waste recovery operations, that fact
         alone is sufficient to establish that it has likewise failed generally and persistently to fulfil the requirements of Article
         of the directive, a provision closely linked to Articles and 10.
      
(see paras 169-171)
8.     Article of Directive 75/on waste, as amended by Directive 91/156, which inter alia implements the principle that preventive
         action should be taken, provides that the Member States have the task of ensuring that any holder of waste has it handled
         by a private or public waste collector or by an undertaking which carries out waste disposal and recovery operations, or recovers
         or disposes of it himself in accordance with the provisions of the directive.
      
The Member States are obliged to take those measures also in relation to the operator or owner of an illegal tip, since he
         must be regarded as the holder of waste for the purposes of that article. Such an obligation is not satisfied where a Member
         State confines itself to ordering the sequestration of the illegal tip and prosecuting the operator of the tip.
      
(see paras 179, 181-182)
9.     According to Article of Directive 75/on waste, as amended by Directive 91/156, the appropriate periodic inspections
         that that provision requires are to cover in particular establishments or undertakings which carry out the operations referred
         to in Articles and of the directive, which must, by virtue of the latter two provisions, obtain in advance an individual
         permit containing a number of requirements and conditions.
      
If such permits are not granted and, therefore, no requirements and conditions are laid down by a permit with regard to a
         given undertaking or establishment, the inspections of the latter which would be carried out cannot, by definition, meet the
         requirements of Article of the directive. One of the fundamental aims of the inspections prescribed by that provision is
         to check that the requirements and conditions laid down in permits issued in accordance with Articles and of the directive
         are complied with. The same holds for records kept by the establishments or undertakings referred to by the latter provisions,
         which, as Article of the directive specifies, must indicate in particular the quantities and nature of the waste or also
         its treatment method.
      
(see paras 190-192)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Environment – Waste management – Directive 75/442/EEC, as amended by Directive 91/156/EC – Articles 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 12, and 14)
In Case C-494/01,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on December 2001,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by R. Wainwright and X. Lewis, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg, 
      
applicant,
v
Ireland, represented by D. O’Hagan, acting as Agent, assisted by P. Charleton SC and A. Collins BL, with an address for service in
         Luxembourg, 
      
defendant,
 
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, P. Jann (Rapporteur), C.W.A. Timmermans and A. Rosas, Presidents of Chambers, J.‑P. Puissochet,
         R. Schintgen, N. Colneric, S. von Bahr, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, M. Ilešič, J. Malenovský, U. Lõhmus and E. Levits, Judges, 
      
Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed, 
Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on July 2004,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities requests the Court to declare that:
–       by failing to take all the measures necessary to ensure a correct implementation of the provisions of Articles 4, 5, 8, 9,
         10, 12, and of Council Directive 75/442/EEC of July on waste (OJ L 194, p. 39), as amended by Council Directive
         91/156/EEC of March (OJ L 78, p. 32) (‘the Directive’), Ireland has failed to comply with its obligations under
         those provisions;
      
–       by failing to respond completely and satisfactorily to a request for information dated September in relation to a
         waste operation at Fermoy, County Cork, Ireland has failed to fulfil the obligations which it has pursuant to Article EC.
      
 Relevant provisions
Article of the Directive provides:
‘Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that waste is recovered or disposed of without endangering human
         health and without using processes or methods which could harm the environment, and in particular: 
      
–       without risk to water, air, soil and plants and animals, 
–       without causing a nuisance through noise or odours, 
–       without adversely affecting the countryside or places of special interest. 
Member States shall also take the necessary measures to prohibit the abandonment, dumping or uncontrolled disposal of waste.’
         
      
Article of the Directive provides: 
‘1.      Member States shall take appropriate measures, in cooperation with other Member States where this is necessary or advisable,
         to establish an integrated and adequate network of disposal installations, taking account of the best available technology
         not involving excessive costs. The network must enable the Community as a whole to become self-sufficient in waste disposal
         and the Member States to move towards that aim individually, taking into account geographical circumstances or the need for
         specialised installations for certain types of waste. 
      
2.      The network must also enable waste to be disposed of in one of the nearest appropriate installations, by means of the most
         appropriate methods and technologies in order to ensure a high level of protection for the environment and public health.’
         
      
Article of the Directive states: 
‘Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that any holder of waste: 
–       has it handled by a private or public waste collector or by an undertaking which carries out the operations listed in Annex
         II A or B, or 
      
–       recovers or disposes of it himself in accordance with the provisions of this Directive.’
Article of the Directive is worded as follows:
‘1.      For the purposes of implementing Articles 4, and 7, any establishment or undertaking which carries out the operations specified
         in Annex II A must obtain a permit from the competent authority referred to in Article 6. 
      
Such permit shall cover: 
–       the types and quantities of waste, 
–       the technical requirements, 
–       the security precautions to be taken, 
–       the disposal site, 
–       the treatment method. 
2.      Permits may be granted for a specified period, they may be renewable, they may be subject to conditions and obligations, or,
         notably, if the intended method of disposal is unacceptable from the point of view of environmental protection, they may be
         refused.’ 
      
Article of the Directive provides:
‘For the purposes of implementing Article 4, any establishment or undertaking which carries out the operations referred to
         in Annex II B must obtain a permit.’ 
      
Article of the Directive is worded as follows:
‘Establishments or undertakings which collect or transport waste on a professional basis or which arrange for the disposal
         or recovery of waste on behalf of others (dealers or brokers), where not subject to authorisation, shall be registered with
         the competent authorities.’ 
      
Article of the Directive provides:
‘Establishments or undertakings which carry out the operations referred to in Articles to shall be subject to appropriate
         periodic inspections by the competent authorities.’ 
      
Article of the Directive states:
‘All establishments or undertakings referred to in Articles and shall: 
–       keep a record of the quantity, nature, origin, and, where relevant, the destination, frequency of collection, mode of transport
         and treatment method in respect of the waste referred to in Annex I and the operations referred to in Annex II A or B, 
      
–       make this information available, on request, to the competent authorities referred to in Article 6. 
Member States may also require producers to comply with the provisions of this Article.’ 
Annexes II A and II B to the Directive respectively list waste disposal operations and waste recovery operations as carried
         out in practice.
      
 Pre-litigation procedure
The Commission received three complaints concerning Ireland. The first related to the dumping of construction and demolition
         waste on wetlands within the area of the City of Limerick (‘Complaint 1997/4705’). The second referred to the storage of organic
         waste in lagoons at Ballard, Fermoy, County Cork, and its disposal through landspreading by a private operator lacking a permit
         (‘Complaint 1997/4792’). The third concerned storage of various types of waste at Pembrokestown, Whiterock Hill, County Wexford,
         by a private operator lacking a permit (‘Complaint 1997/4847’).
      
On October the Commission sent a letter of formal notice to Ireland in respect of those complaints. This was followed,
         on July 1999, by a reasoned opinion, relating only to Complaints 1997/and 1997/4792, which alleged that Ireland had
         infringed the second paragraph of Article and Articles and of the Directive. Ireland was requested to take the measures
         necessary to comply with the reasoned opinion within two months following its notification.
      
In its responses of October and November 1999, Ireland denied that it had in any way failed to fulfil its obligations
         as regards the two complaints referred to in the preceding paragraph.
      
The Commission also received five other complaints concerning Ireland. The first of these raised the operation without a permit
         of a municipal landfill at Powerstown, County Carlow, since (‘Complaint 1999/4351’). The second related to the dumping
         of waste (rubble), and the operation without a permit of a private waste treatment facility, in a green area on the Poolbeg
         Peninsula, Dublin (‘Complaint 1999/4801’). The third concerned the operation without a permit of two municipal landfills,
         one at Tramore and the other at Kilbarry, County Waterford, since and respectively, adjoining and/or encroaching
         upon protected areas (‘Complaint 1999/5008’). The fourth related to the use since the 1980s, by a private operator lacking
         a permit, of waste facilities in disused quarries at Lea Road and Ballymorris, Portarlington, County Laois (‘Complaint 1999/5112’).
         The fifth concerned the operation, without a permit, of a municipal landfill at Drumnaboden, County Donegal (‘Complaint 2000/4408’).
      
On the basis of those complaints and the information gathered in the course of investigating them, the Commission sent a letter
         of formal notice to Ireland on October 2000.
      
The Commission also received four further complaints directed against Ireland, the first relating to the operation, without
         a permit, of a private waste storage and treatment facility at Cullinagh, Fermoy, County Cork (‘Complaint 1999/4478’). The
         second concerned the depositing of demolition and construction waste by a private operator, since 1990, on an area on the
         foreshore at Carlingford Lough, Greenore, County Louth (‘Complaint 2000/4145’). The third related to general waste collection
         by unlicensed and unregistered private undertakings which were not regulated, at Bray, County Wicklow (‘Complaint 2000/4157’).
         The fourth concerned the tipping of various types of waste, principally demolition and construction waste, on four wetlands
         located at Ballynattin, Pickardstown, Ballygunner Bog and Castletown, County Waterford (‘Complaint 2000/4633’).
      
On April the Commission sent a fresh letter of formal notice to Ireland referring to those last four complaints and
         recalling the letter of formal notice of October 2000. 
      
In addition, after the Commission had received no response to a request for information dated September addressed
         to Ireland in relation to Complaint 1999/4478, on April the Commission sent it a letter of formal notice alleging
         a breach of Article EC.
      
On July the Commission sent to Ireland a reasoned opinion that set out the analysis of the aforementioned complaints,
         referring to the letters of formal notice of October 1998, April 2000, October and April and to the
         reasoned opinion of July 1999. The Commission alleged that Ireland had failed to fulfil its obligations to take all the
         measures necessary to ensure a correct implementation of Articles 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 12, and of the Directive and its obligations
         resulting from Article EC, and called on it to take the measures necessary to comply with the reasoned opinion within two
         months of receipt thereof.
      
The Commission also stated that those complaints did not constitute the only cases of non-compliance with the Directive and
         that it reserved the right to cite other examples in order to illustrate the breaches of a general nature in implementing
         the provisions of the Directive of which it accuses the Irish authorities.
      
Considering that Ireland had not complied with the reasoned opinions of July and July 2001, the Commission brought
         the present action.
      
 Consideration of the action
 Breaches of the Directive
 The subject-matter of the action, the date as at which it must be determined whether the alleged failures to fulfil obligations
         have occurred and the admissibility of certain grounds of complaint relied on by the Commission
      
The Commission begins by stating that, following a Treaty infringement procedure initiated against Ireland and the subsequent
         adoption of the Waste Management Act, (‘the Act’) – one of the aims of which was to make operations in respect of
         waste managed by local authorities (‘municipal waste’) subject to a system of licences issued by the Environmental Protection
         Agency (‘the EPA’) – and its implementing regulations, the legal framework for waste management in Ireland has been improved
         considerably. With the exception of a failure to transpose Article of the Directive, the present proceedings therefore
         principally seek a finding that the Irish authorities are not complying with their obligations to achieve a certain result
         because they are not ensuring that the Directive is actually applied.
      
The Commission further explains in this regard that this action seeks a declaration of failure to fulfil obligations not only
         on account of the shortcomings noted in the specific situations covered by the complaints referred to in paragraphs 11,
         and of this judgment but also, and more fundamentally, on account of the general and persistent nature of the deficiencies
         which characterise the actual application of the Directive in Ireland, of which the specific situations mentioned in those
         complaints simply constitute examples. It is a matter of ensuring the full recognition and implementation in Ireland of the
         seamless chain of responsibility for waste which the Directive establishes, by requiring: holders of waste to discard it through
         specified operators; the operators collecting or dealing with the waste to be subject to a permit or registration system and
         to inspection; and the abandonment, dumping or uncontrolled disposal of waste to be prohibited. 
      
In the Commission’s submission, the fact that the action is thus intended in particular to raise systemic deficient administrative
         practices means that it is justified in adducing further evidence to prove the existence of those practices and their continuation
         over a long period. Likewise, the fact that in certain of the specific cases raised by the Commission a permit was finally
         issued or certain steps completed before the period laid down in the reasoned opinion expired is not decisive for the existence
         of a failure to fulfil obligations that is linked to the existence of such practices.
      
The Irish Government contends that the complaints to which the Commission refers in the reasoned opinion must delimit the
         subject-matter of the proceedings. Other facts or complaints not notified to Ireland during the pre-litigation procedure may
         not be relied on in support of the action, and the Commission is not permitted to draw general conclusions from the examination
         of specific complaints by presuming an alleged systemic failure on Ireland’s part. 
      
Furthermore, the question whether Ireland might have failed to fulfil its obligations must be determined by reference to the
         situation prevailing on the date upon which the two-month period set in the reasoned opinion of July expired.
      
As to those various submissions, it should be stated, first, in relation to the subject-matter of the present proceedings,
         that, without prejudice to the Commission’s obligation to satisfy in each and every case the burden of proof which it bears,
         in principle nothing prevents the Commission from seeking in parallel a finding that provisions of a directive have not been
         complied with by reason of the conduct of a Member State’s authorities with regard to particular specifically identified situations
         and a finding that those provisions have not been complied with because its authorities have adopted a general practice contrary
         thereto, which the particular situations illustrate where appropriate.
      
It is accepted that an administrative practice can be the subject-matter of an action for failure to fulfil obligations when
         it is, to some degree, of a consistent and general nature (see, in particular, Case C-387/Commission v Germany [2004] ECR I-0000, paragraph 42, and the case-law cited).
      
Second, as is clear from settled case-law, the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations must be
         determined by reference to the situation prevailing in the Member State at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned
         opinion (see, inter alia, Case C-446/Commission v Spain [2003] ECR I‑6053, paragraph 15).
      
In the present case, although Ireland is alleged not to have complied with the reasoned opinions of July and July
         within the periods laid down by them, the Commission has stated in reply to a written question from the Court that the
         second of those opinions was intended to consolidate and gather together all the information and arguments previously exchanged
         between the parties and that, consequently, it replaced the first opinion.
      
In those circumstances, the failures to fulfil obligations alleged by the Commission must be assessed in light of the situation
         prevailing at the end of the two-month period laid down in the reasoned opinion of July (‘the reasoned opinion’).
      
Admittedly, it follows that the Court cannot declare that Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under the Directive
         with regard to a given particular situation where it is established that, on the date of expiry of that period, the deficiencies
         alleged by the Commission had been remedied. On the other hand, as the Commission rightly submits, in so far as the action
         also seeks a declaration that there has been a general failure on the part of the competent national authorities to fulfil
         obligations, the fact that the deficiencies pointed out in one or other case have been remedied does not necessarily mean
         that the general and continuous approach of those authorities, to which such specific deficiencies would testify where appropriate,
         has come to an end.
      
Third, in the context of proceedings for failure to fulfil obligations, the purpose of the pre-litigation phase is to give
         the Member State concerned an opportunity, on the one hand, to comply with its obligations under Community law and, on the
         other, to avail itself of its right to defend itself against the charges formulated by the Commission (see, inter alia, Case
         C-350/Commission v Netherlands [2004] ECR I-0000, paragraph 18, and the case-law cited).
      
The proper conduct of that procedure constitutes an essential guarantee required by the EC Treaty not only in order to protect
         the rights of the Member State concerned, but also so as to ensure that any contentious procedure will have a clearly defined
         dispute as its subject-matter (see, inter alia, Commission v Netherlands, cited above, paragraph 19, and the case-law cited).
      
The subject-matter of proceedings under Article EC is accordingly delimited by the pre-litigation procedure governed by
         that provision. The Commission’s reasoned opinion and the application must be based on the same grounds and pleas, with the
         result that the Court cannot examine a ground of complaint which was not formulated in the reasoned opinion, which for its
         part must contain a cogent and detailed exposition of the reasons which led the Commission to the conclusion that the Member
         State concerned had failed to fulfil one of its obligations under the Treaty (see, inter alia, Commission v Netherlands, paragraph 20, and the case-law cited).
      
It indeed follows that the Commission cannot seek a declaration of a specific failure by Ireland to fulfil its obligations
         under the Directive regarding a particular factual situation that was not referred to in the course of the pre-litigation
         procedure. A specific ground of complaint of that kind must necessarily have been relied on at the pre-litigation stage, in
         order that the Member State concerned has the opportunity to remedy the particular situation complained of or to avail itself
         of its right to defend itself in that regard; such defence may in particular prompt the Commission to withdraw the ground
         of complaint and/or help to delimit the subject-matter of the dispute that the Court will subsequently have before it. 
      
On the other hand, in so far as the action seeks to raise a failure of a general nature to comply with the Directive’s provisions,
         concerning in particular the Irish authorities’ systemic and consistent tolerance of situations not in accordance with the
         Directive, the production of additional evidence intended, at the stage of proceedings before the Court, to support the proposition
         that the failure thus alleged is general and consistent cannot be ruled out in principle.
      
It should be noted that in its application the Commission may clarify its initial grounds of complaint provided, however,
         that it does not alter the subject-matter of the dispute. In producing fresh evidence intended to illustrate the grounds of
         complaint set out in its reasoned opinion, which allege a failure of a general nature to comply with the provisions of a directive,
         the Commission does not alter the subject-matter of the dispute (see, by analogy, the judgment of October in Case
         C-328/Commission v Greece, not published in the ECR, paragraphs and 36).
      
In the present case, contrary to the Irish Government’s submissions, although they were not referred to during the pre-litigation
         procedure the facts relating to massive illegal dumping of, on occasions hazardous, waste in County Wicklow, of which the
         Commission became aware after issue of the reasoned opinion, could therefore properly be mentioned by the latter in support
         of its application for the purpose of illustrating the failures of a general nature to fulfil obligations raised by it.
      
 The burden of proof
The Irish Government has raised in defence numerous objections relating to the burden of proof. In particular it has cast
         doubt on the truth of numerous facts alleged by the Commission on the conclusion of the investigation of the complaints
         which were received by it. The Irish Government has also contended that the Commission is not justified in drawing general
         conclusions from the examination of those specific complaints by presuming alleged systemic failures by Ireland to fulfil
         its obligations.
      
It is to be remembered that in proceedings under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations it is incumbent upon the
         Commission to prove the allegation that the obligation has not been fulfilled. It is the Commission’s responsibility to place
         before the Court the information needed to enable the Court to establish that the obligation has not been fulfilled, and in
         so doing the Commission may not rely on any presumption (see, in particular, Case 96/Commission v Netherlands [1982] ECR 1791, paragraph 6, and Case C-408/Commission v Netherlands [2000] ECR I-6417, paragraph 15).
      
However, the Member States are required, under Article EC, to facilitate the achievement of the Commission’s tasks, which
         consist in particular, pursuant to Article EC, in ensuring that the provisions of the Treaty and the measures taken by
         the institutions pursuant thereto are applied (Case 96/Commission v Netherlands, paragraph 7, and Case C-408/Commission v Netherlands, paragraph 16).
      
In this context, account should be taken of the fact that, where it is a question of checking that the national provisions
         intended to ensure effective implementation of the directive are applied correctly in practice, the Commission which, as the
         Advocate General has observed in point of his Opinion, does not have investigative powers of its own in the matter, is
         largely reliant on the information provided by any complainants and by the Member State concerned (see, by analogy, Case C‑408/Commission v Netherlands, paragraph 17).
      
It follows in particular that, where the Commission has adduced sufficient evidence of certain matters in the territory of
         the defendant Member State, it is incumbent on the latter to challenge in substance and in detail the information produced
         and the consequences flowing therefrom (see to this effect Case C‑365/Commission v Italy [1999] ECR I‑(‘SanRocco’), paragraphs and 86).
      
In such circumstances, it is indeed primarily for the national authorities to conduct the necessary on-the-spot investigations,
         in a spirit of genuine cooperation and mindful of each Member State’s duty, recalled in paragraph of the present judgment,
         to facilitate the general task of the Commission (SanRocco, paragraph 85).
      
Thus, where the Commission relies on detailed complaints revealing repeated failures to comply with the provisions of the
         directive, it is incumbent on the Member State to contest specifically the facts alleged in those complaints (see, by analogy,
         Case 272/Commission v Greece [1988] ECR 4875, paragraph 19).
      
Likewise, where the Commission has adduced sufficient evidence to show that a Member State’s authorities have developed a
         repeated and persistent practice which is contrary to the provisions of a directive, it is incumbent on that Member State
         to challenge in substance and in detail the information produced and the consequences flowing therefrom (see, by analogy,
         Case 272/Commission v Greece, cited above, paragraph 21, and SanRocco, paragraphs and 86).
      
 The facts relating to the complaints examined by the Commission
As is apparent from paragraphs to of the present judgment, the Commission bases its action in particular on the alleged
         conduct of the Irish authorities in various specific situations examined following complaints from private parties. Since
         the factual circumstances upon which the Commission seeks to rely have been disputed by Ireland, it should be ascertained
         whether they have been proved to the required legal standard.
      
–       Dumping of waste in Limerick (Complaint 1997/4705)
The Commission submits that in Limerick Corporation, a local authority with responsibility for applying waste legislation,
         tolerated dumping of construction and demolition waste on wetlands in Limerick. It further observes that the EPA stated in
         a letter of January that depositing of that kind amounted to recovery operations not requiring authorisation. In addition,
         the waste was not entirely removed, and dumping continued on the wetlands and other nearby areas of wetland. 
      
The Commission relies in this regard on Complaint 1997/4705. Apart from the letter from the EPA, it adduces photographic negatives
         from the complainant showing mounds of debris amidst wetland vegetation, newspaper articles indicating that the instances
         of unauthorised dumping of waste on the wetlands in Limerick were common knowledge and photographs from complainants taken
         in testifying to the presence of demolition and construction waste on those wetlands.
      
The Irish Government replies that, according to Limerick Corporation, just three lorry loads were, in error, deposited in
         October on the area covered by Complaint 1997/and that the waste was removed within hours of its deposit. The facts
         alleged are not proved, particularly at the date upon which the period set in the reasoned opinion expired. As to the
         more recent deposits on the area covered by that complaint, the Irish Government states that they are small in amount and
         affirms that the waste will be removed promptly. The other deposits alleged by the Commission are not material to the present
         proceedings and occurred for infilling and development purposes. Moreover, as regards an infilling proposal with a view to
         developing sporting facilities, the EPA’s position was consistent with Irish legislation which, until May 1998, did not
         require a licence for waste recovery.
      
In this instance, the Court holds that, given the detailed nature of Complaint 1997/and the evidence adduced by the Commission,
         the Irish Government cannot, as is apparent from paragraphs to of this judgment, take refuge behind the otherwise unsupported
         assertions of Limerick Corporation or simply contend that the facts alleged are not proved or that the waste deposits in question
         occurred in implementation of a controlled policy of recovery or infrastructure development, without challenging in substance
         and in detail the information produced by the Commission or supporting its own allegations with specific evidence.
      
Contrary to what the Irish Government suggests, the body of evidence adduced by the Commission is in addition relevant for
         the purpose of substantiating the ground of complaint set out by it relating to the local authorities’ persistent tolerance
         of the unauthorised deposit of waste on the wetlands situated in Limerick.
      
In light of the foregoing, the Court finds that the evidence mentioned in paragraph of this judgment shows to the required
         legal standard that in the competent local authority tolerated unauthorised depositing of construction and demolition
         waste on wetlands in Limerick, that such depositing continued in the area in question, in particular in the course of the
         present proceedings, and that other depositing also took place on two further wetlands very close by. It is also proved that
         the EPA stated in a letter sent on January to Limerick Corporation that, under the Irish legislation in force at that
         time, such depositing did not require authorisation if it occurred for the purpose of recovery.
      
The fact that the wetlands in question are of particular ecological interest is not denied by the Irish Government and is
         sufficiently clear from the case‑file, especially from the fact that classification of one of them has been envisaged as a
         special area of conservation under Council Directive 92/43/EEC of May on the conservation of natural habitats and
         of wild fauna and flora (OJ L 206, p. 7). It is apparent, moreover, from photographs and newspaper articles adduced by
         the Commission and from a letter dated December from the Department of Arts, Heritage, Gaeltacht and the Islands that
         the wetlands in question have been badly damaged.
      
–       Unauthorised operations involving the storage of waste in lagoons and its landspreading, at Ballard, Fermoy, County Cork (Complaint
         1997/4792)
      
The Commission submits that Cork County Council, the competent waste management authority, has since tolerated the carrying
         out by a private operator without a permit of operations involving the storage on a large scale of organic waste in lagoons
         at Ballard and the disposal of that waste by landspreading, failing to ensure that those operations ceased and were punished.
         Furthermore, the facilities in question were constructed without the necessary planning consent and the latter was granted
         in 1998, making it easier for those operations to continue.
      
In its defence the Irish Government concedes that the storage and landspreading operations carried out by the operator concerned
         required possession of a permit. It considers, however, that the conduct of Cork County Council was appropriate. That authority
         established in April that the activities complained of had ceased. When they recommenced, it took steps in to ensure
         that no further material was deposited in the lagoons in question. After finding none the less, on an inspection carried out
         in August 2001, that the storage activity had recommenced, Cork County Council commenced legal proceedings which resulted,
         in March 2002, in the defendant’s being found guilty and fined EUR 800. All illegal depositing has ceased since then and
         the waste still present was removed. 
      
In its reply, the Commission maintains that the operations in question never ceased. It adduces for this purpose various letters,
         including a number from Cork County Council itself, which show that waste was deposited at Ballard until June at least.
         Furthermore, the only penalty imposed on the operator responsible was for failure to provide information to the council.
      
Without contesting this last allegation made by the Commission, the Irish Government indicates in its rejoinder lodged at
         the Court Registry on January that Cork County Council is considering the question of bringing legal proceedings against
         the operator in question. The removal of the waste still on the site is moreover imminent.
      
In light of the foregoing, the Court holds that it is proved to the required legal standard that substantial unauthorised
         operations involving the storage of waste in lagoons and/or its landspreading were pursued on the initiative of a private
         operator in Ballard, County Cork, between and June at least, without the competent authorities taking appropriate
         measures to bring those operations to an end and without the operations giving rise to penalties. Nor is it disputed that
         the installations necessary for such operations were retained although they did not have the necessary planning consent and
         that in the competent authorities issued such a consent authorising the retention of such installations. 
      
–       Unauthorised waste storage operations at Pembrokestown, Whiterock Hill, County Wexford (Complaint 1997/4847)
The Commission contends that a private operator stored waste between and on a site at Pembrokestown, notwithstanding
         three district court decisions in and successively fining him, on conviction in this regard, IEP 100, and then IEP
         twice, a fact which testifies in particular to the inadequacy of the penalties imposed. Furthermore, those operations
         exposed local residents to substantial nuisances of which Wexford County Council was aware, as is apparent in particular from
         the terms of its decision of February refusing an application for planning consent relating to the site concerned,
         a decision which is adduced by the Commission.
      
In the Irish Government’s submission, such fines were consistent with the European Communities (Waste) Regulations, 1979,
         in force at the material time, which provided for the imposition, on summary conviction, of a fine not exceeding IEP and/or
         a term of imprisonment not exceeding six months. Since the operations were of an intermittent nature, Wexford County Council
         also considered it inappropriate to obtain an injunction against the person concerned to prevent them. Finally, a licence
         dated January 2001, which the Irish Government adduces, was granted in respect of the operations. 
      
In this instance, the Court finds that the material in the file shows to the required legal standard that between and
         January waste storage operations took place on a private site located at Pembrokestown in conditions prejudicial to the
         adjacent residents in the absence of any authorisation, without the competent authorities taking appropriate measures to bring
         those operations to an end and without the operations being subject to penalties sufficiently effective to exert a deterrent
         effect. It is also proved that a licence as provided for by the Act was granted by the EPA to the operator of this site
         on January 2001.
      
–       Unauthorised operation of the Powerstown municipal landfill, County Carlow (Complaint 1999/4351)
The Commission submits in its application that the Powerstown municipal landfill, in County Carlow, has been operating without
         a permit since 1975. Although a licence application was submitted on February on the basis of the Act, a decision
         had not yet been issued on February 2000, while the facility had continued to operate since the submission of the licence
         application.
      
The Irish Government does not contest those allegations but adduces a licence relating to the landfill granted by the EPA
         on March 2000.
      
–       Unauthorised operation of a waste storage and treatment facility at Cullinagh, Fermoy, County Cork (Complaint 1999/4478)
The Commission submits that Cork County Council has since tolerated the running by a private operator without a permit
         of a waste storage and treatment facility on a site located at Cullinagh, in an area with groundwater, failing to ensure that
         those operations ceased and were punished, despite the successive refusals issued in respect of the applications for planning
         consent made by that operator between and 1994.
      
The Irish Government states that in April a decision was adopted authorising the concern to carry out recovery operations
         at the rate of tonnes of waste per annum. This decision is not, however, adduced. In the Irish Government’s submission,
         no groundwater contamination from the facility concerned has been ascertained and the licence requires a procedure for monitoring
         and assessing groundwater quality to be implemented. The planning consents were granted by Cork County Council, then set aside
         by the appeal body.
      
The Court accordingly holds that it is proved to the required legal standard that a waste storage and treatment site was operated
         without a permit, at any rate between and April 2002, in an area where a risk of groundwater contamination could not
         be ruled out, without the competent authorities taking appropriate measures to bring its operation to an end and without its
         operation giving rise to penalties. As is apparent from the preceding paragraph, the Irish Government acknowledges, moreover,
         that the competent authorities granted planning consents for those facilities at a time when the facilities did not have the
         permit prescribed by the Directive.
      
–       Dumping of waste and unauthorised operation of waste treatment facilities on the Poolbeg Pensinsula, Dublin (Complaint 1999/4801)
The Commission submits, first, that the competent authorities of the city of Dublin tolerated, from 1997, dumping of construction
         and demolition waste in a green area on the Poolbeg Peninsula, failing to ensure that the dumping ceased or was punished or
         that the waste concerned was removed. Second, those authorities tolerated the operation on the peninsula, without a permit,
         of two treatment facilities for metallic waste, failing to ensure that such operation ceased or was punished, and even went
         so far as to have Community financial assistance granted to the facilities in question. 
      
With regard to the two aforementioned facilities, the Irish Government stated, in its letters of December and June
         responding to requests for information sent to it by the Commission, that, following permit applications submitted on
         September and October respectively, the facilities were granted permits by decisions dated August and March 2001. As to the Community aid, the Irish Government states in its defence that it was granted by mistake.
      
The Irish Government further contends that there was only one past instance of fly-tipping and that the site was remediated
         before the period set in the reasoned opinion expired, without there being any evidence of environmental damage on the
         site. Since the fly-tippers were not identified, they could not be punished. 
      
In its reply, the Commission maintains that it is clear from detailed information received from complainants who were in regular
         contact with Dublin Port Company, which has responsibility for the Poolbeg Peninsula, and with Dublin Corporation, which is
         the competent waste management authority, and from photographs which it adduces that dumping of waste continued until the
         beginning of and that the site concerned was not in fact cleaned up by the Irish authorities until the end of that year.
      
In its rejoinder, the Irish Government contests those allegations made by the Commission and submits that the photographs
         adduced by it are insufficient to support them.
      
The Court finds, first, that in its letters of December and June the Irish Government acknowledged that significant
         dumping of rubble took place in the past in the area at issue and stated that the rubble was levelled to serve as foundation
         material for a platform for pipe assembly operations. Second, the complainants’ assertions and the photographs adduced by
         the Commission are sufficiently precise and detailed in nature for the Irish Government to be unable, as pointed out in paragraphs
         to of this judgment, merely to contend that the facts alleged are not proved without challenging in substance and in
         detail the information produced by the Commission or supporting its own allegations with specific evidence.
      
In light of the foregoing, the Court holds that it is proved to the required legal standard that the competent authorities
         of the city of Dublin tolerated, from up until 2000, the unauthorised presence of rubble dumped in a green area on the
         Poolbeg Peninsula, failing to ensure that dumping ceased or that the waste in question was removed. Those authorities also
         tolerated the operation on the Poolbeg Peninsula without a permit of two waste treatment facilities until August and
         March respectively when the permit applications relating to them were granted, failing to ensure that their operation
         was brought to an end or penalties imposed on the operator. Those facilities also received Community financial assistance.
      
–       Unauthorised operation of municipal landfills at Tramore and Kilbarry, County Waterford (Complaint 1999/5008)
According to the documents and pleadings produced by the parties, the Tramore landfill, which has been in operation since
         the 1930s, adjoins a special protection area within the meaning of Council Directive 79/409/EEC of April on the conservation
         of wild birds (OJ L 103, p. 1) and falls partially within an area proposed as a natural heritage area and as a special
         area of conservation within the meaning of Directive 92/43. It is also apparent from those documents that the licence application
         in respect of this landfill, which was not submitted until September 1998, was granted by the EPA on September 2001.
      
The Kilbarry landfill, which has been in operation since the beginning of the 1970s, adjoins wetlands proposed as a natural
         heritage area and encroaches on a former area of scientific interest. The licence application in respect of the landfill,
         submitted on September 1997, was granted by the EPA on October 2001. 
      
According to the Commission, the unauthorised operation of these two landfills has, moreover, caused significant environmental
         harm and nuisance, consisting in particular in encroachments upon the adjacent wetlands and a consequent reduction in their
         area.
      
In its letter sent to the Commission on November in response to a request by the latter for information, the Irish
         Government maintains that the reduction in area of the wetlands adjoining the Kilbarry landfill occurred years earlier.
         As to the alleged adverse environmental effects, the Irish Government denies that the Tramore landfill has had any significant
         adverse effect on the adjacent special protection area, but acknowledges on the other hand that the EPA has expressed concerns
         with regard to the Kilbarry landfill.
      
In its defence, the Irish Government also explains that, following amendment of the boundary of the proposed special area
         of conservation at Tramore by Dúchas, the authority responsible for nature conservation, the landfill no longer encroaches
         upon that area. It further submits that all the harmful effects on the environment and, in particular, on the various environmentally
         sensitive areas adjoining the landfills in question, are now dealt with in an appropriate manner in the licences of September
         and October 2001. 
      
The Court finds that the Irish Government admits the encroachment of the Kilbarry landfill on the surrounding wetlands and
         the consequent reduction in their area.
      
As to the Tramore landfill, it is apparent from a letter sent on May by the Irish authority responsible for nature
         conservation that it blames Waterford County Council both for the landfill’s encroachments upon the proposed special area
         of conservation and for the damage caused to the latter. A draft conservation plan adopted by the same authority on July
         2000, which the Commission also adduces, confirms that encroachments upon the proposed special area of conservation have taken
         place since 1993, causing serious impairment to it and damage in the areas adjacent to the landfill. Photographs from May
         2001, adduced by the Commission, also show waste adjacent to the boundary of the landfill and encroaching upon the surrounding
         natural environment. 
      
Finally, certain findings made in the inspection reports written in the course of the licensing procedures for the two landfills
         and in the licences themselves and various specific conditions imposed by the licences attest that significant harm to the
         environment, in particular, the aqueous environment, has been caused by the landfills’ operation. Due compliance with the
         various conditions imposed in those licences also involves adopting implementing measures and carrying out works, so that
         mere issue of the licences is not capable of ensuring that the environmental harm resulting from the operation of the two
         landfills in question is immediately brought to an end. Moreover, this finding is confirmed in particular by the annual environmental
         report drawn up in October by Waterford County Council, in accordance with the requirements of the licence relating to
         the Tramore landfill.
      
In light of the foregoing, the Court holds that it is proved to the required legal standard that the Tramore and Kilbarry
         municipal landfills, whose establishment dates back to the 1930s and 1970s, continued to operate without authorisation until
         September and October respectively, when the EPA granted the licence applications concerning them, submitted on
         September and September respectively. It is also proved to the required legal standard that those landfills
         encroached upon sensitive wetlands of particular ecological interest, causing in particular impairment of the wetlands and
         a reduction in their area, and that they were at the origin of significant environmental pollution of various kinds which,
         as is clear from the preceding paragraph, has not been entirely brought to an end merely because the aforementioned licences
         have been issued. 
      
–       Unauthorised operation of waste facilities at Lea Road and Ballymorris, County Laois (Complaint 1999/5112)
The Commission submits that the competent local authorities have tolerated the running, since the 1980s, by a private operator
         without a permit of waste facilities which are located in disused quarries at Lea Road and Ballymorris, near Portarlington,
         County Laois, and are both within the catchment of the River Barrow which has an important aquifer, those authorities having
         failed to ensure that the activities ceased or that they were punished.
      
After acknowledging, in a letter sent to the Commission on November 2000, that waste management activities had indeed taken
         place on those sites without the required authorisation, the Irish Government states, however, in its defence that Laois County
         Council confirmed to it in September that all activity had meanwhile ceased on the Lea Road site. As regards the Ballymorris
         site, it states that in February the EPA issued a proposed decision refusing the licence sought.
      
In its reply, the Commission contests that the waste management operations carried out at Lea Road have ceased. It adduces
         in this connection various reports drawn up following site inspections, including one dated June accompanied by photographic
         negatives attesting that significant waste management and storage activities continued on the site, at least until that date.
         The Commission likewise adduces various inspection reports and photographic negatives demonstrating the extent of the waste
         management operations carried out at Ballymorris.
      
In its rejoinder, lodged at the Court Registry on January 2003, the Irish Government states that a decision on the licence
         application relating to the Ballymorris site is expected in March 2003.
      
In light of the foregoing, the Court holds that it is proved to the required legal standard that the competent Irish authorities
         have tolerated the running, since the 1980s, by a private operator without a permit of two significant waste facilities which
         are located in disused quarries at Lea Road and Ballymorris, near Portarlington, County Laois, and are both within the catchment
         of the River Barrow which has an important aquifer, those authorities having failed to ensure that the activities ceased or
         that they were punished. In the case of the Lea Road site, that situation persisted at least until June and, in the
         case of the Ballymorris site, until January 2003.
      
–       Operation without a permit of the municipal landfills at Drumnaboden, Muckish and Glenalla, County Donegal (Complaint 2000/4408)
It is common ground between the parties that, after a licence application was submitted on September pursuant to the
         Act in respect of the municipal landfill at Drumnaboden, the closure of the landfill was ordered by decision of Donegal
         County Council dated April 1999. That authority was accordingly prompted to decide to continue operation of the municipal
         landfills at Muckish and Glenalla, which had closed shortly before March 1999, the deadline before which an application
         for a licence under the Act had to be made in respect of every existing municipal landfill. Consequently, waste management
         activities resumed in the latter two landfills, whereas the licence applications concerning them were not submitted until
         October 1999. Notwithstanding the lateness of those applications, the EPA made no objections to continuance of those landfills’
         operation.
      
–       Unauthorised dumping and depositing of waste at Carlingford Lough, Greenore, County Louth (Complaint 2000/4145)
The Commission submits that from the Irish authorities tolerated unauthorised dumping of construction and demolition
         waste on an area on the foreshore at Carlingford Lough, Greenore, County Louth, failing to ensure that those operations ceased
         or were punished or that the waste was removed.
      
The Irish Government indicated in a letter sent to the Commission on April that the Department of the Marine and Natural
         Resources had considered that the question of that waste would be resolved in the context of a local development proposal
         under examination. In addition, the Department of the Environment and Local Government forwarded to the Commission a copy
         of a report dated October in which the waste deposited at Carlingford Lough is identified as builders’ rubble.
      
In its defence, the Irish Government contends, however, that this last assessment is incorrect. Following trial excavations
         carried out on the site in January at the request of Louth County Council, it was apparent that the material present
         on the site comprised boulders and stone excavated from a quarry and deposited at that location by the undertaking Greenore
         Port for the purpose of land reclamation, so that there was no waste disposal. Furthermore, it is now proposed to use that
         material in the construction of a seawall. 
      
Here, the Court finds that it is apparent from the evidence adduced by the Commission, which includes, in particular, letters
         from complainants and from the Department of the Marine and Natural Resources, two inspection reports drawn up by officials
         of that ministry following site inspections in and and various photographs taken in January 2002, that the waste
         in question does comprise demolition rubble, in particular reinforced concrete and scrap iron. That evidence also shows to
         the required legal standard that from such demolition and construction waste was in fact dumped and kept by a private
         operator lacking a permit on an area on the foreshore at Carlingford Lough and that that situation was tolerated at least
         until January by the competent Irish authorities, who failed to ensure that those activities ceased and were punished
         or that the waste was removed.
      
–       Waste collection by unlicensed and unregistered private undertakings at Bray, County Wicklow (Complaint 2000/4157)
The Commission submits that in January Bray Urban District Council decided to cease domestic waste collection and invited
         residents to turn to private collectors, a list of whom was sent to them. According to the Commission, the private collectors
         were not registered or authorised for the purposes of Article of the Directive, because that provision had not been transposed
         into Irish law.
      
In its letter sent to the Commission on October 2000, the Irish Government states, first, that the municipality of Bray
         maintained records regarding all waste collectors operating in its area. Second, it informs the Commission of the future adoption
         of regulations under which waste collection in Ireland will be subject to a permit system.
      
–       Unauthorised tipping of waste on sites at Ballynattin, Pickardstown, Ballygunner Bog and Castletown, County Waterford (Complaint
         2000/4633)
      
In its application, the Commission contends that Waterford County Council tolerated, at least until December 2001, unauthorised
         tipping of various types of waste, mainly construction and demolition rubble, on various wetlands in the county, including
         the sites at Ballynattin, Pickardstown, Ballygunner Bog and Castletown, failing to ensure that those activities ceased or
         were punished or that the waste was removed.
      
In its defence, lodged at the Court on August 2002, the Irish Government maintains that, on the date upon which the period
         laid down in the reasoned opinion expired, all dumping had ceased on the Pickardstown, Castletown and Ballygunner Bog
         sites. Furthermore, steps had been taken by Waterford County Council to secure the removal of the waste tipped on the first
         two sites. The third had in the meantime been grassed over and, according to the council, removal of the waste would not enable
         the wetland concerned to be restored to its original state. The Irish Government states in addition that in January proceedings
         were brought with regard to the Ballynattin site, after a notice served by Waterford County Council in June requiring
         all depositing to cease and the waste to be removed had no effect.
      
In support of its reply, the Commission adduces photographic negatives from September which reveal the presence of demolition
         waste on the Ballynattin, Pickardstown and Castletown sites and a building in the course of construction on the first of those
         three sites.
      
In its rejoinder, lodged at the Court on January 2003, the Irish Government submits that the dumping of waste at Ballynattin,
         Pickardstown, Ballygunner Bog and Castletown occurred on areas respectively representing 0.1, 0.8, 0.and hectare, that
         is to say 0.15%, 27%, 6% and 17% of the wetlands concerned. In the case of the Ballynattin site, a circuit court order had
         required removal of the waste and demolition of the building under construction, and an application to have the site owner
         committed to prison was made before the circuit court in December 2002. The Irish Government further states that, having recently
         been informed of fresh dumping of waste on the Castletown site, Waterford County Council expressed its intention to require
         the removal of the waste deposited on this site and the Pickardstown site.
      
In light of the foregoing, the Court holds that it is proved to the required legal standard that waste, mainly construction
         and demolition waste, has been deposited on various wetlands in County Waterford, at the Ballynattin, Pickardstown, Ballygunner
         Bog and Castletown sites, on the initiative of private operators, and that on the date upon which the period set in the reasoned opinion expired, the competent local authority had not ensured that that dumping had ceased and been punished or
         that the waste concerned had been removed, a situation which moreover continued to obtain after the present action was brought.a
      
 Breach of Articles and of the Directive
–       Arguments of the parties
The Commission submits that, as provided by Articles and of the Directive, all waste operations have had to take place
         under a permit since 1977. Such permits, which are issued for the purposes of implementing Article of the Directive and
         must specify the conditions to be complied with by those operations in order to preserve the environment, absolutely must
         be such that they are granted in advance.
      
According to the Commission, numerous municipal waste operations are, however, carried out without a permit in Ireland, as
         is attested, for example, by the cases of the Powerstown and Tramore and Kilbarry landfills, the respective subjects of Complaints
         1999/and 1999/5008.
      
Furthermore, the time taken to process licence applications submitted under the Act is excessive as regards existing
         facilities, whilst the latter continue systematically to operate during the licensing procedure. The reply sent by the Irish
         Government to the Commission on February indicates that, out of licence applications of this type, remained
         pending as at February 2000. In the case of the Muckish and Glenalla landfills, which are referred to in Complaint 2000/4408,
         the EPA even tolerated continuance of their operation without a licence application having been submitted within the time-limit
         laid down by the Act. 
      
In the Commission’s submission, Ireland also fails to fulfil its obligations by not subjecting municipal landfills that closed
         before that time-limit expired to the permit procedure provided for in Article of the Directive.
      
As regards waste dealt with by private operators, the Commission contends that the Irish authorities, at various levels, also
         tolerate the continuation over long periods of unauthorised operations in a very large number of places in Ireland, failing
         to ensure that they cease or are punished, as is apparent in particular from investigation of Complaints 1997/4705, 1997/4792,
         1999/4478, 1999/4801, 1999/5112, 2000/and 2000/4633. The few penalties that are imposed continue, moreover, to have no
         deterrent effect at all, as is shown in particular by examination of Complaint 1997/4847. Unscrupulous operators are thus
         encouraged, on making a simple financial calculation, to continue their illegal activities, while their competitors who comply
         with the Directive’s requirements are penalised. 
      
Where applications are made for a permit or planning consent that relate to existing unlawful facilities, the competent Irish
         authorities furthermore allow the activities concerned to continue, the authorisation finally granted covering the earlier
         breaches in such cases, as is shown by examination, in particular, of Complaints 1997/4792, 1999/4478, 1999/4801, 1999/and 2000/4145. In the case covered by Complaint 1997/4705, the EPA even accepted that infilling on wetlands was equivalent
         to recovery and that, in those circumstances, no permit was required under national law.
      
The Irish Government submits in defence, with regard to operations relating to municipal waste, that at the end of September
         only operational municipal landfills were still to be licensed and that the situation was entirely regularised on
         November 1992, the date on which the final licence was issued. The time taken to process the applications is normal, given
         the wave of simultaneous applications relating to existing facilities, the complexity of the application files and the cumbersomeness
         of the licensing procedure. The case of the Glenalla and Muckish landfills is exceptional.
      
In addition, Article of the Directive does not require that a facility that closed before expiry of the statutory period
         within which a licence application had to be submitted be retroactively subject to authorisation.
      
As regards waste dealt with by the private sector, the Irish Government disputes that there is a general tendency on the part
         of the Irish authorities to tolerate unauthorised operations. Thus, between May and August 2002, applications were
         submitted for permits in respect of existing or proposed activities and permits were issued.
      
Furthermore, the Act provides for the imposition of appropriate fines and terms of imprisonment, and infringements of
         that Act do give rise to penalties. In its defence, lodged at the Court on August 2002, the Irish Government submits that,
         according to information which it does not adduce but has been communicated to it by of the competent local authorities,
         since May more than notices have been issued requiring the cessation of unauthorised activity and removal of the
         waste concerned to an authorised facility and notices requiring other action have been issued, while those authorities
         have completed prosecutions since and are in progress. The EPA has brought prosecutions under the Act.
      
The courts have also given judgment against the defendant in various cases. In support of this contention, the Irish Government
         adduces a High Court judgment of July ordering the defendants to remediate a site in County Wicklow on which hazardous
         hospital waste had been illegally landfilled. It also relies on a judgment delivered by Naas District Court, imposing three
         terms of imprisonment for unlawful holding of waste.
      
As regards the specific cases raised in the complaints sent to the Commission, the Irish Government disputes, in so far as
         the facts are relevant to the present proceedings, that the Irish authorities have not been active in dealing with them. Furthermore,
         the Directive does not prevent recovery operations which do not cause any significant environmental damage from continuing
         during the permit procedure. As to the EPA’s letter of March 1998, it simply reflected Irish law as it stood at the time,
         since waste recovery activities were subject to authorisation only under the Waste Management (Licensing) (Amendment) Regulations,
         1998, which entered into force on May 1998.
      
–       Findings of the Court
A preliminary point to note is that in Ireland municipal waste was not subject to a permit system until the Act and its
         implementing regulations were adopted. As regards waste managed by private operators, certain statements on the part of the
         Irish Government suggest that its disposal has been subject to such a system since 1980, while its recovery has been since
         only.
      
As is apparent from paragraphs and of this judgment, the action seeks, however, a declaration that, on the date upon
         which the two-month period set in the reasoned opinion expired, Ireland was not complying with its obligations under
         Articles and of the Directive, that is to say to ensure that all waste operations actually take place under a permit.
      
In this regard, it should be observed at the outset that, in accordance with the third paragraph of Article EC, a directive
         is binding, as to the result to be achieved, upon each Member State to which it is addressed. In the present instance, Articles
         and of the Directive impose on the Member States obligations formulated in clear and unequivocal terms to achieve a certain
         result, under which undertakings or establishments which carry out waste disposal operations or waste recovery operations
         in those States must hold a permit. It follows that a Member State has complied with its obligations under those provisions
         only if, in addition to the correct transposition of the provisions into domestic law, the operators concerned have the permit
         required (see, by analogy, in relation to the prior authorisation required to operate incineration plants referred to in Article
         of Council Directive 89/369/EEC of June on the prevention of air pollution from new municipal waste incineration
         plants (OJ L 163, p. 32), Case C‑139/Commission v Spain [2002] ECR I-6407, paragraph 27). 
      
As the Advocate General has observed in points to of his Opinion, the Member States therefore have the task of making
         sure that the permit system set up is actually applied and complied with, in particular by conducting appropriate checks for
         that purpose and ensuring that operations carried out without a permit are actually brought to an end and punished.
      
Furthermore, the permit systems referred to in Articles and of the Directive are intended, as is apparent from the very
         wording of those provisions, to enable Article of the Directive to be implemented correctly, in particular by ensuring that
         disposal and recovery operations carried out under such permits comply with the various requirements set by Article 4. For
         this purpose, the permits must contain a number of details and conditions, as is moreover expressly laid down in Article of the Directive in relation to disposal operations. It follows that the authorisation processes referred to in Articles and must necessarily be such that they precede all disposal or recovery operations (see, to this effect, Case C-230/Commission v Belgium [2001] ECR I-4591, paragraph 16). Contrary to the Irish Government’s assertions, mere submission of a permit application
         cannot therefore have the effect of making such operations consistent with the requirements of those provisions.
      
In this regard, the Irish Government’s argument that the implementation in practice of a permit system introduced by national
         legislation requires a transitional period during which existing facilities must be able to remain operational cannot succeed
         in the present proceedings.
      
As provided in Article of Directive 75/442, the Member States were required to bring into force the measures needed in
         order to comply with that directive within months of its notification. Articles and of the Directive replaced Article
         of Directive 75/and, with a view to continuity of the pre-existing obligations, strengthened the latter, which already
         provided for a permit system for facilities at which waste was treated, stored or tipped (see to this effect, in particular,
         SanRocco, paragraph 37).
      
The Irish Government therefore had the task of initiating in good time the procedures necessary for transposing into national
         law, initially, Article of Directive 75/and, subsequently, Articles and of the Directive, so that those procedures
         were completed within the time-limits prescribed by the directives and the obligations formulated in clear and unequivocal
         terms in those provisions to achieve a certain result, namely that the operations concerned be carried out only under the
         requisite permits, were met. In so far as the measures adopted by Ireland to transpose the directives were belated, they cannot
         be relied on to justify the failure to fulfil obligations (see, by analogy, Case C‑60/Commission v France [2002] ECR I-5679, paragraphs 33, and 39).
      
With the benefit of those introductory points of clarification, it must be stated that, as regards municipal landfills, it
         is apparent from paragraph of the present judgment that, on the Irish Government’s own admission, on the date upon which
         the period set in the reasoned opinion expired, operational landfills did not have a licence.
      
The Irish Government likewise admits that, when that period expired, it was the systematic practice of the Irish authorities
         to allow existing facilities to continue to operate during the period from the date on which the licence application was submitted
         until the date of the decision taken after examination of the application. As is apparent from paragraph of this judgment,
         that was in particular true of the Tramore and Kilbarry landfills.
      
It is also apparent from various documents submitted to the Court that, at the time, the periods elapsing in practice before
         such existing facilities were granted or refused a licence were, taken as a whole, quite considerable; the Irish Government
         itself acknowledged that those periods were a matter for concern in its letter sent to the Commission on November 2000.
      
An article entitled ‘Waste Licensing 1997‑2002: Lessons from the Application process’ published in in the Irish Planning and Environmental Law Journal, which the Irish Government adduces, thus refers to an average duration of days for the procedure for considering licence
         applications. It is apparent from paragraph of this judgment that licences relating to the Tramore and Kilbarry municipal
         landfills, whose establishment nevertheless dates back to the 1930s and 1970s, were issued only on conclusion of procedures
         lasting and months respectively, although those landfills were the source of significant environmental pollution and
         of harm to sites of particular ecological interest.
      
According to that article, the main causes of such slowness are the extremely high number of applications dating from the
         same time relating to existing sites that were often poorly located and subject to little monitoring, and clearly insufficient
         staff numbers at the EPA. As the Advocate General has observed in point of his Opinion, where a Member State has been failing
         for some years to fulfil its obligation to achieve the result prescribed in Article of the Directive, it is incumbent
         upon it to do everything to remedy that failure as rapidly as possible.
      
It follows from all of the foregoing that, on the date upon which the period set in the reasoned opinion expired, Ireland
         had not yet met its obligation, by which it had been bound since 1977, to ensure that all municipal landfills hold the requisite
         permit. The failure to fulfil obligations, which is the result, all at once, of extremely belated transposition of Article
         of the Directive, of systematically refraining from requiring existing unauthorised activities to cease while the licensing
         procedure took place, and of a lack of appropriate measures for ensuring that facilities were promptly made subject to the
         domestic system finally set up, was as at that date both general and persistent in nature.
      
As to the municipal landfills which closed down before expiry of the period laid down for submission of a licence application
         under the Act and its implementing regulations, suffice it to state that the Commission has not claimed that that legislation
         transposed the Directive incorrectly because it was not laid down that such landfills had to be subject to authorisation.
         As is clear from paragraph of this judgment, the Commission has, on the contrary, stressed both during the pre-litigation
         procedure and before the Court that, with the exception of Article of the Directive, its action was intended to complain
         not of a failure to transpose the Directive but of deficiencies in the actual implementation of the national provisions adopted
         for the purposes of such transposition. In those circumstances, the Commission cannot seek, in the present action, a declaration
         that Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations because its administrative authorities did not, in the context of application
         of the Act and its implementing regulations which do not envisage such a possibility, make such closed-down landfills
         subject to the permit procedure provided for in Article of the Directive.
      
As regards the handling of waste by private operators, the Court holds that, as is apparent from the findings made in paragraphs
         60, 63, 68, 75, 89, and of this judgment, a number of Irish local authorities have displayed tolerance towards unauthorised
         operations relating to significant quantities of waste in numerous places in Ireland, often over very long periods, failing
         to take appropriate measures to ensure that such operations ceased and were effectively punished and to prevent their recurrence.
      
It is also apparent from those findings that this approach was still being displayed on the date upon which the period set
         in the reasoned opinion expired.
      
First, as is apparent from paragraphs and of this judgment, the fact that a permit application was, in some cases,
         submitted in respect of an existing facility does not in any way permit the view to be taken, contrary to the practice followed
         by the Irish authorities, that the requirements of Article or of the Directive were met or that the activities in question
         could be allowed to continue during the permit procedure.
      
Second, as the Commission rightly submits, the circumstance that in two of the specific situations examined, covered by paragraphs
         and of this judgment, a permit was finally issued before the period set in the reasoned opinion expired affects
         neither the fact that no penalty was imposed for the past in respect of the unauthorised operations in question nor the finding
         that, at the time under consideration, there was a generalised tendency in Ireland on the part of the competent local authorities
         to tolerate situations in which those provisions were not complied with.
      
This tolerant approach is indicative of a large-scale administrative problem, as the Advocate General has observed in point
         of his Opinion, and it was sufficiently general and long-lasting to enable the conclusion to be drawn that a practice
         attributable to the Irish authorities existed consisting in not ensuring a correct implementation of Articles and of
         the Directive. 
      
This assessment is, moreover, borne out by various documents adduced by the Commission. In particular, it is apparent from
         an especially detailed analytical and statistical study, entitled ‘Strategic Review & Outlook for Waste Management Capacity
         and the Impact on the Irish Economy’, of July 2002, that on the date upon which the period set in the reasoned opinion
         expired the Irish network of waste disposal installations was close to saturation point and that this situation was accompanied
         by the appearance of a high number of illegal dumps and deposits. The same finding is made in a document entitled ‘National
         Waste Management Strategy’, submitted to the Irish Government in January by the Institution of the Engineers of Ireland,
         which points out that hundreds if not thousands of illegal dumps are scattered across Ireland. 
      
As regards County Wicklow in particular, newspaper articles published between December and April and a report
         dated September from Wicklow County Council attest inter alia that, around the time when the period set in the reasoned opinion expired, close to illegal sites were recorded in the county, some of which were of a considerable size
         and contained hazardous waste originating in particular from hospitals.
      
Since the Commission thus supplied sufficient evidence indicating that the Irish authorities maintained a general and persistent
         approach of tolerance towards numerous situations betraying a breach of the requirements laid down in Articles and of
         the Directive, failing to ensure that those situations were in fact brought to an end and that effective penalties were imposed,
         it was incumbent on Ireland, as is apparent from paragraphs to of this judgment, to challenge in substance and in detail
         that evidence and the consequences flowing therefrom.
      
It must be held that, here, Ireland did not meet that requirement in merely formulating, otherwise unsupported, general contentions,
         such as those set out in paragraphs to of this judgment, and adducing a judicial decision which, since it came after
         the date upon which the period set by the reasoned opinion expired, cannot, after all, be relevant for the purpose of
         assessing the conduct of the Irish authorities at that date.
      
Furthermore, in its rejoinder, lodged at the Court on January 2003, the Irish Government itself indicated that it had recently
         adopted various initiatives with a view to supporting a consistent approach in the application of environmental standards,
         involving in particular: the provision to local authorities of funding intended to enable them to enforce those standards;
         making those authorities subject to an environmental management system drawn up by the EPA; a more structured and effective
         approach with regard to inspections; the drafting of a bill including strengthened environmental provisions; and the creation
         of a specialist office for this purpose. In an article, which the Commission adduces, published in the IrishTimes on August 2002, it is likewise reported that the Minister for the Environment stated that the creation of such an office
         was one of his priorities given the clear need for stricter and more consistent compliance with waste legislation.
      
It follows from the foregoing and from the finding made in paragraph of this judgment regarding municipal landfills that
         it is proved to the required legal standard that, as at the date upon which the two-month period set in the reasoned
         opinion expired, Ireland was generally and persistently failing to fulfil its obligation to ensure a correct implementation
         of Articles and of the Directive, so that the Commission’s claim in this respect must be upheld.
      
 Breach of Article of the Directive
–       Arguments of the parties
The Commission contends that the Waste Management (Collection Permit) Regulations, (‘the Regulations’), of which
         it was notified on September 2001, transpose Article of the Directive both belatedly and unsatisfactorily. The Regulations set November as the deadline for submitting permit applications. Provided that the permit application
         is submitted before that date, the operators concerned are, moreover, authorised to pursue their activities until the procedure
         has been completed. This belated transposition had the effect of excluding undertakings collecting and transporting waste
         from any requirement for a permit or registration, as is shown in particular by the facts raised in Complaint 2000/4157.
      
In the Irish Government’s submission, the Regulations transpose Article of the Directive correctly and brought the
         failure to fulfil obligations to an end. As to the transitional measures of which the Commission complains, the Irish Government
         maintains that submission of a permit application is at least equivalent to registration for the purposes of Article 12, a
         concept which can in fact be understood as a mere formal notification to the authority, without a need to satisfy prior conditions.
         Nor does the specific case referred to by the Commission betray a failure by Ireland to fulfil its obligations.
      
–       Findings of the Court
Article of the Directive provides in particular that establishments or undertakings which collect or transport waste on
         a professional basis are to be registered with the competent authorities where they are not subject to authorisation.
      
The Irish Government does not contest the Commission’s assertion that the permit system belatedly implemented by the Regulations provides that, from November 2001, waste collection will be carried out in accordance with the requirements
         of a permit issued by the local authority and that any permit application relating to existing activities is to have been
         submitted before that date.
      
Accordingly, on the date upon which the two-month period set in the reasoned opinion expired, possession of a permit
         or registration was not yet compulsory for waste collection operations. Furthermore, even if all the operators concerned submitted
         a permit application pursuant to the Regulations before that date, which has not been established by the Irish Government,
         the submission of such an application cannot, contrary to its submissions, be taken as equivalent to registration for the
         purposes of Article of the Directive and, consequently, satisfy the requirements of that provision. Article requires
         the Member States to choose a permit system or a registration procedure and Ireland did not opt for the second approach.
      
It follows from the foregoing that the Commission’s claim must be upheld inasmuch as it seeks a declaration that Ireland did
         not correctly transpose Article of the Directive.
      
 Breach of Article of the Directive
–       Arguments of the parties
The Commission submits that Ireland has not taken appropriate measures to establish an integrated and adequate network of
         waste disposal installations, since numerous installations operate without a permit, giving rise moreover to harm to the environment
         as attested, for example, by the case of the Tramore and Kilbarry landfills which are referred to in Complaint 1999/5008.
      
The inadequacy of the Irish disposal network is also clear from the fact that it has reached saturation point, a fact which
         has indeed contributed to the appearance of illegal waste dumping on a large scale.
      
The Irish Government denies any breach of Article of the Directive. First, the Commission has not established that there
         was not a permit system in compliance with Article of the Directive on the date upon which the period set in the reasoned
         opinion expired. Second, inasmuch as the term ‘adequate’ may be interpreted as referring to sufficient available space to
         meet a Member State’s current disposal requirements, the various documents adduced by the Commission to demonstrate an alleged
         lack of disposal capacity in Ireland are not convincing. The Commission has in particular not established that waste could
         not be disposed of because of insufficient landfill capacity, and the fact that certain landfills are coming close to closure
         is in no way unusual. The Commission also fails to take account of factors such as the possibility of sharing disposal capacity
         between local authorities or of extending existing landfills, proposals for new landfills that are in the course of being
         examined or the development of recovery infrastructure.
      
–       Findings of the Court
The establishment of an integrated and adequate network of disposal installations, taking account of the best available technology
         not involving excessive costs, the network having to enable waste to be disposed of in one of the nearest appropriate installations,
         in accordance with Article of the Directive, is among the objectives pursued by the Directive (Joined Cases C-53/and
         C-217/Commune de Braine-le-Château and Others [2004] ECR I-0000, paragraph 33).
      
As provided in the first subparagraph of Article 9(1) of the Directive, it is ‘for the purposes of implementing Articles 4,
         and 7’ of the Directive that any establishment or undertaking which carries out disposal operations must obtain a permit.
         This phrase means that implementation of Article of the Directive is meant to be achieved in particular by issuing individual
         permits (see, to this effect, Commune de Braine-le-Château, cited above, paragraphs 40, and 43).
      
However, as is apparent from paragraph of this judgment, as at the date upon which the two-month period set in the reasoned opinion expired, Ireland was generally and persistently failing to fulfil its obligation to ensure a correct implementation
         of Article of the Directive by allowing a large number of waste disposal installations to operate without a permit.
      
As the Commission rightly contends, this circumstance is sufficient to conclude that as at that date Ireland was not complying
         with the obligations laid down in Article of the Directive.
      
As is apparent from paragraphs 118, and of this judgment, the permit system provided for in Article of the Directive
         is intended to ensure that waste disposal operations are consonant with the various objectives pursued by the Directive. For
         this purpose, permits must, as is clear from the very wording of that provision, contain a number of requirements relating
         in particular to the types and quantities of waste, the technical requirements, the security precautions to be taken, the
         disposal site and the treatment method.
      
In conjunction with the management plans referred to in Article of the Directive, the requirements which must appear in
         individual permits therefore manifestly constitute an essential condition for the establishment, in accordance with Article
         of the Directive, of an integrated and adequate network of disposal installations taking account, as Article provides,
         in particular of the best available technology not involving excessive costs and of geographical circumstances or the need
         for specialised installations for certain types of waste, while enabling disposal in one of the nearest appropriate installations,
         by means of the most appropriate methods and technologies in order to ensure a high level of protection for the environment
         and public health.
      
Furthermore, it is apparent from the documents adduced by the Commission, in particular the report referred to in point of the Advocate General’s Opinion and the July study mentioned in paragraph of this judgment, that, on the date upon
         which the period set in the reasoned opinion expired, the Irish network of disposal installations, taken as a whole,
         was close to saturation point and was not sufficient to absorb the waste produced in that Member State. It is also evident
         from those documents that this situation was accompanied by the appearance of a high number of illegal dumps and deposits
         across the whole country.
      
The precise and detailed information contained in those various documents has not been challenged in substance and in detail
         by Ireland which has merely cast doubt, in very general terms, on its evidential value, accordingly not satisfying the requirements
         noted in paragraphs to of this judgment.
      
In those circumstances, it must be found that, on the date upon which the period set in the reasoned opinion expired,
         Ireland had failed to take appropriate measures to introduce an integrated and adequate network of disposal installations
         which, as is clear from Article of the Directive, must be such as to enable the Community as a whole to become self-sufficient
         in waste disposal and the Member States to move towards that aim individually.
      
It follows from all of the foregoing that the Commission’s claim alleging breach of Article of the Directive must be upheld.
 Breach of Article of the Directive
–       Arguments of the parties
The Commission submits that the lengthy absence of an operational permit system in compliance with Articles and of the
         Directive is sufficient in itself to establish that Ireland has not taken the measures required to ensure the recovery or
         disposal of waste without endangering human health and without using processes or methods which could harm the environment,
         as it was obliged to do pursuant to the first paragraph of Article of the Directive.
      
Since the latter provision must be interpreted in accordance with the precautionary and preventive principles, actual harm
         is not required for it to be breached. In the present case, as is apparent in particular from the investigation of Complaints
         1997/4705, 1997/4792, 1999/4801, 1999/5008, 2000/4408, 2000/and 2000/4633, the illegal operations raised in them in fact
         caused numerous instances of degradation of sites of particular interest, and actual damage to the environment, without Ireland
         taking the necessary remedial measures, in particular by ensuring that the sites were restored and that the waste illegally
         deposited on them was appropriately disposed of or recovered. 
      
Furthermore, Ireland has not complied with its obligation to prohibit the dumping or uncontrolled disposal of waste, under
         the second paragraph of Article of the Directive.
      
The Irish Government submits with regard to the first paragraph of Article of the Directive that the Commission has established
         neither the absence of a permit system in compliance with Article of the Directive on the date upon which the period set
         in the reasoned opinion expired nor that actual environmental harm attributable to the Irish authorities has occurred.
         Furthermore, the Directive does not prohibit authorisation of landfilling activity in environmentally sensitive areas.
      
Moreover, the Commission has not established that the Irish authorities have failed to deal with ongoing problems arising
         from past activities. Appropriate measures are provided for in permits issued in respect of existing sites, such as the Kilbarry
         and Tramore sites and the Drumnaboden site, respectively referred to in Complaints 1999/and 2000/4408, while the identification
         and assessment of landfills closed before being subject to authorisation are provided for in section 22(7)(h) of the Act, so that any remedial measures may take place, account being taken of cost-effectiveness.
      
Furthermore, the Commission has not established an infringement of the second paragraph of Article of the Directive as at
         the date upon which the period set in the reasoned opinion expired.
      
–       Findings of the Court
It is to be remembered that the obligation to dispose of waste without endangering human health and without harming the environment
         forms part of the very objectives of Community environmental policy and that Article of the Directive is intended in particular
         to implement the principle that preventive action should be taken, contained in the second sentence of the first subparagraph
         of Article 174(2) EC, by virtue of which it is for the Community and the Member States to prevent, reduce and, in so far as
         is possible, eliminate from the outset the sources of pollution or nuisance by adopting measures of a nature such as to eliminate
         recognised risks (see Joined Cases C-175/and C-177/Lirussi and Bizzaro [1999] ECR I‑6881, paragraph 51, and Case C-387/Commission v Greece [2000] ECR I-5047, paragraph 94).
      
First, Article of the Directive sets out various objectives which the Member States must observe in their performance of
         the more specific obligations imposed on them by other provisions of the Directive (see, to this effect, Case C-236/Comitato di coordinamento per la difesa della cava and Others [1994] ECR I‑483, paragraph 12).
      
According to the very wording of the first subparagraph of Article 9(1) of the Directive and Article thereof, it is inter
         alia ‘for the purposes of implementing’ Article that any establishment or undertaking which carries out waste disposal operations
         or waste recovery operations must obtain a permit. As has been pointed out in paragraph of the present judgment, this
         phrase means that implementation of Article is meant to be achieved in particular by issuing such individual permits (Commune de Braine‑le‑Château, paragraphs and 43).
      
Second, even though the first paragraph of Article of the Directive does not specify the actual content of the measures
         to be taken in order to ensure that waste is disposed of without endangering human health and without harming the environment,
         that provision, which contains obligations independent of those arising from the other provisions of the Directive, is none
         the less binding on the Member States as to the objective to be achieved, while leaving to them a margin of discretion in
         assessing the need for such measures (San Rocco, paragraph 67, and Case C-387/Commission v Greece, cited above, paragraphs and 58).
      
While it is true that it is, in principle, not possible to draw the direct inference from the fact that a situation is not
         in conformity with the objectives laid down in the first paragraph of Article of the Directive that the Member State concerned
         has necessarily failed to fulfil the obligations under that provision, namely to take the requisite measures to ensure that
         waste is disposed of without endangering human health and without harming the environment, it is nevertheless undisputed that
         if that situation persists, in particular if it leads to a significant deterioration in the environment over a protracted
         period without any action being taken by the competent authorities, that may indicate that the Member States have exceeded
         the discretion conferred on them by that provision (San Rocco, paragraphs and 68).
      
Here it is proved that, as is apparent from paragraph of the present judgment, as at the date upon which the two-month
         period set in the reasoned opinion expired, Ireland was generally and persistently failing to fulfil its obligation to
         ensure a correct implementation of Articles and of the Directive.
      
As the Advocate General has observed in point of his Opinion, that fact is sufficient to establish that Ireland has failed,
         likewise generally and persistently, to fulfil the requirements of Article of the Directive, a provision closely linked
         to Articles and 10.
      
First, as pointed out in paragraphs and of this judgment, the permit system referred to in Articles and of the
         Directive is intended to ensure that waste disposal operations and waste recovery operations carried out under such permits
         are consonant with the objectives laid down in the first paragraph of Article of the Directive. For this purpose, the permits
         must necessarily include a number of requirements as is expressly provided by Article of the Directive, a provision which
         refers in particular, in this connection, to the types and quantities of waste, the technical requirements, the security precautions
         to be taken, the disposal site and the treatment method. It follows that the scrutiny of such permit applications and the
         requirements, conditions and obligations which those permits include are among the means of attaining the objectives listed
         in the first paragraph of Article 4. 
      
Second, under the second paragraph of Article of the Directive, the Member States must in particular prohibit all uncontrolled
         disposal of waste.
      
In the present instance, the failure of a general and persistent nature to fulfil the obligations arising from Article of
         the Directive, which has thus been established by reason of the infringement of the requirements of Articles and of the
         Directive, is accompanied in addition, in certain of the specific situations complained of by the Commission, by a failure
         to fulfil the more specific obligation recalled in paragraphs and of this judgment.
      
It is apparent from paragraphs 54, 55, 84, and of this judgment that, on the date upon which the period set in the
         reasoned opinion expired, Ireland had failed, in the face of factual situations that were inconsistent with the objectives
         of the first paragraph of Article of the Directive for a lengthy period and led to a significant deterioration in the environment,
         to take the necessary measures to ensure that the waste in question was disposed of without endangering human health and without
         harming the environment, so that that Member State has exceeded the discretion conferred on it by that provision.
      
It follows from all of the foregoing that the Commission’s claim alleging breach of Article of the Directive is well founded.
 Breach of Article of the Directive
–       Arguments of the parties
In the Commission’s submission, Ireland has also infringed Article of the Directive, by failing to ensure that those who
         hold waste disposed of without a permit have it handled by a private or public waste collector or by an undertaking authorised
         to carry out disposal or recovery operations, or dispose of or recover it themselves after obtaining a permit in compliance
         with the Directive’s requirements. Specific examples of breaches of this provision are apparent in particular from examination
         of the facts raised in Complaints 1997/4792, 1999/4801, 1999/5112, 2000/and 2000/4633.
      
The Irish Government contends that the Commission has not proved the alleged failure to fulfil obligations.
–       Findings of the Court
Article of the Directive, which inter alia implements the principle that preventive action should be taken, provides that
         the Member States have the task of ensuring that any holder of waste has it handled by a private or public waste collector
         or by an undertaking which carries out waste disposal and recovery operations, or recovers or disposes of it himself in accordance
         with the provisions of the Directive (Lirussi and Bizzaro, cited above, paragraph 52).
      
First, such obligations are the corollary to the prohibition on the abandonment, dumping or uncontrolled disposal of waste
         laid down in the second paragraph of Article of the Directive, a provision already found to have been breached by Ireland
         in paragraph of the present judgment (see Case C-1/Van de Walle and Others [2004] ECR I-0000, paragraph 56). 
      
Second, the operator or owner of an illegal tip must be regarded as the holder of waste for the purposes of Article of the
         Directive, so that this provision imposes on the Member State concerned the obligation to take, in his regard, the steps necessary
         to ensure that that waste is handed over to a private or public waste collector or a waste disposal undertaking, unless it
         is possible for the operator or owner himself to recover or dispose of the waste (see, in particular, San Rocco, paragraph 108, the judgment of September in Case C-383/Commission v Italy, not published in the ECR, paragraphs 40, and 44, and the judgment of November in Case C-447/Commission v Italy, not published in the ECR, paragraphs 27, and 30).
      
The Court has held, furthermore, that such an obligation is not satisfied where a Member State confines itself to ordering
         the sequestration of the illegal tip and prosecuting the operator of the tip (San Rocco, paragraph 109).
      
In the present case it is clear that, as the Commission rightly submits, on the date upon which the period set in the reasoned opinion expired, Ireland had not complied with its obligation to ensure a correct implementation of Article of
         the Directive.
      
As is clear from paragraphs and of this judgment, it is proved that, as at that date, Ireland was generally and persistently
         failing to fulfil its obligation to ensure a correct implementation of Article of the Directive, by allowing undertakings
         or establishments lacking the permit prescribed by that provision to pursue waste disposal activities, and not ensuring that
         those activities were actually brought to an end and punished.
      
It may accordingly be deduced from the finding set out in the preceding paragraph that Ireland has failed to ensure that holders
         of waste comply with the obligation owed by them to have waste handled by a private or public waste collector or by an undertaking
         which carries out the operations listed in Annex II A or Annex II B to the Directive, or to recover or dispose of it themselves
         in accordance with the provisions of the Directive.
      
Furthermore, it is apparent from the findings made in paragraphs 60, 89, and of this judgment that, on the date upon
         which the period set in the reasoned opinion expired, Ireland had failed in the various specific cases in question to
         comply with the obligation recalled in paragraph of this judgment.
      
The Commission’s claim alleging breach of Article of the Directive must accordingly be upheld.
 Breach of Articles and of the Directive
–       Arguments of the parties
In the Commission’s submission, the failure to comply with Articles and of the Directive inevitably entails infringement
         of Article thereof, which provides that undertakings or establishments which carry out the operations referred to in Articles
         and are to be subject to periodic inspections, and of Article of the Directive, relating to the keeping of records
         by those operators.
      
Ireland contends that it has not infringed Articles and of the Directive. It also denies that it has failed to fulfil
         its obligation to introduce periodic inspections. Section of the Act transposes Article of the Directive correctly
         and nothing in the latter provision indicates that the inspections required can be carried out only in respect of operators
         holding a permit. Nor is there an automatic link between the issue of permits and the keeping of records that is required
         by Article of the Directive.
      
–       Findings of the Court
According to Article of the Directive, the appropriate periodic inspections that that provision requires must cover in
         particular establishments or undertakings which carry out the operations referred to in Articles and of the Directive.
         In addition, as is apparent in particular from paragraph of this judgment, such establishments or undertakings must, by
         virtue of the latter two provisions, obtain in advance an individual permit containing a number of requirements and conditions.
      
It is clear that, if such permits are not granted and, therefore, no requirements and conditions are laid down by a permit
         with regard to a given undertaking or establishment, the inspections of the latter which would be carried out cannot, by definition,
         meet the requirements of Article of the Directive. A fundamental aim of the inspections prescribed by that provision is,
         obviously, to check that the requirements and conditions laid down in permits issued in accordance with Articles and of the Directive are complied with.
      
The same holds for records kept by the establishments or undertakings referred to by the latter provisions, which, as Article
         of the Directive specifies, must indicate in particular the quantities and nature of the waste or also its treatment method.
         Such particulars are intended in particular to enable the inspecting authority to check that the requirements and conditions
         that are laid down in permits issued in accordance with the Directive are complied with, which, as Article of the Directive
         itself states, must cover the types and quantities of waste and its treatment method. 
      
Here, it is apparent from paragraph of this judgment that, as at the date upon which the two-month period set in the reasoned opinion expired, Ireland was generally and persistently not meeting its obligation to ensure a correct implementation
         of Articles and of the Directive. It follows that Ireland was failing, to a corresponding extent, to fulfil its obligation
         to ensure a correct implementation of Articles and of the Directive.
      
It follows from the foregoing that the Commission’s claim alleging breach of the latter provisions is well founded.
 Breach of Article EC
The Commission further requests the Court to declare that Ireland has failed to comply with the obligations which it has pursuant
         to Article EC by not responding to its letter of September seeking observations on Complaint 1999/4478.
      
Ireland does not deny that it has failed to fulfil its obligations resulting from that provision.
The Member States are under a duty, by virtue of Article EC, to facilitate the achievement of the Commission’s tasks, which
         consist in particular, in accordance with Article EC, in ensuring that the measures taken by the institutions pursuant
         to the Treaty are applied (see, in particular, Case C-33/Commission v Italy [1991] ECR I-5987, paragraph 18).
      
It follows that the Member States are required to cooperate in good faith with the inquiries of the Commission pursuant to
         Article EC, and to provide the Commission with all the information requested for that purpose (Case 192/Commission v Greece [1985] ECR 3967, paragraph 19, and Case C-82/Commission v Italy [2004] ECR I-0000, paragraph 15).
      
Accordingly, the Commission’s claim alleging breach of Article EC must be upheld.
Having regard to all of the foregoing, it must be held that:
–       by failing to take all the measures necessary to ensure a correct implementation of the provisions of Articles 4, 5, 8, 9,
         10, 12, and of the Directive, Ireland has failed to comply with its obligations under those provisions;
      
–       by failing to respond to a request for information dated September in relation to waste operations at Fermoy, County
         Cork, Ireland has failed to fulfil the obligations which it has pursuant to Article EC.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and Ireland has been unsuccessful,
         the latter must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by failing to take all the measures necessary to ensure a correct implementation of the provisions of Articles
            4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 12, and of Council Directive 75/442/EEC of July on waste, as amended by Council Directive 91/156/EEC
            of March 1991, Ireland has failed to comply with its obligations under those provisions;
2.      Declares that, by failing to respond to a request for information dated September in relation to waste operations
            at Fermoy, County Cork, Ireland has failed to fulfil the obligations which it has pursuant to Article EC;
3.      Orders Ireland to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 