
Avis juridique important
|
61993O0257(01)
Order of the President of the Court of July 1993.  -  Léon Van Parijs NV and others v Council of the European Communities and Commission of the European Communities.  -  Bananas - Common organization of the market - Application for interim measures - Inadmissibility.  -  Case C-257/R.  
European Court reports Page I-Summary
Parties
Grounds
Decision on costs
Operative part
Keywords
++++Applications for interim measures ° Conditions of admissibility ° Main action dismissed as inadmissible  (EEC Treaty, Arts and 186; Rules of Procedure of the Court, Art. 83(1))  
Summary
Where the main action to which an application for interim measures attaches is dismissed as inadmissible, the latter application is itself inadmissible. 
Parties
In Case C-257/R,  1. Leon Van Parijs, a company governed by Belgian law, established in Antwerp (Belgium),  2. International Fruit Importers NV, a company governed by Belgian law, established in Schoten (Belgium),  3. Bananic International, a company governed by Belgian law, established in Sint-Niklaas (Belgium),  4. International Fruchtimport Gesellschaft Weichert & Co., a company governed by Belgian law, established in Sint-Niklaas (Belgium),  5. Velleman & Tas, a company governed by Netherlands law, established in Rotterdam (the Netherlands),  6. Banana Marketing Belgium, a company governed by Belgian law, established in Antwerp (Belgium),  7. Jan Van Den Brink, a company governed by Netherlands law, established in Rotterdam (the Netherlands),  represented by P. Vlaemminck and J. Holmens, of the Ghent Bar (Belgium), with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Chambers of R. Diederich, Rue Zithe,  applicants,  v  Council of the European Communities, represented by Mr Jacqué, Director of the Legal Service, Mr Brautigam and Mr Huber, Legal Advisers, and Mr Lo Monaco, of its Legal Service, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of X. Herlin, Manager of the Legal Directorate of the European Investment Bank, Boulevard Konrad Adenauer,  and  The European Communities, represented by the Council of the European Communities and by the Commission of the European Communities, itself represented by P. Gilsdorf, Principal Legal Adviser, and T. Van Rijn, of its Legal Service, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of Nicola Annecchino, of its Legal Service, Wagner Centre, Kirchberg,  defendants,  APPLICATION for interim measures seeking inter alia suspension of operation of certain provisions of Council Regulation (EEC) No 404/of February on the common organization of the market in bananas (OJ L 47, p. 1),  THE PRESIDENT OF THE COURT  makes the following  Order  
Grounds
By application lodged at the Court Registry on April 1993, Leon Van Parijs and six other companies in the banana sector brought an action under the second paragraph of Article of the EEC Treaty for the annulment of certain provisions of Council Regulation (EEC) No 404/of February on the common organization of the market in bananas (OJ L 47, p. 1) and under Article and the second paragraph of Article of the Treaty for an order requiring the European Economic Community to make good the damage caused by the adoption of that regulation.  By a separate document lodged at the Court Registry on June 1993, those undertakings also applied under Articles and of the EEC Treaty for the adoption of interim measures, first, to suspend the operation of Articles and of the aforementioned regulation, and secondly, to enable them to recover the share of the market held by them before July 1993.  The Council and the Commission submitted their observations regarding the application for interim measures on June 1993.  In accordance with Article 83(1) of the Rules of Procedure, an application to suspend the operation of any measure adopted by an institution or for the adoption of any other interim measures is admissible only if proceedings are brought before the Court in which the applicant is challenging the measure in respect of which suspension of operation is sought, or in a case to which the interim measures relate. An application to suspend the operation of a measure or for the adoption of interim measures cannot therefore be granted where the main action to which the application for interim measures attaches is inadmissible.  In this case, the Court has by order of June dismissed the main action as inadmissible to the extent that it seeks the annulment of Regulation No 404/but has allowed it to proceed in so far as it seeks compensation from the Commission of the European Communities in respect of the damage caused by the adoption of that regulation.  However, since the application for interim measures attaches solely to the part of the action seeking the annulment of the regulation in question, it must likewise be dismissed as inadmissible.  
Decision on costs
Costs  Since the action is allowed to proceed in so far as it is based on Articles and of the Treaty, the costs must be reserved.  
Operative part
On those grounds,  THE PRESIDENT OF THE COURT  hereby orders:  1. The application for interim measures is dismissed as inadmissible.  2. The costs are reserved.  Luxembourg, July 1993.  
Top  
 