
Case C-271/European Commission
v
Republic of Poland
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Free movement of capital – Scope – Open pension funds – Limitation on the investment of capital assets outside the Member State concerned – Proportionality)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Free movement of capital – Provisions of the Treaty – Field of application – Open pension funds
(Art. EC; Council Directive 88/361, Annex I)
2.        Free movement of capital – Restrictions – Open pension funds – National legislation limiting foreign investments of those
            funds
(Arts EC and 58(1)(b) EC)
1.        Occupational pension funds operating in accordance with the principle of capitalisation engage, notwithstanding their social
         objective and the compulsory affiliation to the retirement scheme to which they belong, in economic activity. That is the
         case in respect of open pension funds, the assets of which are managed and invested by separate companies, which operate for
         a fee, in the form of a joint-stock company. The prudential supervision of those funds and companies by the public authorities
         and the guarantee made by the State to cover any deficits in those funds is not such as to call into question the economic
         nature of the activities in question. 
      
In addition, even if the public nature of those resources were to be accepted in so far as they originate from the pension
         contributions collected from the employers of the workers concerned, such a fact would in itself be insufficient, in any event,
         to prevent Article EC from applying to transactions concerning those resources, as is apparent from Annex I to Directive
         88/for the implementation of Article of the Treaty (article repealed by the Treaty of Amsterdam), which provides that
         the concept of capital movements covers, inter alia, operations in respect of the assets or liabilities of Member States or
         of other public administrations and agencies.
      
(see paras 40-41)
2.        National legislation which imposes both quantitative and qualitative restrictions on open pension funds with regard to investments
         made outside national territory has a restrictive effect in relation to companies established in other Member States in that
         it constitutes an obstacle to the raising, by such companies, of capital in the Member State in question since the acquisition
         of, inter alia, shares in joint investment bodies is restricted by that legislation.
      
Such restrictions cannot be justified under Article 58(1)(b) EC because, even if the national legislation in question lays
         down the substantive content of the prudential rules applicable to those pension funds, it is not, by contrast, in any way
         whatsoever designed to prevent infringement of the laws and regulations in the field of the prudential supervision of financial
         institutions and cannot, therefore, come within the exception laid down in that article. 
      
Moreover, the restrictions at issue cannot be justified in terms of overriding reasons in the public interest. While it is
         true that the need to guarantee the stability and security of the assets administered by a pension fund, in particular by
         the adoption of prudential rules, constitutes an overriding reason relating to the public interest capable of justifying restrictions
         of the free movement of capital, such restrictions must be appropriate to the objective pursued and must not go beyond what
         is necessary to attain that objective. The difficulties of those pension funds in evaluating the risks linked to foreign investments
         cannot justify quantitative restrictions of investments in securities issued in Member States. The laws of the Member States
         concerning disclosure of information on financial products and protection of investors and consumers have, to a large extent,
         been the subject of harmonisation at EU level, thereby facilitating the creation of a common market in European capital. Likewise,
         such quantitative measures cannot be justified on the ground that it is easier for national monitoring authorities to implement
         them, even in the context of an emerging social security scheme or on the ground that some of those measures protect those
         funds from the risk of bearing additional or excessive costs, since such costs must, in any event, be taken into account by
         the investor when choosing his investments, irrespective of where they are made. 
      
A Member State that maintains in force legislative provisions imposing both quantitative and qualitative restrictions on open
         pension funds with regard to investments made outside national territory, in that they limit investments by those pension
         funds in other Member States, must therefore be found to have failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC.
      
(see paras 51-52, 56-58, 65-67, 69-71, 73, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
December (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Free movement of capital – Scope – Open pension funds – Limitation on the investment of capital assets outside the Member State concerned – Proportionality)
In Case C‑271/09,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on July 2009,
European Commission, represented by E. Montaguti and K. Herrmann, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Republic of Poland, represented by M. Dowgielewicz, M. Szpunar, M. Jarosz and P. Kucharski, acting as Agents,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, R. Silva de Lapuerta, E. Juhász, T. von Danwitz and D. Šváby (Rapporteur),
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: N. Jääskinen,
Registrar: K. Malaček, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on December 2010,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 2011,
gives the following
Judgment
By its action the Commission of the European Communities seeks a declaration by the Court that, by maintaining in force Articles
         143, 136(3) and 136a(2) of the Law of August on the organisation and operation of pension funds (Ustawa o organizacji
         i funkcjonowaniu funduszy emerytalnych), as amended (Dz. U. 2004, No 159, heading 1667) (‘the Law on pension funds’), which
         limit foreign investments by Polish open pension funds (‘OPFs’), the Republic of Poland has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under Article EC.
      
 Legal context
 European Union (‘EU’) legislation
 Directive 88/361/EEC
The introductory section of Annex I to Council Directive 88/361/EEC of June for the implementation of Article of
         the Treaty [article repealed by the Treaty of Amsterdam] (OJ L 178, p. 5), which is entitled ‘Nomenclature of the capital
         movements referred to in Article of the Directive’, states:
      
‘…
The capital movements listed in this Nomenclature are taken to cover:
…
–      operations carried out by any natural or legal person [as defined by national legislation], including operations in respect
         of the assets or liabilities of Member States or of other public administrations and agencies, subject to the provisions of
         Article 68(3) of the Treaty,
      
…’
 Directive 2003/41/EC
Article 18(5) and (6) of Directive 2003/41/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of June on the activities
         and supervision of institutions for occupational retirement provision (OJ L 235, p. 10) provides:
      
‘5.      In accordance with the provisions of paragraphs to 4, Member States may, for the institutions located in their territories,
         lay down more detailed rules, including quantitative rules, provided they are prudentially justified, to reflect the total
         range of pension schemes operated by these institutions.
      
In particular, Member States may apply investment provisions similar to those of Directive 2002/83/EC.
However, Member States shall not prevent institutions from:
…
(b)      investing up to 30% of the assets covering technical provisions in assets denominated in currencies other than those in which
         the liabilities are expressed;
      
…
6.      Paragraph shall not preclude the right for Member States to require the application to institutions located in their territory
         of more stringent investment rules also on an individual basis provided they are prudentially justified, in particular in
         the light of the liabilities entered into by the institution.’
      
 National legislation
Subject to the adjustments linked to the transitional schemes applicable to persons born before January and to persons
         born between January and December 1968, the retirement pension scheme which entered into force in Poland on January
         pursuant to the Law of October on the social security scheme (Ustawa o systemie ubezpieczeń społecznych), as
         amended (Dz. U. 2007, No 11, heading 74) is based on three pillars: 
      
–        The first pillar, a compulsory scheme, is based on the redistribution principle. The pensions are managed and paid by the
         Zakład Ubezpieczeń Społecznych (Social Security Institution) (‘the ZUS’), a public body with the financial resources of the
         Fundusz Ubezpieczeń Społecznych (Social Insurance Fund).
      
–        The second pillar, also a compulsory scheme, is based on the capitalisation principle. It consists of the OPFs, of which there
         are currently fourteen.
      
–        The third pillar, an optional scheme, consists of voluntary supplementary savings mechanisms. It is governed by the Law of
         April on individual retirement accounts (Ustawa o indywidualnych kontach emerytalnych) (Dz. U. No 116, heading 1205).
      
In accordance with Article 3(1)(2) of the Law of October on the social security scheme, as amended, the OPFs are defined
         in accordance with the provisions of the Law on pension funds.
      
Under Article of the Law on pension funds, the purpose of an OPF is to accumulate and invest financial resources with a
         view to repaying them to its members after they have reached retirement age.
      
Article of that Law states that an OPF is a legal person formed as a foundation, the assets of which are separate from those
         of the company which created it, which manages it and which represents it exclusively in its relations with third parties,
         that is to say, the Powszechne Towarzystwo Emerytalne (‘the PTE’). In accordance with Article of that Law, that management
         company operates exclusively in the form of a joint-stock company and, under Article of that Law, for a fee. A PTE may
         manage only one single OPF.
      
Contributors are free to choose their OPFs, which are supplied by the ZUS by means of a transfer of a third of the retirement
         contributions pertaining to those contributors paid under the first pillar of the retirement pension scheme. 
      
Pursuant to Article of the Law on pension funds, the Treasury guarantees to cover deficits in OPFs in a situation where,
         in accordance with Article 175(1) of that Law, over a period of months, the return on the investment is lower than the
         minimum return required, that is to say, a return that is 50% lower than the average weighted return on all of the OPFs for
         the same period, or percentage points of that average, based on the lowest value, if neither the OPF in question nor the
         guarantee fund, to which the OPFs contribute pursuant to Chapter of that Law, has the resources necessary to do so.
      
Articles to of the Law on pension funds define the method of financing the activities of the OPFs. Under those provisions,
         such funds may derive remuneration by taking a percentage of the contributions paid, before their conversion into accounting
         units and up to a limit of 3.5% thereof, and by charging fees for the management of the fund by the PTE, in which connection
         the amount of those fees is to be based on the value of the assets and may not exceed the limits laid down in Article 136a(2)
         of that Law.
      
For the purposes of determining the value of the assets on the basis of which the amount of those fees is defined, Article
         136(3) of the Law on pension funds provides:
      
‘In determining the value of the net assets managed by the fund, referred to in paragraphs and 2a, account shall not be
         taken of the value of the investments referred to in Article 141(1)(8) or of investments in shares issued by joint investment
         bodies domiciled abroad, referred to in Article 143(1).’
      
Article 136a of the Law on pension funds states:
      
‘1.      The costs related to the safeguarding of assets and the implementation and execution of transactions for the acquisition or
         sale of fund assets, which are equivalent to the fees due to the clearing houses whose intermediation the fund is obliged
         to use in accordance with specific provisions and which form part of the remuneration of the depositary, shall be deducted
         from the fund assets according to the table of commissions and fees currently in force for the clearing house concerned.
      
2.      The costs referred to in paragraph 1, being equivalent to the fees due to foreign clearing houses, shall be deducted from
         the fund assets up to the corresponding amounts due to the national clearing houses referred to in paragraph 1.’
      
Articles to of the Law on pension funds concern the investment activities of the OPFs.
      
Article of that Law provides that the OPFs must invest their assets in accordance with the provisions of that Law, by
         seeking to maximise both security and return on the investments.
      
Article 141(1) of the Law on pension funds is worded as follows:
      
‘1.      …, the fund assets may be invested only in the following categories of instruments:
(1)      bonds, bills and other securities issued by the Treasury or the National Bank of Poland, and loans and credits extended to
         those entities;
      
(2)      bonds and other debt securities based on cash payments which are guaranteed or backed by the Treasury or the National Bank
         of Poland, and deposits, credits and loans guaranteed or backed by those bodies;
      
(3)      bank deposits and bank securities in Polish currency;
(3a)      bank deposits and bank securities, in the currency of a Member State of the [Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
         (OECD)] or of another State with which the Republic of Poland has concluded a reciprocal investment promotion and protection
         agreement, in so far as those currencies may be acquired solely for settlement of the current liabilities of the fund;
      
(4)      shares in companies listed on a regulated stock market, as well as pre-emptive rights, stock options and bonds convertible
         into shares in companies listed on a regulated stock market;
      
(5)      shares in companies listed on a regulated OTC [over-the counter] market or dematerialised in accordance with the Law of July
         on trading in financial instruments, shares in companies which are not tradable on a regulated market, as well as pre-emptive
         rights, stock options and bonds convertible into shares in companies which are listed on the regulated OTC market or dematerialised,
         but not listed on the regulated market;
      
(6)      National Investment Fund shares;
(7)      investment certificates issued by closed investment funds;
(8)      shares sold by open investment funds or specialised open investment funds;
(9)      bonds and other debt securities issued by local authorities, groups of local authorities or the City of Warsaw, dematerialised
         in accordance with the Law referred to in point 5;
      
(10)      instruments, other than bonds and other dematerialised debt securities, issued by local authorities, groups of local authorities
         or the City of Warsaw;
      
(10a) income bonds referred to in the Law of June on bonds (Dz. U. 2001, No 120, heading 1300; Dz. U. 2002, No 216, heading
         1824; and Dz. U. 2003, No 217, heading 2124);
      
(11)      bonds dematerialised in accordance with the Law referred to in point and issued by entities other than local authorities,
         groups of local authorities or the City of Warsaw, which have been guaranteed in the amount corresponding to their full face
         value and any interest;
      
(12)      instruments other than dematerialised bonds and other debt securities issued by entities other than local authorities, groups
         of local authorities or the City of Warsaw, which have been guaranteed in the amount corresponding to their full face value
         and any interest;
      
(13)      bonds and other debt securities issued by publicly-owned companies, other than the securities referred to in points and
         12;
      
(13a) bonds and other debt securities dematerialised in accordance with the Law referred to in point 5, other than those referred
         to in points and 11;
      
(13b) mortgage bonds;
(13c) certificates of deposit within the meaning of the Law of July on trading in financial instruments, tradable on a regulated
         market in Poland.
      
…’
Article of the Law on pension funds defines the categories of foreign instruments in which the OPFs may invest their assets.
         That article reads as follows:
      
‘1.      On the basis of a general permit issued by order of the Minister responsible for financial institutions, and on the conditions
         laid down therein, the assets of an [OPF] my be invested abroad in securities issued by companies listed on the main stock
         markets of the OECD Member States or of other States as may be specified in the permit, as well as in treasury bonds or securities
         issued by the central banks of those States and in shares issued by joint investment bodies domiciled in those States, if
         those bodies offer those shares to the general public and take them back at the investor’s request.
      
2.      The total value of investments made
(1)      by an [OPF] in instruments falling under the categories referred to in paragraph may not exceed 5% of the value of the fund
         assets.
      
…’
This last provision is supplemented by Article of the Decree of the Minister for Finance of December introducing
         general authorisation for investments of pension funds outside national borders (Rozporządzenie Ministra Finansów w sprawie
         ogólnego zezwolenia na lokowanie aktywów funduszy emerytalnych poza granicami kraju), as amended (Dz. U. No 229, heading 2286)
         (‘the Decree of the Minister for Finance’), which provides, inter alia, in its paragraph 3, that investments in foreign assets
         must be accompanied by an evaluation of the quality of the investment conducted by a specialist rating agency recognised on
         an international capital market, which will assess the investment risk in relation to the relevant securities and the ability
         of the issuer of those securities to honour the commitments made upon maturity.
      
 Pre-litigation procedure
On October 2007, the Commission sent to the Republic of Poland a letter of formal notice concerning a failure to fulfil
         obligations under Article EC. In that letter, the Commission argued that the provisions of Article of the Law on pension
         funds, read in conjunction with Article 141, as well as Article 136(3) and Article 136a(2) of that Law, restricted foreign
         investments by the OPFs and, consequently, amounted to a breach of the fundamental freedom of movement of capital under Article
         EC.
      
By letter of December 2007, the Republic of Poland responded to the formal complaints raised by the Commission, claiming
         that Article EC was not applicable to the OPFs.
      
On September 2008, the Commission sent to the Republic of Poland a reasoned opinion in which it rejected the arguments
         put forward by the Polish authorities concerning the non-applicability of Article EC to the investment activity of the
         OPFs and maintained the complaint alleging failure to fulfil obligations under Article EC by reason of the restriction
         imposed on investments by Article of the Law on pension funds, read in conjunction with Article thereof, as well as
         by Article 136(3) and Article 136a(2) of that Law.
      
On November 2008, in its response to the Commission’s reasoned opinion, the Republic of Poland invoked, in addition to
         the non-applicability of Article EC to the investment activity of the OPFs, the need to protect the public interest by
         safeguarding the financial stability of the social security system, as justification for the restrictions imposed on investments
         by those funds.
      
In the light of that response received from the Republic of Poland, the Commission decided to bring the present action.
      
 The action
 Admissibility
In its rejoinder, the Republic of Poland asks the Court to rule of its own motion on the admissibility of the present action.
      
The Republic of Poland points out, first of all, that it disagrees with the Commission as regards the assessment of the factual
         aspects of the case and of the elements which purportedly constitute an infringement of the principle of the free movement
         of capital. By failing to establish correctly and fully the principles and the legal regime applicable to the OPFs, as well
         as their nature, the Commission, it argues, failed to define precisely the subject-matter of the dispute in the course of
         the pre-litigation procedure and infringed Article 38(1)(c) of the Court’s Rules of Procedure. Second, the Republic of Poland
         claims that the Commission, in its reply, invoked the provisions of Article 1(3) of the Decree of the Polish Minister for
         Finance, which amounts to relying, at this advanced stage of the proceedings concerning a failure on the part of the Republic
         of Poland to fulfil its obligations, on a new ground of complaint, which must be declared inadmissible.
      
In that regard, it should be borne in mind that the Court may, of its own motion, examine whether the conditions laid down
         in Article EC for bringing an action for failure to fulfil obligations are satisfied (Case C‑439/Commission v Italy [2002] ECR I‑305, paragraph 8; Case C‑98/Commission v United Kingdom [2006] ECR I‑4003, paragraph 16; and Case C‑343/Commission v Czech Republic [2010] ECR I‑275, paragraph 25).
      
In this context, it must be held, first of all, that the disagreement between the Commission and the Republic of Poland with
         regard to the assessment of the factual and legal aspects of the alleged infringement cannot lead to the conclusion that there
         has been a failure to define the subject-matter of the present action. On the contrary, such a disagreement lasting beyond
         the time-limit laid down by the Commission in its reasoned opinion constitutes the very justification for bringing an action
         before the Court under Article EC.
      
Furthermore, it must be stated that, as required by Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union
         and by Article 38(1)(c) of the Court’s Rules of Procedure, the Commission, in the form of order sought in the application
         initiating the proceedings, stated clearly that the complaint directed at the Republic of Poland concerned the non-conformity
         with Article EC of Articles 143, 136(3) and 136a(2) of the Law on pension funds, and thus defined in sufficient detail
         the subject-matter of the action.
      
So far as concerns, second, the reliance on Article 1(3) of the Decree of the Polish Minister for Finance, it is apparent
         from the file submitted to the Court that that decree is a measure for the application of Article of the Law on pension
         funds, which is the subject of the present action. Consequently, the fact that the Commission detailed, in its reply, a complaint
         which it had already set out, in more general terms, in the application did not alter the subject-matter of the alleged infringement,
         and has thus had no effect on the scope of the proceedings (see, to that effect, Case C‑543/Commission v Portugal [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraphs 20, and 23, and the case-law cited).
      
In the light of the foregoing, it must be held that the present action is admissible.
      
 The alleged failure to fulfil obligations
 Preliminary observations
At the hearing, the Commission, on being asked by the Court to specify the scope of the alleged failure to fulfil obligations,
         stated that it was limiting that failure exclusively to the restriction of the movement of capital between Member States.
      
 Applicability of Article EC 
–       Arguments of the parties
The Commission submits that Article EC applies to the investment activities of the OPFs in the light of the Court’s case-law
         concerning the nomenclature annexed to Directive 88/361.
      
The Commission also points out that, in the restructuring of their social security systems, Member States must comply with
         EU law, which means, in the present case, that, as regards the choice in respect of the investment of their assets, the OPFs
         must be able to benefit from the free movement of capital. In that regard, Article 137(4) EC cannot validly be relied on in
         so far as it concerns only the new provisions adopted pursuant to that article and by no means precludes the obligation on
         Member States to comply with the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the EC Treaty.
      
According to the Commission, the activity at issue cannot be excluded from the scope of Article EC on the ground that the
         OPFs should be treated as entities governed by public law substituting themselves for the State and, therefore, not engaging
         in economic activity. In view of their characteristics, the OPFs should, it argues, be considered to be operating according
         to the principle of capitalisation and on the basis of principles unrelated to the redistribution scheme as it prevails under
         the first pillar managed by the ZUS. Consequently, the OPFs should be classified as undertakings that engage in economic activity.
      
In addition, the Commission rejects the view that Article EC is such as to exclude the Polish legislation at issue from
         the scope of Article EC on the ground that the real owner of the resources derived from the contributions is the State.
         Those contributions, the Commission argues, originate entirely from the payments made by employees and entitle the latter,
         if they fulfil the requirements laid down by the legislation, to payment of the accumulated capital.
      
Basing itself on Article 137(4) EC, the non-economic nature of the activity at issue and Article EC, the Republic of Poland
         maintains that the legislation concerning the OPFs does not come within the scope of application of EU law and that, consequently,
         Article EC does not apply to the activity here at issue.
      
So far as concerns, first of all, Article 137(4) EC, the Republic of Poland argues that it alone is competent to define the
         principles governing the operation of the Polish compulsory social security scheme, including the foreign investment policy
         of the OPFs and the fees relating to those investments, which have the objective of safeguarding the financial equilibrium
         of its retirement pension scheme.
      
Second, with regard to the non-economic nature of the activity of the OPFs, the Republic of Poland argues that the freedoms
         set out in the Treaty, in particular in Article EC, do not apply to fields which, like that of social security at issue
         in the present case, concern, by their very nature, State prerogatives and do not directly have a commercial dimension. The
         status of the OPFs as entities governed by public law which do not operate on a profit-making basis and their participation
         in the compulsory retirement pension scheme ought, it contends, to lead to the conclusion that the OPFs fulfil an exclusively
         social function.
      
Lastly, as regards Article EC, the Republic of Poland maintains that, under that article, Member States may choose freely
         how to exercise the prerogatives vested in them by virtue of their ownership of public resources in order to comply with the
         duties incumbent on them. According to the Republic of Poland, the sums at issue constitute public resources, an assertion
         which has been confirmed by the Polish courts.
      
–       Findings of the Court
Since it is common ground that the investment transactions open to the OPFs constitute ‘movements of capital’ within the meaning
         of Article EC, it is necessary to examine the arguments put forward by the Republic of Poland with a view to demonstrating
         that those transactions do not, however, come within the scope of that provision.
      
With regard, first of all, to the argument that Article EC is not intended to apply to activities involving the investment
         of OPF assets on the ground that those activities are not economic in nature, it must be borne in mind that the Court has
         already held that occupational pension funds operating in accordance with the principle of capitalisation engage, notwithstanding
         their social objective and the compulsory affiliation to the second pillar for the retirement scheme to which they belong,
         in economic activity (see Case C‑67/Albany [1999] ECR I‑5751, paragraphs to 87). In accordance with Articles 2, 3, and of the Law on pension funds, the scheme
         in question is based on the capitalisation principle and the assets of the OPFs are managed and invested by PTEs, which operate
         for a fee, in the form of a joint-stock company. The evidence, relied on by the Republic of Poland, concerning the prudential
         supervision of the OPFs and PTEs by the public authorities and the guarantee made by the State to cover any deficits in the
         OPFs is not such as to call into question the economic nature of the activities in question. 
      
So far as concerns the public or private nature of the resources allocated to the OPFs and managed by the PTEs, even if the
         public nature of those resources were to be accepted, as maintained by the Republic of Poland, notwithstanding the fact that
         they originate from the pension contributions collected from the employers of the workers concerned, such a fact would in
         itself be insufficient, in any event, to exclude from the scope of Article EC transactions concerning those resources,
         as is apparent from Annex I to Directive 88/361, which provides that the concept of ‘capital movements’ covers, inter alia,
         ‘operations in respect of the assets or liabilities of Member States or of other public administrations and agencies’.
      
Neither the allegedly non-economic nature of the investment activities of the OPFs nor the allegedly public nature of the
         funds that supply them can therefore preclude application of Article EC.
      
As regards, second, the argument of the Republic of Poland that application of Article EC is, in the present case, excluded
         on the basis of Article 137(4) EC, which prohibits infringement of the right of Member States to define the fundamental principles
         of their social security systems and states that the financial equilibrium thereof must not be significantly affected, it
         must be noted that those prohibitions thus laid down apply in respect of ‘provisions adopted pursuant to [that] article’ (see,
         to that effect, Case C‑343/Commission v Czech Republic, paragraphs and 67). However, that is not the case with regard to Article EC.
      
Third, with regard to the claims based on Article EC, which states that ‘[the] Treaty shall in no way prejudice the rules
         in Member States governing the system of property ownership’, it must be noted that, in accordance with settled case-law,
         that article does not have the effect of exempting the Member States’ systems of property ownership from the fundamental rules
         of the Treaty (see Case C‑171/Commission v Portugal [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and the case-law cited). Consequently, if the sums held by the OPFs and invested by the PTEs
         must be considered to be public resources, Article EC cannot relieve the Republic of Poland of its duty to comply with
         the rules relating to the free movement of capital (see, by analogy, Case C‑367/Commission v Portugal [2002] ECR I‑4731, paragraph 48), any more than it can justify a restriction on those rules (see, to that effect, Case C‑171/Commission v Portugal, paragraph and case-law cited). 
      
It must therefore be concluded that the provisions of the Law on pension funds which are here in issue come within the scope
         of Article EC.
      
 The restrictions on the free movement of capital and their justification
–       Arguments of the parties
The Commission maintains that the provisions at issue in the present action constitute restrictions on movements of capital
         between Members States within the meaning of Article EC, in so far as they are liable to deter, and do deter, investments
         of the OPFs from being made outside the Republic of Poland in other Member States, a fact which the Republic of Poland does
         not dispute and which is evidenced by the low levels of foreign investments made by the OPFs (1.1%).
      
Without calling into question the need to guarantee the security of the funds accumulated in the retirement accounts of the
         OPFs, the Commission takes the view that such restrictions cannot be justified either under Article 58(1)(b) EC or by overriding
         reasons in the public interest constituted by the maintenance of the financial equilibrium of the OPFs and the protection
         of the interests of their members, on account of their discriminatory character, and that they are, in any event, disproportionate.
      
The Commission also rejects the argument that Article 86(2) EC permits derogation, in the present case, from the principle
         of the free movement of capital. In that regard, while recognising that that article may constitute justification for a restriction
         on the free movement of capital, and that the OPFs may be classified as services of general economic interest, the Commission
         notes, first, that Article 86(2) EC requires that the operation of those services be entrusted to entities which have the
         status of undertakings, a status that the Republic of Poland excludes with regard to the OPFs. The Commission considers, second,
         that the OPFs are not required by the State to provide such services. Third, and in any event, the Commission notes that the
         application of the rules relating to the free movement of capital do not preclude the fulfilment of the tasks delegated to
         the OPFs and that the restrictions in dispute cannot be regarded as being necessary and proportionate to ensure that those
         tasks are carried out. The Commission takes the view, fourthly, that those restrictions affect the development of trade in
         a manner which runs counter to the interests of the European Union by significantly limiting competition and by discouraging
         and deterring the OPFs from operating more effectively. 
      
The Republic of Poland submits that the restrictions at issue are justified, first, pursuant to Article 58(1)(b) EC and, second,
         by an overriding reason in the public interest relating, essentially, to the need to safeguard the stability and security
         of the resources transferred to the OPFs. In the third place, the Republic of Poland maintains that the restrictions at issue
         are justified pursuant to Article 86(2) EC.
      
–       Findings of the Court
It is necessary to examine, first of all, whether the national provisions at issue result in a restriction on the free movement
         of capital between Member States which is, in principle, prohibited by Article 56(1) EC.
      
It is common ground that Article of the Law on pension funds, first, limits foreign investments by the OPFs to 5% of the
         value of the assets of the OPF concerned, and, second, sets out a list of possible foreign investments which is less extensive
         than that for possible investments within Poland pursuant to Article 141(1) of that Law. In doing so, Article of the Law
         on pension funds imposes both quantitative and qualitative restrictions on OPFs with regard to investments made outside national
         territory, and in particular in other Member States.
      
Such a provision also has a restrictive effect in relation to companies established in other Member States in that it constitutes
         an obstacle to the raising, by such companies, of capital in Poland since the acquisition of, inter alia, shares in joint
         investment bodies is restricted (see, by analogy, Case C‑242/Weidert and Paulus [2004] ECR I‑7379, paragraph 14).
      
Likewise, it is apparent from Article 136(3) of the Law on pension funds that the value of the investments made by an OPF
         in shares issued by joint investment bodies domiciled outside Poland and referred to in Article 143(1) of that Law must not
         be taken into account in determining the value of the net assets managed by the fund concerned, the value of which forms the
         basis for determining the management costs levied by the PTEs as payment. Consequently, a provision such as Article 136(3)
         of that Law has the effect of deterring OPFs from investing their assets in shares issued by joint investment bodies domiciled
         in other Member States, by not allowing them to deduct management fees in respect of those assets. Furthermore, in conjunction
         with Article of the Law on pension funds, Article 136(3) thereof reinforces the obstacle to the raising of capital in
         Poland by those bodies.
      
Lastly, Article 136a(2) of the Law on pension funds states that costs equivalent to the fees due to foreign clearing houses
         may be covered only to the extent of the corresponding amounts due to national clearing houses. That factor is also liable
         to deter OPFs from investing their assets in other Member States since, if costs such as those at issue that are incurred
         outside Poland prove to be greater than those incurred within Poland, they cannot be fully covered, in contrast to the position
         in respect of similar costs generated by national clearing houses.
      
Next, as regards justification for the restrictions on free movement of the capital in question, the Court has repeatedly
         held that the free movement of capital may be limited by national legislation only if this is justified by one of the reasons
         mentioned in Article EC or by overriding reasons in the public interest within the meaning of the Court’s case-law (see,
         to that effect, judgment of February in Case C‑274/Commission v Spain, paragraph and the case-law cited). Moreover, pursuant to Article 86(2) EC, ‘undertakings entrusted with the operation
         of services of general economic interest … shall be subject to the rules contained in this Treaty, … in so far as the application
         of such rules does not obstruct the performance, in law or in fact, of the particular tasks assigned to them [and on condition
         that the] development of trade [is] not … affected to such an extent as would be contrary to the interests of the [European
         Union]’. 
      
With regard, first of all, to the argument that the restrictions in question are justified under Article 58(1)(b) EC, which
         provides that ‘Article shall be without prejudice to the right of Member States … to take all requisite measures to prevent
         infringements of national law and regulations, in particular in the field of … the prudential supervision of financial institutions’,
         suffice it to state that, while the national provisions at issue undoubtedly lay down the substantive content of the prudential
         rules applicable to the OPFs, they are not, by contrast, in any way whatsoever designed to prevent infringement of the laws
         and regulations in the field of the prudential supervision of financial institutions. Those provisions cannot, therefore,
         come within the exception laid down in that article.
      
So far as concerns, second, the alleged justification in terms of overriding reasons in the public interest, it is necessary
         to point out that the need to guarantee the stability and security of the assets administered by a pension fund, in particular
         by the adoption of prudential rules, constitutes an imperative reason of public interest which is capable of justifying restrictions
         on the free movement of capital.
      
Such restrictions must, however, be appropriate to the objective pursued and must not go beyond what is necessary to attain
         that objective (Case C‑451/ELISA [2007] ECR I‑8251, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
With regard, first of all, to the restrictions resulting from Article of the Law on pension funds, the Commission maintains
         that the requirements laid down by the national legislation in question are disproportionate in view of the objective pursued,
         since diversification of investments both geographically and by type of investment guarantees their security. In addition,
         the Commission notes that the Polish legislation in question allows foreign investments to be made only in EU and OECD Member
         States or in States with which the Republic of Poland has concluded reciprocal investment promotion and protection agreements,
         and that the risk linked to short-term foreign-exchange-rate fluctuations does not justify such restrictive measures. Lastly,
         in the view of the Commission, if the defendant Member State were to adopt strict measures, those measures would have to be
         identical for both foreign and national investments in financial instruments.
      
The Republic of Poland rejects the argument that geographic diversification of investments still constitutes an essential
         risk-reducing tool, by reason of the globalisation of financial markets. The Republic of Poland stresses the exchange risks
         linked to sharp fluctuations in the Polish złoty exchange rate and stresses the need to adopt a particularly prudent approach
         during the initial period of operation of the new Polish social security system. The Republic of Poland also notes that it
         is easier, for the Financial Market Authority, to implement quantitative restrictions than to monitor an investment policy
         based on the ‘prudent-investor rule’.
      
In that regard, it is necessary to examine whether the Republic of Poland has been able to show that the quantitative and
         qualitative restrictions imposed by Article of the Law on pension funds are appropriate for the purpose of guaranteeing
         the stability and security of the assets administered by a pension fund and that they do not go beyond what is necessary to
         attain that objective.
      
As regards the exchange risk, it is true that sharp fluctuations in the exchange rate of foreign currencies may have a significant
         impact on the return on investments made in foreign currency. However, it follows from Article 18(5)(b) of Directive 2003/that Member States must not prevent institutions for occupational retirement provision from investing up to 30% of their assets
         in assets denominated in foreign currencies and that, pursuant to Article 18(6) thereof, it is only on an individual basis
         that Member States may require the application to institutions located in their territory of investment rules that are more
         stringent than those laid down in Article 18(5) of that directive.
      
Even if those provisions do not apply ratione materiae to the investments of the OPFs, the fact nonetheless remains that the 30% rule was laid down by the EU legislature to cover
         similar situations.
      
In those circumstances, the Republic of Poland ought to have put forward, in order to justify the quantitative limit of 5%,
         which is significantly lower than the limit of 30% considered appropriate by the EU legislature, specific evidence explaining
         the reasons for imposing the quantitative limit that was adopted.
      
In so far as the Republic of Poland relies, in this respect, on the difficulties of the OPFs in evaluating the risks linked
         to foreign investments, it must be noted that this factor cannot justify quantitative restrictions on investments in securities
         issued in Member States. As the Commission has submitted, the laws of the Member States concerning disclosure of information
         on financial products and protection of investors and consumers have, to a large extent, been the subject of harmonisation
         at EU level, thereby facilitating the creation of a common market in European capital.
      
Likewise, such quantitative measures cannot be justified on the ground that it is easier for national monitoring authorities
         to implement them, even in the context of an emerging social security scheme.
      
For the same reasons as those referred to in paragraph of this judgment, qualitative restrictions cannot be justified in
         respect of investments in securities issued in Member States.
      
So far as concerns, next, the restrictions resulting from Articles 136(3) and 136a(2) of the Law on pension funds, it must
         be held that the Republic of Poland has not put forward any evidence capable of demonstrating to the requisite legal standard
         that the objective pursued by those provisions cannot be attained either without such restrictions or by means of less restrictive
         measures with regard to the freedom of the OPFs to invest in other Member States. 
      
Neither the failure to take into account the value of investments made in shares issued by joint investment bodies domiciled
         outside Poland for the purposes of determining the net assets of the fund concerned, the value of which is the basis for determining
         the management costs levied by the PTEs, nor the limit placed on the allocation of transaction costs linked to national clearing
         houses can be justified by the need, pleaded by the Republic of Poland, to protect the OPFs from the risk of bearing additional
         or excessive costs, since such costs must, in any event, be taken into account by the investor when choosing his investments,
         irrespective of where they are made.
      
Third, with regard to the arguments based on Article 86(2) EC, it must be borne in mind that, in accordance with settled case-law,
         it is incumbent upon a Member State which invokes that article to show that all the conditions for application of that provision
         are fulfilled (Case C‑160/Commission v Germany [2010] ECR I‑3713, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
While it is, admittedly, true that the OPFs are liable to be considered to be performing a task of general economic interest
         (see, by analogy, Albany, paragraphs to 111), it must nevertheless be pointed out that the Republic of Poland has failed to demonstrate to the
         requisite legal standard that the conditions for the application of that article are met. In particular, the Republic of Poland
         has not demonstrated to what extent the application of the Treaty rules, in this case those relating to the free movement
         of capital between Member States, would obstruct the attainment, in law or in fact, of the objectives pursued by the OPFs.
      
It follows that the Republic of Poland’s arguments based on Article 86(2) EC must be rejected.
      
It must, accordingly, be held that, by maintaining in force Articles 143, 136(3) and 136a(2) of the Law on pension funds,
         in that they limit investments by Polish OPFs in the other Member States, the Republic of Poland has failed to fulfil its
         obligations under Article EC.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has asked for costs to be awarded against the Republic
         of Poland, and since the latter has been unsuccessful, the Republic of Poland must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by maintaining in force Articles 143, 136(3) and 136a(2) of the Law of August on the organisation and
            operation of pension funds (Ustawa o organizacji i funkcjonowaniu funduszy emerytalnych), as amended, in that they limit investments
            by Polish open pension funds in the other Member States, the Republic of Poland has failed to fulfil its obligations under
            Article EC;
2.      Orders the Republic of Poland to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Polish.
      
Top  
 