
Case C-306/I. B.
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Cour constitutionnelle (Belgium))
(Police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters – Framework Decision 2002/584/JHA – European arrest warrant and the surrender procedures between Member States – Article – Grounds for optional non-execution – Article 4(6) – Arrest warrant issued for the purposes of execution of a sentence – Article – Guarantees to be provided by the issuing Member State – Article 5(1) – Sentence imposed in absentia – Article 5(3) – Arrest warrant issued for the purposes of criminal prosecution – Surrender subject to the condition that the requested person be returned to the Member State of execution – Joint application of Article 5(1) and Article 5(3) – Compatibility)
Summary of the Judgment
European Union – Police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters – Framework Decision on the European arrest warrant and
            the surrender procedures between Member States – Grounds for optional non-execution of the European arrest warrant  
(Council Framework Decision 2002/584, Arts 4(6) and 5(1) and (3))
Article 4(6) and 5(3) of Framework Decision 2002/on the European arrest warrant and the surrender procedures between Member
         States must be interpreted as meaning that, when the executing Member State concerned has implemented Article 5(1) and Article
         5(3) of that framework decision in its domestic legal system, the execution of a European arrest warrant issued for the purposes
         of execution of a sentence imposed in absentia within the meaning of Article 5(1) of the framework decision may be made subject to the condition that the person concerned,
         who is a national or resident of the executing Member State, should be returned to the executing Member State in order, as
         the case may be, to serve there the sentence passed against him, following a new trial arranged in his presence in the issuing
         Member State.
      
Given that the situation of a person who was sentenced in absentia and to whom it is still open to apply for a retrial is comparable to that of a person who is the subject of a European arrest
         warrant for the purposes of prosecution, there is no objective reason precluding an executing judicial authority which has
         applied Article 5(1) of Framework Decision 2002/from applying the condition contained in Article 5(3) of that framework
         decision.
      
(see paras 57, 61, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters – Framework Decision 2002/584/JHA – European arrest warrant and the surrender procedures between Member States – Article – Grounds for optional non-execution – Article 4(6) – Arrest warrant issued for the purposes of execution of a sentence – Article – Guarantees to be provided by the issuing Member State – Article 5(1) – Sentence imposed in absentia – Article 5(3) – Arrest warrant issued for the purposes of criminal prosecution – Surrender subject to the condition that the requested person be returned to the Member State of execution – Joint application of Article 5(1) and Article 5(3) – Compatibility )
In Case C-306/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EU from the Cour constitutionnelle (Belgium), made by decision of July
         2009, received at the Court on July 2009, in the proceedings concerning the execution of a European arrest warrant issued
         against
      
I.B.,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of J.‑C. Bonichot, President of the Chamber, K. Schiemann, L. Bay Larsen (Rapporteur), C. Toader and M. Berger, Judges,
Advocate General: P. Cruz Villalón,
Registrar: M.-A. Gaudissart, Head of Unit,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on May 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        I.B., by P. Huget, avocat,
–        the Belgian Government, by T. Materne, acting as Agent, assisted by J. Bourtembourg and F. Belleflamme, avocats,
–        the German Government, by J. Möller and J. Kemper, acting as Agents, 
–        the Austrian Government, by E. Riedl, acting as Agent,
–        the Polish Government, by M. Dowgielewicz, acting as Agent,
–        the Swedish Government, by A. Falk and C. Meyer-Seitz, acting as Agents,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by I. Rao, acting as Agent, 
–        the Council of the European Union, by O. Petersen and I. Gurov, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by R. Troosters and S. Grünheid, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on July 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles 3, 4(6), 5(1) and 5(3) of Council Framework
         Decision 2002/584/JHA on the European arrest warrant and the surrender procedures between Member States (OJ L 190, p. 1),
         and the validity of Articles 4(6) and 5(3) of that framework decision.
      
The reference has been made in proceedings concerning the execution, by the Tribunal de première instance de Nivelles (Court
         of First Instance, Nivelles) (Belgium) (‘the executing judicial authority’), of a European arrest warrant issued on December
         by the Tribunalul București (Regional Court of Bucharest) (Romania) (‘the Romanian issuing judicial authority’) in respect
         of I.B., a Romanian national residing in Belgium, for the purposes of execution of a four-year custodial sentence imposed
         by a judicial decision rendered in absentia.
      
 Legal framework
 European Union Law
It is apparent from the information concerning the date of entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam, published in the Official Journal of the European Communities of May (OJ L 114, p. 56), that the Kingdom of Belgium made a declaration on the basis of Article 35(2) EU by which
         it accepted the jurisdiction of the Court to give preliminary rulings in accordance with the arrangements laid down in Article
         35(3)(b) EU.
      
In accordance with Article 10(1) of Protocol No on transitional provisions, annexed to the TFEU, the powers of the Court
         of Justice of the European Union under Title VI of the Treaty on European Union concerning acts of the Union which were adopted
         before the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon are to remain the same, including where they have been accepted under
         Article 35(2) EU.
      
 Framework Decision 2002/Recitals 1, 5, and in the preamble to Framework Decision 2002/state as follows: 
      
‘(1)      According to the Conclusions of the Tampere European Council of and October …, the formal extradition procedure
         should be abolished among the Member States in respect of persons who are fleeing from justice after having been finally sentenced
         and extradition procedures should be speeded up in respect of persons suspected of having committed an offence.
      
...
(5)      The objective set for the Union to become an area of freedom, security and justice leads to abolishing extradition between
         Member States and replacing it by a system of surrender between judicial authorities. Further, the introduction of a new simplified
         system of surrender of sentenced or suspected persons for the purposes of execution or prosecution of criminal sentences makes
         it possible to remove the complexity and potential for delay inherent in the present extradition procedures. Traditional cooperation
         relations which have prevailed up till now between Member States should be replaced by a system of free movement of judicial
         decisions in criminal matters, covering both pre-sentence and final decisions, within an area of freedom, security and justice.
      
…
(10)      The mechanism of the European arrest warrant is based on a high level of confidence between Member States. Its implementation
         may be suspended only in the event of a serious and persistent breach by one of the Member States of the principles set out
         in Article 6(1) [EU], determined by the Council pursuant to Article 7(1) [EU] with the consequences set out in Article 7(2)
         [EU]. 
      
...
(12)      This Framework Decision respects fundamental rights and observes the principles recognised by Article [EU] and reflected
         in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, in particular Chapter VI thereof …
      
…’
Article of Framework Decision 2002/states:
      
‘1.      The European arrest warrant is a judicial decision issued by a Member State with a view to the arrest and surrender by another
         Member State of a requested person, for the purposes of conducting a criminal prosecution or executing a custodial sentence
         or detention order.
      
2.      Member States shall execute any European arrest warrant on the basis of the principle of mutual recognition and in accordance
         with the provisions of this Framework Decision.
      
3.      This Framework Decision shall not have the effect of modifying the obligation to respect fundamental rights and fundamental
         legal principles as enshrined in Article [EU].’
      
Article 2(1) of Framework Decision 2002/584, under the heading ‘Scope of the European Arrest Warrant’ provides:
      
‘A European arrest warrant may be issued for acts punishable by the law of the issuing Member State … or, where a sentence
         has been passed or a detention order has been made, for sentences of at least four months.’
      
Article of Framework Decision 2002/lists three ‘[g]rounds for mandatory non-execution of the European arrest warrant’.
      
Article of Framework Decision 2002/584, entitled ‘Grounds for optional non-execution of the European arrest warrant’, states,
         in seven paragraphs, what those grounds are. Article 4(6) states:
      
‘The executing judicial authority may refuse to execute the European arrest warrant:
...
(6)      if the European arrest warrant has been issued for the purposes of execution of a custodial sentence or detention order, where
         the requested person is staying in, or is a national or a resident of the executing Member State and that State undertakes
         to execute the sentence or detention order in accordance with its domestic law.’
      
Article of Framework Decision 2002/584, entitled ‘Guarantees to be given by the issuing Member State in particular cases’,
         states:
      
‘The execution of the European arrest warrant by the executing judicial authority may, by the law of the executing Member
         State, be subject to the following conditions:
      
(1)      where the European arrest warrant has been issued for the purposes of executing a sentence or a detention order imposed by
         a decision rendered in absentia and if the person concerned has not been summoned in person or otherwise informed of the date and place of the hearing which
         led to the decision rendered in absentia, surrender may be subject to the condition that the issuing judicial authority gives an assurance deemed adequate to guarantee
         the person who is the subject of the European arrest warrant that he or she will have an opportunity to apply for a retrial
         of the case in the issuing Member State and to be present at the judgment;
      
... 
(3)      where a person who is the subject of a European arrest warrant for the purposes of prosecution is a national or resident of
         the executing Member State, surrender may be subject to the condition that the person, after being heard, is returned to the
         executing Member State in order to serve there the custodial sentence or detention order passed against him in the issuing
         Member State.’
      
Article of the Framework Decision, entitled ‘Content and form of the European arrest warrant’, provides:
      
‘1.      The European arrest warrant shall contain the following information set out in accordance with the form contained in the Annex:
…
(c)      evidence of an enforceable judgment, an arrest warrant or any other enforceable judicial decision having the same effect,
         coming within the scope of Articles and 2;
      
…
(f)      the penalty imposed, if there is a final judgment, or the prescribed scale of penalties for the offence under the law of the
         issuing Member State;
      
…’
Article 15(2) of the Framework Decision provides:
      
‘If the executing judicial authority finds the information communicated by the issuing Member State to be insufficient to
         allow it to decide on surrender, it shall request that the necessary supplementary information, in particular with respect
         to Articles to and Article 8, be furnished as a matter of urgency …’
      
Article of Framework Decision 2002/provides:
      
‘Extradition requests received before January will continue to be governed by existing instruments relating to extradition.
         Requests received after that date will be governed by the rules adopted by Member States pursuant to this Framework Decision.
         However, any Member State may, at the time of the adoption of this Framework Decision by the Council, make a statement indicating
         that as executing Member State it will continue to deal with requests relating to acts committed before a date which it specifies
         in accordance with the extradition system applicable before January 2004. The date in question may not be later than August
         2002. The said statement will be published in the Official Journal of the European Communities. It may be withdrawn at any
         time.’
      
 Framework Decision 2009/299/JHA
Council Framework Decision 2009/299/JHA of February 2009, amending Framework Decisions 2002/584/JHA, 2005/214/JHA, 2006/783/JHA,
         2008/909/JHA and 2008/947/JHA, thereby enhancing the procedural rights of persons and fostering the application of the principle
         of mutual recognition to decisions rendered in the absence of the person concerned at the trial (OJ L 81, p. 24), which,
         under Article 8(1), must be implemented by the Member States by March at the latest, repealed Article 5(1) of Framework
         Decision 2002/and inserted a new Article 4a in that framework decision.
      
However, Article 4a of Framework Decision 2002/584/JHA, entitled ‘Decisions rendered following a trial at which the person
         did not appear in person’, applies only to the recognition and execution of decisions rendered in the absence of the person
         concerned at the trial as from March 2011.
      
 National law
 Belgian legislation
The Law of December on the European arrest warrant (Moniteur belge of December 2003, p. 60075; ‘the Law on the European arrest warrant’) transposes Framework Decision 2002/into national
         law.
      
With regard, first, to the grounds of mandatory non-execution of the European arrest warrant, Article of the Law on the
         European arrest warrant provides: 
      
‘The execution of a European arrest warrant shall be refused in the following cases: 
… 
(5)      if there are valid grounds for believing that the execution of the European arrest warrant would have the effect of infringing
         the fundamental rights of the person concerned, as enshrined in Article [EU]’. 
      
Regarding, second, the grounds for optional non-execution of the European arrest warrant, Article of the Law on the European
         arrest warrant provides: 
      
‘Execution may be refused in the following cases: 
…
(4)      if the European arrest warrant has been issued for the purposes of execution of a custodial sentence or detention order, where
         the person concerned is Belgian or resides in Belgium and the competent Belgian authorities undertake to execute the sentence
         or detention order in accordance with Belgian law;
      
...’ 
With regard to the actual implementation of a decision taken under Article 6(4) of the Law on the European arrest warrant,
         Article 18(2) of the Law of May on the inter-State transfer of convicted persons, the taking-over and transfer of
         the monitoring of persons convicted or discharged subject to conditions and the taking-over and transfer of the execution
         of custodial sentences and detention orders (Moniteur belge of July 1990, p. 14304), as amended by the Law of May (Moniteur belge of June 2005, p. 26718) (‘the Law on transfers’), provides: 
      
‘A judicial decision taken pursuant to Article 6(4) of the Law … on the European arrest warrant shall entail the taking-over
         of the execution of the custodial sentence or detention order referred to in that judicial decision. The sentence or detention
         order shall be executed in accordance with the provisions of this Law.’ 
      
Article of the Law on transfers, which appears in Chapter VI of that law, entitled ‘The execution in Belgium of custodial
         sentences and detention orders imposed abroad’, must be read in the light of Article of that law, which provides:
      
‘The provisions of Chapters V and VI shall not apply to criminal sentences imposed in absentia, save in the cases referred to in Article 18(2) where a sentence imposed in absentia has become final.’
      
With regard, third, to the guarantees which must be observed by the issuing Member State, Articles and of the Law on the
         European arrest warrant transpose Article 5(1) and Article 5(3) of Framework Decision 2002/respectively. Article of
         that law provides, for the purposes of executing a sentence imposed by a decision rendered in absentia:
      
‘Where a European arrest warrant has been issued for the purposes of executing a sentence or a detention order imposed by
         a decision rendered in absentia and if the person concerned has not been summoned in person or otherwise informed of the date and place of the hearing which
         led to the decision rendered in absentia, surrender may be subject to the condition that the issuing judicial authority should give an assurance deemed adequate to
         guarantee the person who is the subject of the European arrest warrant that he or she will have an opportunity to apply for
         a retrial of the case in the issuing Member State and to be present at the judgment.
      
The existence in the law of the issuing State of a provision which provides for an appeal and a statement of the conditions
         for bringing that appeal, which make it clear that the person concerned may in fact bring an appeal shall be deemed an adequate
         guarantee within the meaning of the preceding paragraph.’
      
Article of the Law on the European arrest warrant provides:
      
‘Where a person who is the subject of a European arrest warrant for the purposes of prosecution is Belgian or resides in Belgium,
         surrender may be subject to the condition that the person, after being tried, should be returned to Belgium in order to serve
         there the custodial sentence or detention order passed against him in the issuing Member State.’
      
 Romanian legislation
Article 522a of the Romanian Code of Criminal Procedure provides:
      
‘Retrial of persons tried in absentia in extradition cases.
      
Where the extradition is requested of a person who has been tried and sentenced in absentia, the case may be retried by the court which heard the case at first instance, on application by that person.
      
The provisions of Articles to apply by analogy.’
Article of the Romanian Code of Criminal Procedure provides:
      
‘Following acceptance in principle of an application for review, that case shall be reheard in accordance with the rules of
         procedure which applied to the trial at first instance.
      
If it considers it to be necessary, the court shall re-examine the evidence submitted when the case was first tried or when
         the application for review was accepted in principle.’
      
 The proceedings in the main action and the questions referred
By judgment of June 2000, the Tribunalul București sentenced I.B. to four years’ imprisonment for the offence of trafficking
         in nuclear and radioactive substances. That judgment was upheld, by decision of April 2001, by the Curtea de apel Bucureşti
         (Court of Appeal, Bucharest).
      
Those two courts had authorised I.B. to serve his sentence, which was imposed and upheld in adversarial proceedings, at his
         workplace rather than in custody.
      
By decision of January 2002, the Curtea Supremă de Justiţie (Supreme Court of Justice) (Romania), ruling, according to
         the statements of the referring court, in absentia, and without I.B. having been informed in person of the date or place of the hearing, quashed the earlier judgments in so
         far as they authorised I.B. to serve his four-year prison sentence at his workplace, and ordered that it be served in custody.
      
In February 2002, I.B. decided to go to Belgium after having been, according to his evidence, the victim of serious breaches
         of his right to a fair trial. His wife and two children then joined him as from October 2002.
      
On December 2007, I.B. was taken into custody in Belgium, following the entry by the Romanian authorities, on February
         2006, of an alert in the Schengen Information System (SIS) seeking his arrest and surrender to those authorities for the purposes
         of execution of the custodial sentence that had been imposed on him.
      
Considering that that alert was equivalent to a European arrest warrant, the Public Prosecutor referred the case to the investigating
         judge who decided, by order of December 2007, to release I.B. conditionally pending a final decision on his surrender.
      
On December 2007, the Tribunalul București issued a European arrest warrant in respect of I.B. for the purposes of executing
         the sentence of four years’ imprisonment passed against him in Romania.
      
On December 2007, I.B. lodged an application at the Office for Foreign Nationals for the grant of refugee status in Belgium.
      
On February 2008, the Public Prosecutor requested the Tribunal de première instance de Nivelles to rule that the arrest
         warrant issued by the Romanian issuing judicial authority was enforceable.
      
On July 2008, I.B. was refused refugee status and subsidiary protection. That refusal, which was confirmed by the Conseil
         du contentieux des étrangers (Council for asylum and immigration proceedings), is currently the subject of proceedings before
         the Conseil d’État (Council of State) (Belgium).
      
By order of July 2008, the Tribunal de première instance de Nivelles, when checking the conditions with which the European
         arrest warrant must comply before it can be executed, held that it fulfilled all the conditions laid down by the Law on the
         European arrest warrant. In particular, it considered that there was no valid ground for believing that the execution of the
         European arrest warrant would have the effect of infringing I.B.’s fundamental rights.
      
In that regard, that court observes that, while the European arrest warrant at issue in the main proceedings concerns, admittedly,
         the execution of a judicial decision rendered in absentia, the Romanian issuing judicial authority has nevertheless given certain assurances which can be regarded as adequate under
         Article of the Law on the European arrest warrant, since the arrest warrant in question refers to the fact that, under Article
         522a of the Romanian Code of Criminal Procedure, the case may, on application by the person sentenced in absentia, be retried by the court which heard the case at first instance.
      
The Tribunal de première instance de Nivelles held that I.B. could not rely on Article 6(4) of the Law on the European arrest
         warrant, which provides that the execution of the European arrest warrant may be refused if the European arrest warrant has
         been issued for the purposes of execution of a custodial sentence, where the person concerned resides in Belgium and the competent
         authorities undertake to execute that sentence in accordance with Belgian law.
      
That ground for refusal applies only to sentences rendered in absentia which have become final, as laid down in Article of the Law on transfers, read in conjunction with Article 18(2) of that
         law. However, I.B. would still have the right to request a retrial.
      
In addition, the Tribunal de première instance de Nivelles points out that, while Article of the Law on the European arrest
         warrant provides that the surrender of a person for the purposes of prosecution who is the subject of a European arrest warrant
         and resides in Belgium may be subject to the condition that the person, after being tried, is returned to Belgium in order
         to serve there the custodial sentence passed against him in the issuing Member State, Article of that law provides that
         an arrest warrant based on a judgment rendered in absentia is considered as being issued for the purposes of executing a sentence.
      
Considering that that difference in treatment may result in discrimination, and taking into account the fact that I.B. resides
         in Belgium for the purposes of that legislation, the Tribunal de première instance de Nivelles, on the assumption that Article
         must be interpreted as applying only to a European arrest warrant issued for the purposes of prosecution and not also to
         a European arrest warrant issued for the purposes of executing a custodial sentence rendered in absentia against which the convicted person still has a remedy, referred to the Cour constitutionnelle (Constitutional Court) the
         question of the compatibility of Article of the Law on the European arrest warrant with Articles and of the Constitution,
         which concern the principles of equal treatment and non-discrimination.
      
Having in its turn held that the only purpose of the Law on the European arrest warrant was to implement Framework Decision
         2002/in the domestic legal system, the Cour constitutionnelle decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following
         questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Is a European arrest warrant issued for the purposes of the execution of a sentence imposed in absentia, without the convicted person having been informed of the date and place of the hearing, and against which that person still
         has a remedy, to be considered to be, not an arrest warrant issued for the purposes of the execution of a custodial sentence
         or detention order within the meaning of Article 4(6) of Framework Decision [2002/584], but an arrest warrant for the purposes
         of prosecution within the meaning of Article 5(3) of the Framework Decision? 
      
(2)      If the reply to the first question is in the negative, are Article 4(6) and Article 5(3) of the Framework Decision to be interpreted
         as not permitting the Member States to make the surrender to the judicial authorities of the issuing State of a person residing
         on their territory who is the subject, in the circumstances described in the first question, of an arrest warrant for the
         purposes of the execution of a custodial sentence or detention order, subject to a condition that that person be returned
         to the executing State in order to serve there the custodial sentence or detention order imposed by a final judgment against
         that person in the issuing State? 
      
(3)      If the reply to the second question is in the affirmative, do the articles in question contravene Article 6(2) [EU] and, in
         particular, the principles of equality and non-discrimination? 
      
(4)      If the reply to the first question is in the negative, are Articles and of the Framework Decision to be interpreted as
         preventing the judicial authorities of a Member State from refusing the execution of a European arrest warrant if there are
         valid grounds for believing that its execution would have the effect of infringing the fundamental rights of the person concerned,
         as enshrined by Article 6(2) [EU]?’
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
As a preliminary point, it should be noted first that, according to Article of Framework Decision 2002/584, the framework
         decision applies to requests for execution of an arrest warrant received after January 2004, on condition that the executing
         Member State has not made a statement indicating that it will continue to deal with requests relating to acts committed before
         August in accordance with the extradition system applicable before January 2004. While the request at issue in the
         main proceedings indeed relates to acts which took place before that date, it is agreed that the Kingdom of Belgium did not
         make such a statement. It follows that that framework decision is applicable to the present case.
      
It should be recalled, secondly, that the grounds for non-execution of a European arrest warrant listed in Article and of that framework decision do not include an application for asylum or an application for the grant of refugee status or subsidiary
         protection.
      
With regard, more particularly, to a request for asylum submitted to the competent authorities of a Member State by a national
         of another Member State, the sole article of Protocol No on asylum for nationals of member states of the European Union
         annexed to the EC Treaty (now Protocol No annexed to the TFEU) provides inter alia that, given the level of protection
         of fundamental rights and freedoms by the Member States of the European Union, Member States are to be regarded as constituting
         safe countries of origin in respect of each other for all legal and practical purposes in relation to asylum matters.
      
Similarly, it should be pointed out that a request for the grant of refugee status or subsidiary protection by a national
         of a Member State does not fall within the scope of the international protection mechanism established by Council Directive
         2004/83/EC of April on minimum standards for the qualification and status of third country nationals or stateless
         persons as refugees or as persons who otherwise need international protection and the content of the protection granted (OJ
         L 304, p. 12).
      
Therefore, the fact that I.B. lodged a request with the competent Belgian authorities for the grant of refugee status or subsidiary
         protection within the meaning of Directive 2004/cannot be considered relevant, for the purpose of the answers to be given
         to the questions raised by the referring court.
      
Third, it should be noted that the referring court proceeds on the assumption that the request submitted to it was for execution
         of a judgment rendered in absentia within the meaning of Article 5(1) of Framework Decision 2002/584. It is for that court, as appropriate, to make use of the
         possibilities offered to it in Article 15(2) of that framework decision in order to check that point. In any case, it is for
         the Court of Justice to rule on the matter in the light of the factual and legal considerations set out in the order for reference.
         
      
 First and second questions
By its first and second questions, which should be examined together, the referring court asks essentially whether Articles
         4(6) and 5(3) of Framework Decision 2002/may be interpreted as meaning that the execution of a European arrest warrant
         issued for the purposes of execution of a sentence imposed in absentia within the meaning of Article 5(1) of that framework decision may be subject to the condition that the person concerned,
         a national or resident of the executing Member State, should be returned to the executing State in order, as the case may
         be, to serve there the sentence passed against him, following a new trial organised in his presence in the issuing Member
         State.
      
In order to reply to those questions, it must be noted that the European arrest warrant may, under Article 1(1) of Framework
         Decision 2002/584, apply to two situations. Thus, that arrest warrant may be issued, on the one hand, for the purposes of
         conducting a criminal prosecution or, on the other hand, for the purposes of executing a custodial sentence or detention order.
      
While the system established by Framework Decision 2002/is based on the principle of mutual recognition, that recognition
         does not, as is clear from Articles to of the framework decision, mean that there is an absolute obligation to execute
         the arrest warrant that has been issued.
      
The system established by the framework decision, as evidenced inter alia by the provisions of those articles, makes it possible
         for the Member States to allow the competent judicial authorities, in specific situations, to decide that a sentence must
         be executed on the territory of the executing Member State.
      
That is the case, in particular, under Articles 4(6) and 5(3) of Framework Decision 2002/584. For both types of European arrest
         warrant envisaged by the framework decision, those provisions have, in particular, the objective of enabling particular weight
         to be given to the possibility of increasing the requested person’s chances of reintegrating into society (see, in particular,
         Case C-123/Wolzenburg [2009] ECR I-9621, paragraph 62).
      
There is nothing to indicate that the European Union legislator wished to exclude persons requested on the basis of a sentence
         imposed in absentia from that objective.
      
First, a judicial decision rendered in absentia, where the person concerned was not summoned in person or otherwise informed of the date and place of the hearing which led
         to that decision, falls within the scope of Framework Decision 2002/which, specifically, in Article 5(1), provides that
         the execution of the arrest warrant issued following such a decision may be subject to the guarantee that the person concerned
         will have an opportunity to apply for a retrial of the case.
      
Second, the mere fact that Article 5(1) makes the execution of an arrest warrant issued following a decision rendered in absentia subject to such a guarantee cannot have the effect of rendering inapplicable to a warrant of that kind the ground or the
         condition laid down in Article 4(6) or Article 5(3) of Framework Decision 2002/respectively in order to increase the requested
         person’s chances of reintegrating into society.
      
If the sentence imposed in absentia – which, in the case in the main proceedings, provides the basis for the arrest warrant – is not yet enforceable, the surrender
         would serve the specific purpose of enabling a criminal prosecution to be conducted or the case to be retried, that is to
         say surrender would be for the purposes of criminal prosecution which is the situation envisaged by Article 5(3) of Framework
         Decision 2002/584.
      
Given that the situation of a person who was sentenced in absentia and to whom it is still open to apply for a retrial is comparable to that of a person who is the subject of a European arrest
         warrant for the purposes of prosecution, there is no objective reason precluding an executing judicial authority which has
         applied Article 5(1) of Framework Decision 2002/from applying the condition contained in Article 5(3) of that framework
         decision. 
      
Furthermore, such an interpretation is the only one which, currently, offers a real possibility of reintegrating into society
         for a person resident in the executing Member State who, having been sentenced by a judgment which is not yet enforceable,
         may be retried in the issuing Member State.
      
Finally, that interpretation also makes it possible, as emphasised, in particular, by the Swedish Government, to avoid constraining
         the person sentenced in absentia to waive a retrial in the issuing Member State in order to ensure that his sentence may, pursuant to Article 4(6) of Framework
         Decision 2002/584, be executed in the Member State where he is resident within the meaning of the relevant provisions of that
         framework decision.
      
It follows that, as argued by all the Member States and the European Commission which submitted observations on the first
         question or on the first and the second questions, the executing member State may make the surrender of a person in a situation
         such as that of I.B. subject to the joint application of the conditions laid down in Article 5(1) and Article 5(3) of Framework
         Decision 2002/584.
      
In the light of all of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the first and second questions is that Article 4(6) and
         5(3) of Framework Decision 2002/must be interpreted as meaning that, where the executing Member State has implemented
         Article 5(1) and Article 5(3) of that framework decision in its domestic legal system, the execution of a European arrest
         warrant issued for the purposes of execution of a sentence imposed in absentia within the meaning of Article 5(1) of the framework decision, may be subject to the condition that the person concerned,
         who is a national or resident of the executing Member State, should be returned to the executing State in order, as the case
         may be, to serve there the sentence passed against him, following a new trial organised in his presence in the issuing Member
         State.
      
 The third and fourth questions
The third and fourth questions in fact require a reply only if the answer given to the first and second questions does not,
         in circumstances such as those in the main proceedings, allow the executing judicial authority to make the surrender of the
         person concerned subject to the condition that he should be returned to the executing Member State.
      
Since the Court has, in its answer to the first and second questions, accepted that it is possible to make the surrender subject
         to the guarantee provided for in Article 5(3) of Framework Decision 2002/584, it is not necessary to reply to the third and
         fourth questions.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
Articles 4(6) and 5(3) of Council Framework Decision 2002/584/JHA of June on the European arrest warrant and the surrender
            procedures between Member States must be interpreted as meaning that, where the executing Member State has implemented Articles
            5(1) and Article 5(3) of that framework decision in its domestic legal system, the execution of a European arrest warrant
            issued for the purposes of execution of a sentence imposed in absentia within the meaning of Article 5(1) of the framework decision, may be subject to the condition that the person concerned,
            a national or resident of the executing Member State, should be returned to the executing State in order, as the case may
            be, to serve there the sentence passed against him, following a new trial organised in his presence in the issuing Member
            State.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 