
Case C-506/P
Kingdom of Sweden
v
MyTravel Group plc 
and
European Commission
(Appeal – Access to documents of the institutions – Regulation (EC) No 1049/– Article 4(2), second indent, and Article 4(3), second subparagraph – Exceptions to the right of access concerning the protection of court proceedings and legal advice and the decision-making
         process – Control of concentrations – Commission documents drawn up in the context of a procedure which led to a decision declaring a concentration operation incompatible
         with the common market – Documents drafted following the annulment of that decision by the General Court)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        European Union – Institutions – Right of public access to documents – Regulation No 1049/– Exceptions to the right of
            access to documents – Protection of the decision-making process
(European Parliament and Council Regulation No 1049/2001, Art. 4(3), second subpara.)
2.        European Union – Institutions – Right of public access to documents – Regulation No 1049/– Exceptions to the right of
            access to documents – Protection of the decision-making processl
(European Parliament and Council Regulation No 1049/2001, Art. 4(3), second subpara.)
3.        European Union – Institutions – Right of public access to documents – Regulation No 1049/– Exceptions to the right of
            access to documents – Protection of the decision-making process
(European Parliament and Council Regulation No 1049/2001, Art. 4(3), second subpara.)
4.        European Union – Institutions – Right of public access to documents – Regulation No 1049/– Exceptions to the right of
            access to documents – Protection of legal advice
(European Parliament and Council Regulation No 1049/2001, Art. 4(2), second indent)
1.        Concerning the exception for protecting the decision-making process contained in Article 4(3) of Regulation No 1049/regarding
         public access to European Parliament, Council and Commission documents, the said Article 4(3) draws a clear distinction by
         reference to whether a procedure has been closed or not.  It is only for part of the documents for internal use, namely, those
         containing opinions for internal use as part of deliberations and preliminary consultations within the institution concerned,
         that the second subparagraph of Article 4(3) allows access to be refused even after the decision has been taken, when their
         disclosure would seriously undermine the decision-making process of that institution.  The Union legislature has thus taken
         the view that, once the decision is adopted, the requirements for protecting the decision-making process are less acute, so
         that disclosure of any document other than those mentioned in the second subparagraph of Article 4(3) of Regulation No 1049/can never undermine that process and that refusal of access to such a document cannot be permitted, even if its disclosure
         would have seriously undermined that process if it had taken place before the adoption of the decision in question.
      
It is true that the mere possibility of using the exception in question to refuse access to documents containing opinions
         for internal use as part of deliberations and preliminary consultations within the institution concerned is not in any way
         affected by the fact that the decision has been adopted. That does not, however, mean that the assessment which the institution
         concerned is called upon to make in order to establish whether or not the disclosure of one of those documents is likely seriously
         to undermine its decision-making process must not take account of the fact that the administrative procedure to which those
         documents relate has been closed. The reasons invoked by an institution and capable of justifying refusal of access to such
         a document of which communication has been requested before the closure of the administrative procedure might not be sufficient
         for refusing disclosure of the same document after the adoption of the decision, without that institution explaining the specific
         reasons why is considers that the closure of the procedure does not exclude the possibility that that refusal of access may
         remain justified having regard to the risk of a serious undermining of its decision-making process.
      
(see paras 77-82)
2.        When an institution decides to refuse access to a document which it has been asked to disclose, it must, in principle, explain
         how disclosure of that document could specifically and effectively compromise the interest protected by an exception under
         Article of Regulation No 1049/regarding public access to European Parliament, Council and Commission documents upon
         which that institution is relying. Moreover, the risk of that undermining must be reasonably foreseeable and not purely hypothetical.
      
Thus, the Commission may not refuse access to the whole of a report on the control of concentrations without in any way supporting
         its arguments by detailed evidence, having regard to the actual content of the report, allowing it to be understood why disclosure
         of the latter would have been likely seriously to jeopardise the Commission’s decision-making process, even if the procedure
         to which that document relates had already been closed. In other words, the Commission must indicate the specific reasons
         why it considers that closure of the administrative procedure does not exclude the possibility that refusal of access to the
         report might remain justified having regard to the risk of the said decision-making process being seriously undermined.
      
(see paras 76, 89-90)
3.        The fact that a document is likely to be published does not in itself exclude the possibility that that same document might
         fall within the exception in the second subparagraph of Article 4(3) of Regulation No 1049/regarding public access to
         European Parliament, Council and Commission documents. It is apparent from the wording of that article that the latter applies
         to any document containing opinions for internal use as part of deliberations and preliminary consultations within the institution.
      
(see para. 93)
4.        When the Commission refuses an application for access to an opinion of the legal service on the control of concentrations
         on the basis of the second indent of Article 4(2) of Regulation No 1049/regarding public access to European Parliament,
         Council and Commission documents, it is under a duty, in principle, to provide explanations as to how access to that document
         might actually and specifically undermine the interest protected by the exception contained in that article.
      
As regards the fear that disclosure of an opinion of the Commission’s legal service relating to a draft decision could lead
         to doubts as to the lawfulness of the final decision, it is precisely openness in this regard that contributes to conferring
         greater legitimacy on the institutions in the eyes of European citizens and increasing their confidence in them by allowing
         divergences between various points of view to be openly debated. It is in fact rather a lack of information and debate which
         is capable of giving rise to doubts in the minds of citizens, not only as regards the lawfulness of an isolated act, but also
         as regards the legitimacy of the decision-making process as a whole. Furthermore, the risk that doubts might be engendered
         in the minds of European citizens as regards the lawfulness of an act adopted by an institution because the latter’s legal
         service had given an unfavourable opinion would more often than not fail to arise if the statement of reasons for that act
         were reinforced, so as to make it apparent why that unfavourable opinion was not followed.
      
As regards the argument that the legal service might find itself obliged to defend before the Union judicature the legality
         of a decision in relation to which it had issued a negative opinion, an argument of such a general nature cannot justify an
         exception to the transparency required by Regulation No 1049/2001.  The legal service cannot, moreover, find itself in such
         a situation when no further action concerning the legality of that decision can be envisaged before the Union judicature.
      
(see paras 110, 113-114, 116-117)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Appeal – Access to documents of the institutions – Regulation (EC) No 1049/– Article 4(2), second indent, and Article 4(3), second subparagraph – Exceptions to the right of access concerning the protection of court proceedings and legal advice and the decision-making
         process – Control of concentrations – Commission documents drawn up in the context of a procedure which led to a decision declaring a concentration operation incompatible
         with the common market – Documents drafted following the annulment of that decision by the General Court)
      
In Case C‑506/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, brought on November 2008,
Kingdom of Sweden, represented by K. Petkovska and A. Falk, acting as Agents,
      
applicant,
supported by:
Kingdom of Denmark, represented by B. Weis Fogh and V. Pasternak Jørgensen, acting as Agents,
      
Kingdom of the Netherlands, represented by C. Wissels and J. Langer, acting as Agents,
      
Republic of Finland, represented by J. Heliskoski, acting as Agent,
      
interveners in the appeal,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
MyTravel Group plc, established in Rochdale (United Kingdom),
      
applicant at first instance,
European Commission, represented by X. Lewis, P. Costa de Oliveira and C. O’Reilly, acting as Agents,
      
defendant at first instance,
supported by:
Federal Republic of Germany, represented by M. Lumma and B. Klein, acting as Agents,
      
French Republic, represented by E. Belliard, G. de Bergues and A. Adam, acting as Agents,
      
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, represented by E. Jenkinson and S. Ossowski, acting as Agents,
      
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of A. Tizzano (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, A. Borg Barthet, M. Ilešič, M. Safjan and M. Berger, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on October 2010,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2011,
gives the following
Judgment
By its appeal, the Kingdom of Sweden seeks to have set aside the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities
         (now ‘the General Court’) of September in Case T‑403/MyTravel v Commission [2008] ECR II‑(‘the judgment under appeal’), whereby the General Court dismissed the action brought by MyTravel Group
         plc (‘MyTravel’) against Commission Decision D(2005) of September (‘the first contested decision’) and Commission
         Decision D(2005) of October (‘the second contested decision’), partially rejecting MyTravel’s request for access
         to certain preparatory documents of the Commission concerning the control of concentrations (hereinafter collectively referred
         to as ‘the contested decisions’).
      
 Legal context
Recitals 2, and of Regulation (EC) No 1049/of the European Parliament and of the Council of May regarding
         public access to European Parliament, Council and Commission documents (OJ L 145, p. 43), read as follows:
      
‘(2)      Openness enables citizens to participate more closely in the decision-making process and guarantees that the administration
         enjoys greater legitimacy and is more effective and more accountable to the citizen in a democratic system. Openness contributes
         to strengthening the principles of democracy and respect for fundamental rights as laid down in Article of the EU Treaty
         and in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union.
      
…
(4)      The purpose of this Regulation is to give the fullest possible effect to the right of public access to documents and to lay
         down the general principles and limits on such access in accordance with Article 255(2) of the EC Treaty.
      
…
(11)      In principle, all documents of the institutions should be accessible to the public. However, certain public and private interests
         should be protected by way of exceptions. The institutions should be entitled to protect their internal consultations and
         deliberations where necessary to safeguard their ability to carry out their tasks. In assessing the exceptions, the institutions
         should take account of the principles in Community legislation concerning the protection of personal data, in all areas of
         Union activities.’
      
Article of that regulation provides:
      
‘The purpose of this Regulation is:
(a)      to define the principles, conditions and limits on grounds of public or private interest governing the right of access to
         European Parliament, Council and Commission (hereinafter referred to as “the institutions”) documents provided for in Article
         of the EC Treaty in such a way as to ensure the widest possible access to documents,
      
(b)      to establish rules ensuring the easiest possible exercise of this right, and
(c)      to promote good administrative practice on access to documents.’
According to Article 2(1) and (3) of the same regulation:
      
‘1.      Any citizen of the Union, and any natural or legal person residing or having its registered office in a Member State, has
         a right of access to documents of the institutions, subject to the principles, conditions and limits defined in this Regulation.
      
...
3.      This Regulation shall apply to all documents held by an institution, that is to say, documents drawn up or received by it
         and in its possession, in all areas of activity of the European Union.’
      
Article 4(2), (3) and (6) of Regulation No 1049/provide:
      
‘2.      The institutions shall refuse access to a document where disclosure would undermine the protection of:
–        …
–        ... court proceedings and legal advice,
–        the purpose of inspections, investigations and audits,
unless there is an overriding public interest in disclosure.
3.      Access to a document, drawn up by an institution for internal use or received by an institution, which relates to a matter
         where the decision has not been taken by the institution, shall be refused if disclosure of the document would seriously undermine
         the institution’s decision-making process, unless there is an overriding public interest in disclosure.
      
Access to a document containing opinions for internal use as part of deliberations and preliminary consultations within the
         institution concerned shall be refused even after the decision has been taken if disclosure of the document would seriously
         undermine the institution’s decision-making process, unless there is an overriding public interest in disclosure.
      
…
6.      If only parts of the requested document are covered by any of the exceptions, the remaining parts of the document shall be
         released.’
      
According to Article 7(2) of that regulation:
      
‘In the event of a total or partial refusal, the applicant may, within working days of receiving the institution’s reply,
         make a confirmatory application asking the institution to reconsider its position.’
      
 Background to the dispute
By judgment of June in Case T‑342/Airtours v Commission [2002] ECR II‑2585, the General Court annulled Commission Decision 2000/276/EC of September declaring a concentration
         to be incompatible with the common market and the EEA Agreement (Case IV/M.– Airtours/First Choice) (OJ L 93, p.
         1; ‘the Airtours decision’). That decision concerned the concentration operation between the British tour operator Airtours
         plc, which subsequently became MyTravel, and its competitor First Choice plc (‘First Choice’).
      
Following the Airtours v Commission judgment, the Commission established a working group comprising officials of the Directorate-General for Competition (‘DG
         Competition’) and the legal service in order to consider whether it was appropriate to bring an appeal against that judgment
         and to assess the implications of that judgment for the procedures for the control of concentrations or in other areas. The
         report of the working group was presented to the Member of the Commission responsible for competition on July 2002, that
         is to say, prior to the expiry of the period allowed for bringing an appeal. 
      
By letter of May 2005, MyTravel made a request to the Commission, pursuant to Regulation No 1049/2001, for access to the
         report, to the documents relating to its preparation (‘the working papers’) and the documents contained in the file relating
         to the Airtours/First Choice case on which the report was based or which were referred to in it (‘the other internal documents’).
      
In view of the number of documents requested, MyTravel and the Commission agreed that the latter would give separate treatment
         to, on the one hand, the report and working papers and, on the other, the remaining internal documents.
      
The Commission having initially refused, at least partially, access to all those documents by two letters of July and August 2005, MyTravel brought two confirmatory applications, pursuant to Article 7(2) of Regulation No 1049/2001, to which
         the Commission replied by adopting the contested decisions.
      
By the first contested decision, the Commission refused in particular to communicate to MyTravel the report and the working
         papers, taking the view, first, that the latter were covered by at least one of the exceptions to the right of access set
         out in Article 4(2), second and third indents, and Article 4(3), second subparagraph, of Regulation No 1049/2001, concerning,
         respectively, the protection of court proceedings and legal advice, the purpose of inspections, investigations and the decision-making
         process, and, secondly, that there was no overriding public interest in disclosure.
      
By the second contested decision, the Commission similarly refused access to some of the remaining internal documents. It
         took the view that the exceptions set out in Article 4(2), third indent, and Article 4(3), second subparagraph, of that regulation,
         concerning protection of the purpose of inspections, investigations and of the decision-making process, applied in particular
         to:
      
–        the notes from the Director General of DG Competition to the Member of the Commission responsible for competition (‘the notes
         to the Commissioner’);
      
–        five notes from DG Competition to other Commission services, including the legal service, which supplied and asked for the
         advice of the addressees on certain draft texts (‘the notes to the other services’), and 
      
–        the notes from other Commission services supplied in reply to the five notes from DG Competition referred to above, setting
         out the views of the services concerned of the draft texts (‘the notes in reply from the services other than the legal service’).
      
As regards the five notes from the legal service in reply to the five notes from DG Competition referred to above (‘the notes
         in reply from the legal service’), the Commission invoked in support of its refusal of access the second indent of Article
         4(2) of Regulation No 1049/2001, concerning the protection of court proceedings and legal advice.
      
In addition, the Commission referred to the special situation of certain internal documents, to which partial or total access
         was refused. These included, in particular, the report of the Hearing Officer, a note from DG Competition to the Advisory
         Committee, and a note to file on a site visit to First Choice.
      
Finally, the Commission emphasised that MyTravel had not submitted any argument capable of establishing an overriding public
         interest to justify the documents to which access was sought being disclosed in any event.
      
 The judgment under appeal
On November 2005, MyTravel brought an action for annulment of the contested decisions. 
      
In support of its action, MyTravel relied on a series of pleas designed to show that, by the contested decisions, the Commission
         had made an erroneous assessment of the second and third indents of Article 4(2) and the second subparagraph of Article 4(3)
         of Regulation No 1049/2001, concerning the exceptions to the right of access for protecting court proceedings and legal advice,
         inspections, investigations and audits, and the decision-making process. 
      
 The exception for protecting the decision-making process
The General Court first verified whether, in the contested decisions, the Commission had properly applied the exception concerning
         the protection of the decision-making process, contained in the second subparagraph of Article 4(3) of Regulation No 1049/2001.
      
Concerning the report, after finding, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal that this was a document which was
         capable of falling within the scope of that exception, and that the latter could be invoked ‘even after the decision has been
         taken’, the Court noted, in paragraph of the judgment, that the Commission had taken the view that disclosure of the report
         would have posed a serious threat to its decision-making process, as the freedom of its authors to express their views would
         have been called into question.
      
The General Court further held, in paragraphs to of the judgment, that the report fell within the purely administrative
         functions of the Commission. The interest of the public in obtaining access to a document pursuant to the principle of transparency
         did not carry the same weight in the case of a document drawn up in an administrative procedure as in the case of a document
         relating to a procedure in which the Community institution acts in its capacity as legislator.
      
Disclosure of the report would thus carry the risk that the possibly critical opinions of Commission officials might be made
         public, and that the content of the report could be compared with the decisions ultimately taken. Furthermore, the authors
         might be led to practise self-censorship and to cease putting forward any views that might involve the addressee of the report
         being exposed to risk. That would risk seriously undermining the decision-making freedom of the Commission, whose Members
         must, in the general interest of the Union, be completely independent in the performance of their duties. Similarly, the Commission
         could no longer benefit from the frankly-expressed and complete views required of its agents and officials.
      
The General Court further held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the risk of the decision-making process
         being seriously undermined was reasonably foreseeable and not purely hypothetical. It appeared probable that the Member of
         the Commission responsible for competition would be induced to cease making requests for the written, and potentially critical,
         views of his advisers, if documents such as that in question were to be disclosed.
      
With regard to the working papers, the General Court held, in paragraph of the judgment, that, since the report was protected
         under the second subparagraph of Article 4(3) of Regulation No 1049/2001, the documents which enabled it to be produced and
         which comprised preparatory assessments or provisional conclusions for internal use also came within that exception.
      
With regard to the remaining internal documents, namely the notes to the Commissioner, the notes to the other services and
         the notes in reply from the services other than the legal service, the General Court held, in paragraphs to of the
         judgment under appeal, that the Commission was right to submit that the partial or total disclosure of those various documents
         would reduce the ability of its services to express their point of view and risked seriously undermining its decision-making
         process in the field of the control of concentrations. 
      
Those preparatory documents might indicate the opinions, the doubts or the changes of mind of the Commission services, which
         – at the end of the decision‑making process in question – may no longer appear in the final versions of the decisions. Moreover,
         disclosure of those documents would mean that their authors would take that risk of disclosure into account in the future,
         to the point where they might be led to practise self-censorship and to cease putting forward any views that might involve
         the addressee of the document in question being exposed to risk. 
      
The General Court further took the view that the Commission assessed the risk of a serious undermining of the decision-making
         process in an individual and specific way, particularly where it considered that disclosure of the documents risked undermining
         its assessment of similar concentrations which might arise between the parties concerned or in the same sector.
      
Finally, the General Court held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the risk of the decision-making process
         being seriously undermined in the event of those documents being disclosed was reasonably foreseeable and not purely hypothetical.
         It was reasonable to believe that such documents could be used, even though they did not necessarily represent the Commission’s
         definitive position, to influence the position of its services in the examination of similar cases involving the same sector
         of activities or the same economic concepts. 
      
With regard to the report of the Hearing Officer, the General Court took the view, in paragraphs to of the judgment
         under appeal, that, in the same way as with the remaining internal documents, the Commission could refuse access to them given
         that, since that report contained the opinions of the Hearing Officer on the substance and the procedural aspects of the concentration
         operation at issue, its disclosure would be likely to imperil the latter’s freedom to express his views. That would seriously
         undermine the Commission’s decision-making process in the area of concentrations, since it could no longer rely in the future
         on the frankly-expressed and complete opinions of hearing officers.
      
Regarding the note from DG Competition to the Advisory Committee, the General Court held that its disclosure would seriously
         undermine the decision-making process of the Commission, since consultation with the Advisory Committee also forms part of
         the internal decision-making process in the control of concentrations. Even though the Advisory Committee is composed of representatives
         of the Member States, and is therefore separate from the Commission for that reason, the fact that the latter is obliged to
         transmit internal documents to that committee in order that the committee may reach a view permits the inference that the
         note in question remains an internal Commission document.
      
The General Court also held that disclosure of the file note concerning a site visit to First Choice would seriously undermine
         the Commission’s decision-making process because, for certain parties, that document reflected the views of the officials
         of DG Competition during the visit.
      
The General Court also ruled on the question whether, in this case, an overriding public interest, within the meaning of the
         last sentence of the second subparagraph of Regulation No 1049/2001, justified the documents in question being disclosed in
         any event. In that respect, it noted, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that MyTravel had claimed that ‘the need
         to understand what took place and what was done by the Commission, as well as the need to ensure the sound administration
         of justice’ constituted overriding public interests justifying disclosure of the documents.
      
The General Court essentially took the view, in paragraphs to and of the judgment under appeal, that those arguments
         did not allow the overriding public interest required by Regulation No 1049/to be established to the requisite legal
         standard, or allow it to be ascertained whether, on setting that alleged overriding public interest against the interest in
         maintaining the confidentiality of the documents as regards the public under the exceptions to the right of access, the Commission
         ought to have reached the conclusion that those documents should none the less be disclosed. The Court further found that
         the private interest of MyTravel in obtaining the documents in question in order better to put forward its arguments in the
         context of the action which it had brought for compensation for the loss it had allegedly suffered by reason of the Commission’s
         management and assessment of the operation which formed the subject-matter of the Airtours decision could not, as a purely
         private interest, be relevant to assessing the balance of public interests.
      
The General Court therefore concluded that the Commission had not made any error of assessment in taking the view that disclosure
         of the abovementioned documents would have seriously undermined its decision-making process and that there was no overriding
         public interest capable of justifying their disclosure nevertheless.
      
 The exception concerning the protection of legal advice 
Secondly, the General Court verified whether, in the second contested decision, the Commission had correctly applied to the
         notes in reply from the legal service the exception contained in the second indent of Article 4(2) of Regulation No 1049/2001.
         
      
In that regard, it took the view, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, that disclosure of those notes would
         risk communicating to the public information on the state of internal discussions between DG Competition and the legal service
         on the lawfulness of the assessment of the compatibility of the Airtours/First Choice concentration with the common market.
         In such circumstances, the risk of undermining the protection of legal advice was not purely hypothetical, since disclosure
         of that advice would risk putting the Commission in the difficult position in which its legal service might find itself required
         to defend a position before the Court which was not the same as the position which it had argued for internally. Such a risk
         would be liable to have a considerable effect both on the freedom of the legal service to express its views and its ability
         effectively to defend the Commission’s definitive position before the Community judicature, on an equal footing with the other
         legal representatives of the various parties to legal proceedings.
      
For the same reasons as those referred to in relation to the application of the exception for protecting the decision-making
         process, in paragraphs and of this judgment, the General Court took the view, in paragraph of the judgment under
         appeal, that there was no overriding public interest in the disclosure of those notes within the meaning of the final part
         of the sentence in Article 4(2) of Regulation No 1049/2001.
      
 The conclusions of the judgment under appeal
Regarding the first contested decision, the General Court, in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, allowed the
         action of MyTravel only in relation to the part of that decision refusing access to one of the working papers, namely working
         paper 15, solely on the basis of the exception for protecting inspections, investigations and audits, contained in the third
         indent of Article 4(2) of Regulation No 1049/2001. That part of the judgment under appeal does not form part of the subject-matter
         of this appeal.
      
As to the remainder, the General Court took the view, first, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that, by the first
         contested decision, the Commission did not commit an error of assessment in refusing access to all the other documents it
         had been requested to communicate, on the basis of the second subparagraph of Article 4(3) of Regulation No 1049/2001.
      
Secondly, it held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that neither did the Commission commit any error of assessment
         in relying on the second subparagraph of Article 4(3) or the second indent of Article 4(2) of Regulation No 1049/as a
         basis for refusing disclosure of the various internal documents and legal advice with respect to which those exceptions were
         invoked by the Commission.
      
As a result, the General Court did not find it necessary, in the interest of procedural economy, to examine the other complaints
         by MyTravel directed against the contested decisions.
      
In particular, with regard to the first contested decision, the General Court did not examine the complaints concerning the
         other exceptions which the Commission had invoked in refusing disclosure of one or other part of the report or the working
         papers, namely the exceptions contained in the second and third indents of Article 4(2) and concerning, respectively, the
         protection of court proceedings and legal advice and the purpose of inspections, investigations and audits. 
      
With regard to the second contested decision, the General Court also refrained from examining the complaints concerning the
         exception for protecting the purpose of inspections, investigations and audits, in conjunction with the exception for protecting
         the decision-making process, relied on by the Commission in refusing to disclose some of the remaining internal documents.
      
Having regard to those considerations and having partially annulled the first contested decision, the General Court dismissed
         the remainder of the action in paragraph of the operative part of the judgment under appeal.
      
 Procedure before the Court of Justice and forms of order sought
By order of June 2009, the President of the Court of Justice granted the Kingdom of Denmark, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
         and the Republic of Finland leave to intervene in support of the forms of order sought by the Kingdom of Sweden and granted
         the Federal Republic of Germany, the French Republic and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland leave to
         intervene in support of the forms of order sought by the Commission.
      
The Kingdom of Sweden and the Kingdom of the Netherlands claim that the Court should:
      
–        set aside paragraph of the judgment under appeal;
–        annul the first contested decision, in accordance with the form of order sought by MyTravel before the General Court, in so
         far as concerns the refusal of access to the Commission’s report and other working documents;
      
–        annul the second contested decision, in accordance with the form of order sought by MyTravel before the General Court, in
         so far as concerns the refusal of access to the Commission’s other internal documents; and
      
–        order the Commission to pay the costs in relation to the appeal proceedings.
The Kingdom of Denmark and the Republic of Finland claim that the Court should annul paragraph of the operative part of
         the judgment under appeal and the two contested decisions.
      
The Commission, the Federal Republic of Germany, the French Republic and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
         Ireland claim that the Court should dismiss the appeal and order the Kingdom of Sweden to pay the costs.
      
 The appeal
In its appeal, the Kingdom of Sweden makes, essentially, three pleas in law claiming infringement of, respectively, the second
         subparagraph of Article 4(3) of Regulation No 1049/2001, the second indent of Article 4(2) of Regulation No 1049/2001, and
         the final parts of Article 4(2) and the second subparagraph of Article 4(3) of Regulation No 1049/2001.
      
 The first plea, claiming infringement of the second subparagraph of Article 4(3) of Regulation No 1049/Arguments of the parties
By its first plea, the Kingdom of Sweden, supported by the Kingdom of Denmark, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic
         of Finland, argues that the General Court misinterpreted the exception concerning the protection of the decision-making process
         inasmuch as in took the view that the Commission could, without making a specific and individual assessment of the documents
         in question, hold that their disclosure would seriously undermine the decision-making process of that institution.
      
As a preliminary observation, the Kingdom of Sweden points out, first, that, according to paragraph of the judgment in
         Case C‑64/P Sweden v Commission [2007] ECR I‑11389, any exception to the principle of transparency must be strictly interpreted and its application requires
         an examination of the content of the document specifically concerned. Next, the principle of transparency applies to all activities
         within the Union, without a distinction being made between the administrative or legislative nature of the procedure to which
         the document concerned by a request for access refers. Finally, the presumption in favour of disclosure is stronger, as in
         this instance, in the case of a matter that has been closed. As the Kingdom of Denmark also maintains, the institutions must
         take account of the chronology of a case.
      
According to the Kingdom of Sweden, and the three Member States which have intervened in its support, the case-law, and in
         particular the judgment in Joined Cases C‑39/P and C‑52/P Sweden and Turco v Council [2008] ECR I‑4723, requires that, where an institution refuses access to a document in reliance on one of the exceptions
         laid down in Regulation No 1049/2001, it must in particular examine whether disclosure of that document would specifically
         undermine the interest protected by the exception in question. In this case, even if the Commission has, to some extent, made
         an assessment of the confidentiality of the documents requested, that assessment was not as complete as required by the regulation,
         since the Commission based the application of the exceptions on an abstract reasoning concerning the freedom of opinion of
         officials and free internal communication, and not on the content of the documents which were the subject‑matter of the request
         for access.
      
More specifically, concerning the report, the Kingdom of Sweden maintains, first, that, even without knowing its content,
         it is reasonable to assume that it contains not only confidential information but also parts which do not constitute sensitive
         elements, such as, for example, a reminder of the Airtours decision and the Airtours v Commission judgment, or general statements, which can and must be disclosed, in particular pursuant to Article 4(6) of Regulation No 1049/2001,
         which provides for the possibility of partial access.
      
Next, the Kingdom of Sweden complains that the General Court confirmed the argument of the Commission that officials would
         not freely express their opinion if there were a possibility that what they wrote might be published. In fact, the question
         whether one of the exceptions contained in Article of Regulation No 1049/may apply must be determined from the content
         of the report and not by means of a general reasoning concerning the freedom of opinion of its authors and a possible fear
         linked to the consequences of publication. The Republic of Finland adds in this respect that, since Article 4(3) of Regulation
         No 1049/requires the existence of a risk that the decision-making process be seriously undermined, the requirement concerning
         the burden of proof to be borne by the institution is particularly high. 
      
Finally, as for the risk that the disclosure of the opinions of officials might cause the latter to practice self-censorship,
         the Kingdom of Sweden points out that officials are required to perform the obligations arising from their function in an
         objective and impartial manner and in compliance with their duty of loyalty towards the Union. The fact that the public has
         a right to be informed about the activities of the institutions cannot constitute an acceptable reason for not performing
         those obligations. In any event, officials of the institutions must be aware of that right to be informed, without being legitimately
         entitled to expect that the protection of the confidentiality of the documents held by the Commission will go beyond what
         is provided by Regulation No 1049/2001.
      
As regards the working papers, the Kingdom of Sweden argues that the reasoning of the General Court, according to which access
         to those documents may be refused since the report itself was protected by the exception contained in the second subparagraph
         of Article 4(3) of Regulation No 1049/2001, is too general and unduly extends the scope of the exception in question.
      
Concerning the notes to the Commissioner, the notes to the other services and the notes in reply from services other than
         the legal service, the Kingdom of Sweden considers that the General Court also pursued a general and hypothetical line of
         reasoning, basing its reasoning on the fear of preventing free communication between the various Commission services.
      
Concerning the report of the Hearing Officer, the Kingdom of Sweden argues that Article 16(3) of Commission Decision 2001/462/EC,
         ECSC of May on the terms of reference of hearing officers in certain competition proceedings (OJ L 162, p. 21),
         requires that that report be published at the same time as the Commission decision in the case concerning which that report
         was drawn up. Consequently, it is even doubtful whether that report falls within the expression ‘opinions for internal use’
         within the meaning of the second subparagraph of Article 4(3) of Regulation No 1049/2001. It is true that, in this case, the
         matter was closed in 1999, namely before the adoption of the said decision. However, even if, with regard to the regime applicable
         in 1999, the report was capable of benefiting from the exception concerning the said concept, it would still have been necessary
         to prove the actual existence of confidentiality.
      
Concerning the note of DG Competition addressed to the Advisory Committee, the Kingdom of Sweden does not accept that the
         latter may fall within the Commission’s decision-making process on the control of concentrations, given that that committee
         is independent of the Commission, so that the exception at issue is not even applicable. Moreover, Article 19(7) of Council
         Regulation (EC) No 139/of January on the control of concentrations between undertakings (OJ L 24, p. 1)
         lays down for the Advisory Committee publication rules similar to those governing the report of the Hearing Officer. Similarly,
         according to Article 19(7) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/of December on the control of concentrations between
         undertakings (OJ L 257, p. 13), the Advisory Committee may recommend to the Commission that its opinion be published.
         In those circumstances, according to the Kingdom of Sweden, before being able to classify a note addressed to the Advisory
         Committee on the subject of its mission as sensitive, a detailed examination of the content of that note was necessary.
      
Finally, the Kingdom of Sweden argues that the circumstances surrounding the note on the file concerning a visit to the site
         of First Choice are not clear from the judgment under appeal. If, as MyTravel had stated, that note concerned oral observations
         of First Choice, it is not even certain that it actually contains an opinion for internal use within the meaning of the second
         subparagraph of Article 4(3) of Regulation No 1049/2001. It was therefore necessary to clarify what the content of the said
         note was in order to determine whether the exception contained in that provision is applicable to it.
      
The Commission, supported by the Federal Republic of Germany, the French Republic, and the United Kingdom, counters that the
         appeal of the Kingdom of Sweden is entirely unfounded, inasmuch as the General Court did not in any way imply that an analysis
         document by document was devoid of purpose.
      
Those parties argue, first, that the Kingdom of Sweden has not challenged the statement of the General Court, contained in
         paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the public interest in obtaining communication of a document does not have
         the same weight in relation to a document falling within an administrative procedure concerning, for example, competition
         law, as it does in relation to a document concerning a legislative procedure. The parties argue that the difference in treatment
         between those documents is justified in particular having regard to the control of legality which is exercised over administrative
         acts.
      
Moreover, the United Kingdom argues that the approach set out by the Kingdom of Sweden is likely to hinder the realisation
         of the aim of the Union legislature to preserve a ‘space for reflection’ within the institution, as is apparent from the preparatory
         papers for Regulation No 1049/2001.
      
The Federal Republic of Germany argues in that respect that the interests protected by Regulation No 1049/are different
         from the interests of the parties to an administrative procedure. The protection of the latter is assured by Commission Regulation
         (EC) No 802/of April implementing Council Regulation (EC) No 139/(OJ L 133, p. 1), applicable in this
         case. Moreover, in paragraph of its order of January in Case C‑9/Donnici v Parliament, the Court of Justice already indicated that the intention to use internal documents in the context of individual court proceedings
         against an institution of the Union, as declared by MyTravel, is an indicator of a purely individual interest. 
      
Next, the Commission and the Member States intervening in its support argue that, in the contested decisions, it specifically
         examined each of the documents to which access had been requested, as confirmed moreover by the fact that it had agreed to
         communicate some of the latter to MyTravel. The Federal Republic of Germany adds in that respect that the relationship between
         the degree of importance of the reasoning for the refusal and the individual case depends directly on the specific situation
         at issue. As regards competition cases, the divergences of opinion arising between services during an administrative procedure,
         which are concretised in the internal opinions of the legal service or other Commission services, cannot fail to be exploited.
         The Commission would thus risk facing divergent previous internal opinions raised against it in future administrative or court
         proceedings.
      
Finally, the Commission considers that the argument of the Kingdom of Sweden that an official is required to perform his functions
         with impartiality and objectivity is irrelevant in this case. 
      
Concerning the various documents at issue, the Commission considers that the arguments of the Kingdom of Sweden to the effect
         that it would be reasonable to assume, even without becoming aware of the fact, that the report contains parts that are not
         of a sensitive nature, and which are therefore capable of partial disclosure, are unjustified. In any event, partial access
         cannot be considered where one of the parts of the document cannot be separated from the others.
      
Concerning the working papers, the Commission maintains that it refused access after a specific examination concerning each
         of them. Those documents were drafted in order to prepare the report and are often literally reproduced therein. Therefore,
         they could not be disclosed for the same reasons as those invoked in relation to the report itself.
      
Concerning the report of the Hearing Officer, the Commission argues that, during an investigation concerning concentrations,
         the Hearing Officer draws up two reports, namely an intermediate report, which is purely internal, and a final report, which
         is intended for publication, in accordance with Article 16(3) of Decision 2001/462. The report at issue in this case is an
         intermediate report, drafted for the attention of the Member of the Commission with responsibility for competition matters.
         The General Court set out, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, the reasons why that report should not be
         disclosed. In any event, the Commission states that the regime prior to the said decision, applicable ratione temporis in
         this case, did not make provision for publication of the report of the Hearing Officer.
      
Concerning the internal note from DG Competition to the Advisory Committee, the Commission and the United Kingdom consider
         that the fact that the opinion of that committee is public is not relevant in this case. The note in question, in which DG
         Competition summarised its draft decision, had a totally different content from that of the latter, and should therefore be
         regarded as an internal document.
      
The Commission observes finally that the note on the file concerning a site visit to First Choice reflected the impressions
         of officials of DG Competition during the visit. To give further details on the content of that document would amount to depriving
         the exception in question of its useful effect.
      
 Findings of the Court
As a preliminary observation, it should be noted that, in accordance with the first recital of Regulation No 1049/2001, that
         regulation reflects the intention expressed in the second paragraph of Article EU – inserted by the Treaty of Amsterdam
         – of marking a new stage in the process of creating an ever closer union among the peoples of Europe, in which decisions are
         taken as openly as possible and as closely as possible to the citizen. As is stated in recital in the preamble to Regulation
         No 1049/2001, the right of public access to documents of the institutions is related to the democratic nature of those institutions
         (Sweden and Turco v Council, paragraph 34; Joined Cases C‑514/P, C‑528/P and C‑532/P Sweden and Others v API and Commission [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 68).
      
To that end, Regulation No 1049/is intended, as is apparent from recital in its preamble and from Article 1, to give
         the fullest possible effect to the right of public access to documents of the institutions (Sweden and Turco v Council, paragraph 33; Case C‑139/P Commission v Technische Glaswerke Ilmenau [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 51; Sweden and Others v API and Commission, paragraph 69).
      
However, that right is none the less subject to certain limitations based on grounds of public or private interest. More specifically,
         and in reflection of recital in the preamble thereto, Article of Regulation No 1049/provides that the institutions
         are to refuse access to a document where its disclosure would undermine the protection of one of the interests protected by
         that provision (see, to that effect, Case C‑266/P Sison v Council [2007] ECR I‑1233, paragraph 62; Sweden and Others v API and Commission, paragraphs and 71).
      
However, since they derogate from the principle of the widest possible public access to documents, those exceptions must be
         interpreted and applied strictly (Sison v Council, paragraph 63; Sweden and Turco v Council, paragraph 36; Sweden and Others v API and Commission, paragraph 73).
      
Thus, if the institution concerned decides to refuse access to a document which it has been asked to disclose, it must, in
         principle, explain how disclosure of that document could specifically and effectively undermine the interest protected by
         the exception – among those provided for in Article of Regulation No 1049/– upon which it is relying (Sweden and Others v API and Commission, paragraph and case-law cited). Moreover, the risk of that undermining must be reasonably foreseeable and not purely hypothetical
         (Sweden and Turco v Council, paragraph 43).
      
Concerning the exception for protecting the decision-making process contained in Article 4(3) of Regulation No 1049/2001,
         it needs to be verified whether, as the Kingdom of Denmark and the Kingdom of Sweden argue, the fact that the documents concerned
         by that provision concern an administrative procedure that has already been closed is relevant for the specific application
         of the exception in question. Contrary to the facts at issue in Commission v Technische Glaswerke Ilmenau (paragraph 18), mentioned by the Kingdom of Sweden at the hearing, and as is apparent from paragraph of this judgment, MyTravel
         made its request for access to the documents concerning the procedure which lead to the Airtours decision on May 2005,
         that is to say at a time when that decision, which is dated September had not only already been adopted but had also
         been annulled by the judgment of the General Court in Airtours v Commission, against which the time-limit for lodging an appeal had, moreover, already expired.
      
In that respect, it should be noted that the said Article 4(3) draws a clear distinction precisely by reference to whether
         a procedure has been closed or not. Thus, first, according to the first subparagraph of that provision, any document drawn
         up by an institution for internal use or received by an institution, which relates to a matter where the decision has not
         been taken by the institution falls within the scope of the exception for protecting the decision-making process. Secondly,
         the second subparagraph of that provision provides that, after the decision has been taken, the exception at issue covers
         only documents containing opinions for internal use as part of deliberations and preliminary consultations within the institution
         concerned.
      
It is thus only for part of the documents for internal use, namely those containing opinions for internal use as part of deliberations
         and preliminary consultations within the institution concerned, that the second subparagraph of Article 4(3) allows access
         to be refused even after the decision has been taken, where their disclosure would seriously undermine the decision-making
         process of that institution.
      
It follows that the Union legislature took the view that, once the decision is adopted, the requirements for protecting the
         decision-making process are less acute, so that disclosure of any document other than those mentioned in the second subparagraph
         of Article 4(3) of Regulation No 1049/can never undermine that process and that refusal of access to such a document
         cannot be permitted, even if its disclosure would have seriously undermined that process if it had taken place before the
         adoption of the decision in question.
      
It is true that, as the General Court essentially stated in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the mere possibility
         of using the exception in question to refuse access to documents containing opinions for internal use as part of deliberations
         and preliminary consultations within the institution concerned is not in any way affected by the fact that the decision has
         been adopted. That does not, however, mean that the assessment which the institution concerned is called upon to make in order
         to establish whether or not the disclosure of one of those documents is likely seriously to undermine its decision-making
         process must not take account of the fact that the administrative procedure to which those documents relate has been closed.
      
The reasons invoked by an institution and capable of justifying refusal of access to such a document of which communication
         has been requested before the closure of the administrative procedure might not be sufficient for refusing disclosure of the
         same document after the adoption of the decision, without that institution explaining the specific reasons why is considers
         that the closure of the procedure does not exclude the possibility that that refusal of access may remain justified having
         regard to the risk of a serious undermining of its decision-making process (see, by analogy with the second indent of Article
         4(2) of Regulation No 1049/2001, Sweden and Others v API and Commission, paragraphs to 134).
      
It is in the light of those principles that the Court must examine the first plea raised by the Kingdom of Sweden in support
         of its appeal.
      
For that purpose, it is necessary to verify whether the General Court correctly applied the second subparagraph of Article
         4(3) of Regulation No 1049/in respect of each of the documents to which MyTravel had been refused access by the contested
         decisions on the basis of that provision.
      
Concerning the report, it needs to be examined whether the General Court was right, in paragraph of the judgment under
         appeal, to conclude that disclosure of the whole of the report would have seriously undermined the Commission’s decision-making
         process.
      
In that regard, the General Court first took the view, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the interest of
         the public in obtaining access to a document under the transparency principle does not carry the same weight in the case of
         a document drawn up in an administrative procedure intended to apply rules governing the control of concentrations or competition
         law in general, as in the case of a document relating to a procedure in which the Community institution acts in its capacity
         as legislator. It then held, in paragraphs to of its judgment, that, in those circumstances, disclosure of a document
         such as the report to the public would prevent the Commission from obtaining the frankly-expressed and complete views of its
         own services, given that it would lead the authors of that document to practice self-censorship. Finally, the obligation to
         disclose such documents would lead the Member of the Commission responsible for competition to cease making requests for the
         written, and potentially critical, views of his advisers on issues falling within his jurisdiction or that of the Commission,
         which would cause significant damage to the effectiveness of the Commission’s internal decision-making process.
      
First, it is true that, as the Court has already stated, the administrative activity of the Commission does not require as
         extensive an access to documents as that concerning the legislative activity of a Union institution (Commission v Technische Glaswerke Ilmenau, paragraph 60; Sweden and Others v Commission, paragraph 77).
      
However, that does not in any way mean, as the Kingdom of Sweden, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic of Finland
         have rightly pointed out, that such an activity falls outside the scope of Regulation No 1049/2001. Suffice it to note in
         that respect that Article 2(3) of that regulation states that the latter applies to all documents held by an institution,
         that is to say drawn up or received by it and in its possession, in all areas of Union activity.
      
Secondly, the other considerations mentioned in paragraph of this judgment and taken by the General Court as being sufficient
         to justify the Commission’s refusal of MyTravel’s request for access are not in any way supported by detailed evidence, having
         regard to the actual content of the report, allowing it to be understood why disclosure of the latter would have been likely
         seriously to undermine the Commission’s decision-making process, even if the procedure to which that document relates had
         already been closed. In other words, the General Court should have required the Commission to indicate, in accordance with
         the principles set out in particular in paragraphs and of this judgment, the specific reasons why that institution considered
         that closure of the administrative procedure did not exclude the possibility that refusal of access to the report might remain
         justified having regard to the risk of the said decision-making process being seriously undermined.
      
It follows that the General Court erred in law by holding that the Commission could, in such circumstances, refuse access
         to the whole of the report.
      
With regard to the remaining documents, it is necessary first to examine the arguments raised by the Kingdom of Sweden in
         order to challenge the contention that the report of the Hearing Officer, the note from DG Competition to the Advisory Committee
         and the note on the file concerning a site visit to First Choice might be regarded, contrary to the assessment of the General
         Court contained, respectively, in paragraphs 105, and of the judgment under appeal, as opinions for internal use as
         part of deliberations and preliminary consultations within the institution concerned, within the meaning of the second subparagraph
         of Article 4(3) of Regulation No 1049/2001.
      
Concerning, first, the report of the Hearing Officer, this Court finds that, even if the Kingdom of Sweden has doubts as to
         the possibility of applying the exception in question to such a report, which is subject to the rules laid down by Decision 2001/462,
         it itself recognises that, having regard to the regime which actually applied in to the report of the Hearing Officer
         to which MyTravel had sought access, the latter falls within the scope of the said second subparagraph of Article 4(3).
      
Concerning, next, the note from DG Competition to the Advisory Committee, it is obvious that, contrary to what the Kingdom
         of Sweden argues, the fact that a document is likely to be published does not in itself exclude the possibility that that
         same document might fall within the exception in question. It is apparent from the wording of the second subparagraph of Article
         4(3) of Regulation No 1049/that the latter applies to any document containing opinions for internal use as part of deliberations
         and preliminary consultations within the institution. As the General Court stated in paragraph of the judgment under appeal,
         without being contradicted on that point by the Kingdom of Sweden or the Member States intervening in its support, what allows
         the document in question to be regarded as an internal Commission document for the purposes of applying that provision is
         precisely the fact that the Commission was obliged to send that Advisory Committee internal documents pursuant to Article
         of Regulation No 4064/in order for it to be able to give its opinion in accordance with the procedure requiring its
         involvement.
      
Finally, concerning the note on the file concerning a site visit to First Choice, it should be noted that the Kingdom of Sweden
         does not maintain that the General Court distorted the facts when, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, it found
         that that document contained internal deliberations of DG Competition concerning the investigation inasmuch as, for certain
         parties, that document reflected the views of the officials of DG Competition during the visit and not, as MyTravel argued
         at first instance, oral observations of First Choice. In those circumstances, that assessment of the facts made by the General
         Court cannot be called into question at the appeal stage.
      
It follows that the General Court did not make any error of law in holding that the report of the Hearing Officer, the note
         from DG Competition to the Advisory Committee and the file note concerning a site visit to First Choice constituted opinions
         for internal use as part of deliberations and preliminary consultations within the Commission, within the meaning of the second
         subparagraph of Article 4(3) of Regulation No 1049/2001.
      
However, the Kingdom of Sweden argues that the General Court infringed the second subparagraph of Article 4(3) of Regulation
         No 1049/when it concluded, in essence, in paragraphs 59, 94, 104, and of the judgment under appeal, that disclosure
         of the three documents mentioned in paragraph of this judgment and, first, the working papers, and, second, the notes to
         the Commissioner, the notes to other services and the notes in reply from services other than the legal service would have
         seriously undermined the Commission’s decision-making process.
      
It should first be noted that, as regards the report of the Hearing Officer, the note from DG Competition to the Advisory
         Committee and the file note concerning a site visit to First Choice, the General Court, in paragraphs 106, and of
         the judgment under appeal respectively, based the legality of the Commission’s refusal of MyTravel’s request for disclosure
         solely on considerations concerning the impact that such disclosure might have had on the freedom of opinion of the Hearing
         Officer, the internal nature of the documents in question and the fact that the latter reflected the impressions of Commission
         officials.
      
This Court finds that, contrary to the requirements referred to in paragraphs and of this judgment, the General Court
         did not in any way verify whether the Commission had supplied specific reasons why such considerations permitted the conclusion
         that disclosure of those latter documents would have seriously undermined the decision-making process of that institution,
         even though the administrative procedure to which those documents related had been closed.
      
Next, concerning the working papers, the General Court took the view, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the
         latter had enabled the report to be produced and comprised preparatory assessments or provisional conclusions for internal
         use, so that they fell within the exception in question.
      
This Court finds in that respect that, taking account of the fact that, as has been held in paragraph of this judgment,
         the considerations which led the General Court to conclude that access to the report could be refused were not sufficient,
         the General Court was not justified either in taking the view, solely on the basis of the fact that those working papers had
         enabled the report to be produced, that disclosure of the latter would have seriously undermined the decision-making process
         of the Commission and that, therefore, those documents should not be disclosed.
      
Finally, concerning the notes to the Commissioner, the notes to the other services and the notes in reply from services other
         than the legal service, the General Court considered by contrast, in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, that
         the Commission had explained that the refusal to disclose those documents was justified even after the adoption of the second
         contested decision, given that such disclosure risked undermining its assessment of similar concentrations which might arise
         between the parties concerned or in the same sector, or of ‘cases involving the concept of a collective dominant position’.
         The Commission also referred specifically to an EMI/Time Warner case, in which it refused a request for access under Regulation
         No 1049/concerning the statement of objections in order to protect the deliberations of its services in the BMG/Sony
         case, which concerned the same business sector.
      
However, this Court finds that, as the Advocate General has essentially pointed out in points to of her Opinion, such
         arguments are not in any way supported. In particular, the Commission has not provided, as required by the case-law mentioned
         in paragraph of this judgment, any evidence that access to the said documents would have had an actual impact on other
         specific administrative procedures. Moreover, even supposing the Commission had, in an isolated case, correctly refused a
         request for access to the statement of objections in order to protect the deliberations of its services in another case concerning
         the same business sector, that does not in any way demonstrate that any refusal of access to documents on the basis of the
         exception in question is justified as such.
      
In the light of the above, the first plea raised by the Kingdom of Sweden in support of its appeal must be upheld.
      
 The second plea, claiming infringement of the second indent of Article 4(2) of Regulation No 1049/Arguments of the parties
By its second plea, the Kingdom of Sweden, supported by the Kingdom of Denmark, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic
         of Finland, argues that the General Court infringed the second indent of Article 4(2) of Regulation No 1049/by holding,
         contrary to the case-law in Sweden and Turco v Council, that the Commission had rightly refused access to the notes in reply of the legal service on the basis of the exception
         for protecting legal advice, without first carrying out an examination of the content of those notes. 
      
The fact that the legality of a decision risks being called into question by the disclosure of a document does not, the Kingdom
         of Sweden argues, constitute a sufficient reason for that document not be disclosed. On the contrary, it is precisely the
         lack of information which is likely to give rise to doubts as to the legitimacy of the decision-making process within the
         institutions. That risk would be avoided if, in its decision, the Commission were to indicate clearly the grounds which led
         it to opt for a solution in respect of which the legal service had issued an unfavourable opinion. Moreover, the statement
         that, in the event of disclosure, the legal service would be led in future to display reticence and caution was unfounded.
         Finally, the argument that it would be difficult for the latter to defend a point of view different from its own before the
         Union judicature was too general to establish the existence of a risk that the interest protected by the said provision might
         be undermined.
      
The Commission, supported by the Federal Republic of Germany, the French Republic and the United Kingdom, considers that the
         reasoning of the General Court is in accordance with the case-law in Sweden and Turco v Council. 
      
The document at issue in Sweden and Turco v Council concerned a legislative procedure, whereas, in this case, the notes in reply from the legal service concern a procedure of
         an administrative nature. The General Court explained in detail, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, that
         the risk entailed by disclosure of those notes that the protection of legal advice might be undermined is real and linked
         to the fact that, if the College of Commissioners were not to follow the opinion of the legal service and adopt a decision
         different from that envisaged by the latter, disclosure of those opinions would weaken the benefit which the Commission may
         derive from those opinions.
      
The Federal Republic of Germany adds that the Court has already held, in paragraph of its order in Donnici v Parliament, that, in the context of court proceedings, the principle of a fair trial is infringed if, for example, the legal service
         were obliged, in the event of divergence between the opinion it issued and the decision finally adopted, to defend in proceedings
         a position opposed to that which it had itself expressed in the past.
      
 Findings of the Court
In order to reply to the second plea in the appeal, it is necessary to recall at the outset that, as stated in paragraphs
         and of this judgment and contrary to what seems to be suggested, in particular, by the Commission, the administrative
         activity of the institutions does not escape in any way from the scope of Regulation No 1049/2001.
      
Moreover, it should also be noted that, as stated in paragraph of this judgment, where the institution concerned decides
         to refuse access to a document of which communication has been requested, it is under a duty, in principle, to provide explanations
         as to how access to that document might actually and specifically undermine the interest protected by an exception contained
         in Article of Regulation No 1049/upon which that institution relies.
      
Concerning, in this case, the exception for protecting legal advice, contained in the second indent of Article 4(2) of that
         regulation, it is necessary to verify, as the Kingdom of Sweden and the other Member States which have intervened in its support
         are requesting, whether the considerations adopted by the General Court were actually sufficient to support the conclusion
         that the Commission was right to refuse access to the notes in reply from the legal service.
      
For that purpose, it should be recalled that the General Court held, first, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal,
         that disclosure of those notes would risk communicating to the public information on the state of internal discussions between
         DG Competition and the legal service on the lawfulness of the assessment of the compatibility of the Airtours/First Choice
         concentration with the common market, which would, as such, risk affecting decisions which might fall to be made as regards
         the same parties or in the same sector. Secondly, in paragraph of that judgment, the General Court held that to accept
         that the notes in question should be disclosed would be liable to lead the legal service to display reticence and caution
         in the future in the drafting of such notes in order not to affect the Commission’s decision-making capacity in areas in which
         it is involved in its administrative capacity. Thirdly, in paragraph of the judgment, the General Court held that disclosure
         of those notes would risk putting the Commission in the difficult position in which its legal service might see itself required
         to defend a position before the Court which was not the same as the position which it had argued for internally in its role
         as adviser to the services responsible for the file, which it was its duty to perform during the administrative procedure.
      
As regards, first, the fear that disclosure of an opinion of the Commission’s legal service relating to a draft decision could
         lead to doubts as to the lawfulness of the final decision, it is, as the Kingdom of Sweden has rightly argued, precisely openness
         in this regard that contributes to conferring greater legitimacy on the institutions in the eyes of European citizens and
         increasing their confidence in them by allowing divergences between various points of view to be openly debated. It is in
         fact rather a lack of information and debate which is capable of giving rise to doubts in the minds of citizens, not only
         as regards the lawfulness of an isolated act, but also as regards the legitimacy of the decision-making process as a whole
         (Sweden and Turco v Council, paragraph 59).
      
Furthermore, the risk that doubts might be engendered in the minds of European citizens as regards the lawfulness of an act
         adopted by an institution because the latter’s legal service had given an unfavourable opinion would more often than not fail
         to arise if the statement of reasons for that act were reinforced, so as to make it apparent why that unfavourable opinion
         was not followed (Sweden and Turco v Council, paragraph 60).
      
Concerning, next, the argument that the legal service would be liable to be led to display reticence and caution, it is sufficient
         to note that the General Court, without in any way verifying whether that argument was supported by concrete and detailed
         evidence, based its reasoning solely on general and abstract considerations.
      
Moreover, as regards the argument that the legal service might find itself obliged to defend before the Union judicature the
         legality of a decision in relation to which it had issued a negative opinion, it should be noted that, as the Kingdom of Sweden
         maintains, an argument of such a general nature cannot justify an exception to the transparency required by Regulation No
         1049/(Sweden and Turco v Council, paragraph 65).
      
In this case, as stated in paragraph of this judgment, MyTravel’s request for access was brought after the Airtours decision
         had been annulled by the judgment of the General Court in Airtours v Commission and after the time-limit for appealing against that judgment had expired. In such circumstances, as the Advocate General
         has, in essence, pointed out in point of her Opinion, there was no possibility of the legal service finding itself in a
         situation such as that referred to in the preceding paragraph, as no further action concerning the legality of that decision
         could be envisaged before the Union judicature.
      
Finally, as regards the argument raised by the Federal Republic of Germany on the strength of the order in Donnici v Parliament, it is sufficient to note that the facts which gave rise to that order are different from those in this case. In the first
         place, that order concerned not a request for access within the meaning of Regulation No 1049/2001, but a request that an
         opinion of the legal service of the Parliament be placed on the file of the procedure before the Court. Secondly, that request
         had been submitted in the context of a dispute concerning precisely the validity of the decision of the Parliament to which
         that opinion related. That order cannot therefore be relevant in order to justify the legality of the refusal of access in
         question in relation to the second indent of Article 4(2) of Regulation No 1049/2001.
      
Having regard to the above, the second plea raised by the Kingdom of Sweden in support of its appeal must also be upheld.
      
 The third plea, claiming infringement of the parts of the sentence at the end of Article 4(2) and of the second subparagraph
            of Article 4(3) of Regulation No 1049/By its third plea, the Kingdom of Sweden complains that the General Court failed to recognise the existence, in this case,
         of an overriding public interest justifying the disclosure of the documents, even though such disclosure risked undermining
         the interests protected, respectively, under the second indent of Article 4(2) and the second subparagraph of Article 4(3)
         of Regulation No 1049/2001.
      
However, given that the Court has upheld the first and second pleas of the Kingdom of Sweden in support of its appeal, there
         is no need to examine its third plea.
      
 The action and reference back to the General Court
According to the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, the latter may,
         where the decision of the General Court has been annulled, either itself give final judgment in the matter, where the state
         of the proceedings so permits, or refer the case back to the General Court for judgment.
      
In this case, the Court of Justice has the necessary information in order to give final judgment on the pleas raised in support
         of the action claiming infringement of, first, the second subparagraph of Article 4(3) of Regulation No 1049/2001, directed
         against the two contested decisions and, second, the second indent of Article 4(2) of that regulation, directed against the
         second contested decision.
      
In that regard, it is sufficient to note that, for the reasons set out in paragraphs 89, 98, and of this judgment,
         the Commission, in the contested decisions, did not correctly apply the exception for protecting the decision-making process
         of that institution. Similarly, having regard to the grounds set out in paragraphs to of this judgment, the Commission
         also misapplied the exception for protecting legal advice.
      
It follows that, first, the contested decisions must be annulled inasmuch as they are based on the second subparagraph of
         Article 4(3) of Regulation No 1049/and that, secondly, the second contested decision must also be annulled inasmuch as
         it is based on the second indent of Article 4(2) of that regulation.
      
However, the Court of Justice is not in a position to rule on the pleas by MyTravel in support of its action, referred to
         in paragraph of this judgment, directed against the first contested decision and claiming infringement of the second and
         third indents of Article 4(2) of Regulation No 1049/2001, or on the pleas, referred to in paragraph of this judgment, directed
         against the second contested decision and concerning the exception for protecting the purpose of inspections, investigations
         and audits, in conjunction with the exception for protecting the decision-making process.
      
As stated in paragraphs and of this judgment, and as is apparent from paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal,
         the General Court did not examine those pleas. 
      
Therefore, the case must be referred back to the General Court for it to rule on the pleas in the action brought before it
         by MyTravel on which it did not give a ruling.
      
 Costs
Since the case has been referred back to the General Court, the costs relating to the present appeal proceedings must be reserved.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby: 
1.      Sets aside point of the operative part of the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities of September
            in Case T‑403/MyTravel v Commission;
2.      Annuls Commission Decision D(2005) of September 2005, dismissing the request by MyTravel Group plc for access to certain
            preparatory documents of the Commission on the control of concentrations inasmuch as it is based on the second subparagraph
            of Article 4(3) of Regulation (EC) No 1049/of the European Parliament and of the Council of May regarding public
            access to European Parliament, Council and Commission documents;
3.      Annuls Commission Decision D(2005) of October 2005, partially dismissing the request by MyTravel Group plc for access
            to certain preparatory documents of the Commission on the control of concentrations inasmuch as it is based on the second
            indent of Article 4(2) and the second subparagraph of Article 4(3) of Regulation No 1049/2001;
4.      Refers the case back to the General Court of the European Union for it to rule on the pleas in the action brought before it
            by MyTravel Group plc on which it did not give a ruling;
5.      Reserves the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English
      
Top  
 