
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-217/P Michel HendrickxvEuropean Centre for the Development of Vocational Training (Cedefop)
«(Appeal – Officials – Resettlement allowance – Action which has become devoid of purpose – No need to adjudicate)»
Opinion of Advocate General Tizzano delivered on September I - Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), April I - Summary of the Judgment
1..
Procedure – Decision replacing, in the course of the proceedings, the contested decision –   Replacement of a decision refusing the reinstallation allowance by a decision granting it but operating a set-off against
                     allowances wrongly received by the applicant – Different subject-matter – Extension of the initial claims for relief and pleadings – Not permitted  
                  
2..
Appeals – Pleas in law – Plea put forward for the first time in the appeal – Inadmissible  (Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, Art. 42(1), first subpara.) 
1.
 An applicant may amend his heads of claim and pleas in law following the replacement by a decision, in the course of the proceedings,
         of a previous decision with the same subject-matter. That is not the case if the contested decision is one refusing the reinstallation allowance and if, in the course of the proceedings,
         it is replaced by a decision granting it to the applicant but also requiring him to repay sums wrongly paid to him in respect
         of the installation allowance. The decision replacing the contested decision does not have the same subject-matter since it
         establishes a set-off between the amount overpaid to the applicant and that of the sums due to him. It follows therefrom that
         in such a case the applicant should not be given leave to amend his claims and pleas. see paras 29-2.
 To allow a party to put forward for the first time before the Court of Justice a plea in law which it has not raised before
         the Court of First Instance would be to allow it to bring before the former, whose jurisdiction in appeals is limited, a case
         of wider ambit than that which came before the Court of First Instance. In an appeal the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice
         is confined to review of the findings of law on the pleas argued before the Court of First Instance. see para. JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)April (1)
((Appeal – Officials – Resettlement Allowance – Action which has become devoid of purpose – No need to adjudicate))
In Case C-217/P, 
            
 Michel Hendrickx , an official of the Council of the European Union, residing in Brussels (Belgium), represented by J.-N. Louis and V. Peere,
            avocats,
            
appellant, 
APPEAL against the order of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities (Fifth Chamber) of March in Case
            T-298/Hendrickx  v  
             Cedefop  (not published in the ECR), seeking to have that order set aside,
            
the other party to the proceedings being: 
             Centre européen pour le développement de la formation professionnelle (Cedefop) , represented by  B. Wägenbaur, Rechtsanwalt,defendant at first instance, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
composed of: J.-P. Puissochet, President of the Chamber, C. Gulmann, F. Macken, N. Colneric (Rapporteur) and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: A. Tizzano, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2002, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By application lodged at the Registry of the Court of Justice on May 2001, Mr Hendrickx brought an appeal pursuant to Article
         of the EC Statute of the Court of Justice and the corresponding provisions of the ECSC and EAEC Statutes of the Court of
         Justice against the order of the Court of First Instance of March in Case T-298/Hendrickx  v  
          Cedefop  (not published in the ECR, hereinafter  
         the contested order), by which it held that there was no need to adjudicate on his action for annulment of the implied rejection by the Centre
         européen pour le développement de la formation professionnelle (European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training,
         hereinafter  
         Cedefop) of his request for payment of a resettlement allowance (hereinafter  
         the disputed decision).  
         
Relevant provisions
            
Article 24(1) and (2) of the Conditions of employment of other servants of the European Communities (hereinafter  
         the Conditions of Employment) provides: 
         
1.
 A member of the temporary staff engaged for a fixed period of not less than one year, or deemed by the authority referred
         to in the first paragraph of Article to be engaged for an equivalent period if his contract is for an indefinite period,
         shall receive an installation allowance as provided for in Article of Annex VII to the Staff Regulations amounting, for
         an expected period of service of:
         
─
not less than one year but less than two years, to one third of the rate laid down in Article of Annex VII to the Staff
            Regulations 
         
─
not less than two years but less than three years, to two thirds of the rate laid down in Article of Annex VII to the Staff
            Regulations 
         
─
three years or more, to three thirds of the rate laid down in Article of Annex VII to the Staff Regulations. 
         
2.
 The resettlement allowance provided for in Article of Annex VII to the Staff Regulations shall be granted to temporary staff
         who have completed four years' service. A servant who has completed more than one year's service but less than four years'
         service shall receive a resettlement allowance proportionate to his length of service, incomplete years being disregarded.
         
            
Article 6(1) and (4) of Annex VII to the Staff Regulations of the European Communities (hereinafter  
         the Staff Regulations) provides: 
         
1.
 An established official who satisfies the requirements of Article 5(1) shall be entitled on termination of service to a resettlement
         allowance equal to two months' basic salary in the case of an official who is entitled to the household allowance or to one
         month's basic salary in other cases, provided that he has completed four years of service and does not receive a similar allowance
         in his new employment.  In cases where a husband and wife who are officials of the Communities are both entitled to the resettlement
         allowance, this shall be payable only to the person whose basic salary is the higher.
         For the purpose of calculating his service, account shall be taken of years spent in any administrative status listed in Article of the Staff Regulations other than leave on personal grounds. ...The resettlement allowance shall be weighted at the rate fixed for the place where the official was last employed....
         
4.
 The resettlement allowance shall be paid against evidence that the official and his family, or, where the official has died,
         his family only, have resettled at a place situated not less than km from the place where the official was employed.
         Resettlement of an official or of the family of a deceased official shall take place within three years of the date of termination
         of his service....
         
            
Under Article of the Staff Regulations:  
         Any sum overpaid shall be recovered if the recipient was aware that there was no due reason for the payment or if the fact
         of the overpayment was patently such that he could not have been unaware of it.
         Facts giving rise to the dispute
            
By contract of December 1996, Cedefop, which is established at Thessalonika (Greece), engaged Mr Hendrickx as a member
         of its temporary staff in Grade A for a period of one year from January 1997.  Mr Hendrickx, a Council official in Grade
         B 5, had previously obtained, by Council decision of December 1996, his secondment to Cedefop for a period of one year.
         
         
            
On taking up his post, he was paid an installation allowance corresponding to his basic salary for two months. 
         
            
On December 1997, the Council extended Mr Hendrickx's secondment to Cedefop for a year. 
         
            
By decision of December 1997, the Director of Cedefop extended Mr Hendrickx's contract as a member of the temporary staff
         for six months, until June 1998.  No extension beyond that date was accorded to him, in spite of his request. 
         
            
An action brought by Mr Hendrickx against the decision not to renew his contract was dismissed by judgment of the Court of
         First Instance of July in Case T-87/Hendrickx  v  
          Cedefop  (ECR-SC I-A-and II-679).  Mr  Hendrickx's appeal against that judgment was dismissed by order of the Court of Justice
         of March in Case C-344/P  
          Hendrickx  v  
          Cedefop  (not published in the ECR). 
         
            
By decision July 1998, the Council reinstated Mr Hendrickx in a post of assistant in Financial Control with effect from
         July 1998.  After taking leave on personal grounds, he resumed his duties at the Council on April 1999. 
         
            
On July 1999, he informed the Director of Cedefop of his and his family's resettlement in Brussels and requested payment
         of the resettlement allowance. 
         
            
With regard to the fate of that request, the Court of First Instance found as follows: 
         
            
On September 1999, the applicant sent an electronic mail to Cedefop's finance unit asking what document he had to forward
         to be entitled to payment of the resettlement allowance and on what bases it was calculated. 
         
            
Since he was informed that his request had been forwarded to Mr Paraskevaïdis, Cedefop's head of administration responsible
         for advising the AIPN on the establishment of the entitlements of officials and other servants, the applicant sent him on
         October 1999, an electronic mail requesting contain information as to the settlement of his reinstallation allowance. 
         
            
On November 1999, since Cedefop had made no decision on the applicant's request for payment, it became the subject of an
         implied rejection (hereinafter  
         the disputed decision). 
         
            
Since he received no reply from Mr Paraskevaïdis, the applicant repeated his request to him on November 1999. 
         
            
On December Mr Paraskevaïdis sent the applicant the following reply: As you know perhaps, there has recently been a decision of the Court of First Instance in a case brought by another of our
         former members of the temporary staff against Cedefop, which makes clear that, if the installation allowance has been paid
         at the outset in its entirety (3/3) and if it is established that the member of the temporary staff did not complete four
         years of service prior to his departure, any difference between what has been paid and the sum properly due must be repaid
         to the Centre.  Given that you have [completed] less than half of the period of four years mentioned in the regulations, and
         that at the outset you received the full sum for the three years, you would first have to reimburse half of it and then receive
         back part of that sum by way of resettlement allowance.  In net terms therefore, you would owe money to the Centre rather
         than being entitled to a payment from it. I think, anyway, that it is better now to await the conclusion of the case which you have brought before the CFI before doing
         anything else in this matter.  The reasoning of the judgment to be delivered should largely determine the actions of those
         concerned, since one will then know whether the conditions under the Staff Regulations for the Centre to be required to call
         for repayment of half of the installation allowance are met or whether (according to the CFI) you are, on the contrary, entitled
         to payment of the full resettlement allowance without any deduction or set-off. We shall therefore return to this particular matter when we know more of the main case. ...
         
            
By fax dated February 2000, the applicant sent Cedefop's AIPN a complaint under Article 90(2) of the Staff Regulations
         ... 
         
            
In the absence of a reply from the AIPN, that claim became the subject of an implied rejection.
         
Proceedings before the Court of First Instance
            
It was in those circumstances that Mr Hendrickx, by application lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on September 2000, brought an action for annulment of the disputed decision and an order that Cedefop pay the costs.  
         
            
The steps taken in the proceedings are described in the contested order as follows:  By document lodged at the Registry of
         the Court of First Instance on November 2000, Cedefop asked the Court of First Instance to declare that there was no need
         to adjudicate on the action.  It annexed to its request a decision of November relating to the payment of the resettlement
         allowance claimed by the applicant. 
         
            
That decision stated: ...
         
1.
 Pursuant to the provisions of Article 24(2) of the [Conditions of employment of other servants of the European Communities]
         and to Article of Annex VII to the Staff Regulations, a resettlement allowance of [GRD] Greek drachmas is to be
         paid to Mr Hendrickx in respect of his services as a member of the temporary staff of the Centre for the period 01.01.1997-30.06.1998.
         
         
2.
 Pursuant to the provisions of Article 24(1) of the [Conditions of employment of other servants of the European Communities]
         and to Article of the Staff Regulations, the overpaid part of the installation allowance amounting to [GRD] is
         to be recovered. 
         
3.
 Following the usual practice of the Community institutions, the set-off between the two amounts is to be effected by the payment
         by Mr Hendrickx of the balance of [GRD] to Cedefop's bank account no later than December 2000. 
         
4.
 This decision takes effect on 14.11.2000.
         
            
In support of its request for a declaration that there was no need to adjudicate, Cedefop argued that it was clear from Mr Paraskevaïdis's
         letter of December that the applicant's right to payment of a resettlement allowance had never been disputed, but
         that, on the contrary, it had been confirmed to him.  His action had therefore become devoid of purpose. 
         
            
Mr Hendrickx argued that he still had an interest in pursuing the proceedings before the Court of First Instance.  He submitted
         that the decision of November partially replaced the disputed decision.  Consequently, the decision of November
         constituted, according to him, a new factor entitling him to amend his heads of claim and pleas in law.  Mr Hendrickx
         therefore formally claimed that the application for a declaration that there was no need to adjudicate be rejected and that
         he be given leave to amend his heads of claim and pleas in law. 
         The contested order
            
By the contested order the Court of First Instance declared that there was no need to adjudicate on Mr Hendrickx's action.
         
         
            
The Court of First Instance explained that decision, in paragraphs to of the contested order, in the following terms:
         
         
            
It is, admittedly, true that in the interests of the proper administration of justice and of the requirement of procedural
         economy, heads of claim directed against a decision which is replaced, during the course of proceedings, by a decision with
         the same subject-matter, may be regarded as being directed against the replacement decision because the latter decision constitutes
         a new factor which entitles the applicant to amend his heads of claim and pleas in law (see, among others, Case 14/Alpha Steel  v  
          Commission  [1982] ECR 749, paragraph 8, and Case 103/Stahlwerke Peine-Salzgitter  v  
          Commission  [1988] ECR 4131, paragraph 11). 
         
            
However, the subject of the applicant's action is the claim for annulment of Cedefop's implied decision refusing him the benefit
         of the resettlement allowance following his transfer back to Brussels. 
         
            
By the decision of November the applicant specifically obtained payment of that allowance.  In the terms of that decision,
          
         a resettlement allowance of GRD is to be paid to Mr Hendrickx in respect of his services as a member of the temporary
         staff of the Centre for the period 01.01.1997-30.06.1998. 
         
            
That finding is not undermined by the fact that Cedefop decided to recover simultaneously the overpayment of part of the allowance
         paid to the applicant following his installation at Thessalonika. 
         
48.
 Therefore, in view of the decision of November 2000, this action has become devoid of purpose.
         
The appeal
            
In his appeal, in support of which he raises two pleas in law, Mr Hendrickx claims that the Court should: 
         
─
set aside the contested order and, giving judgment itself: 
         
─
grant him leave to amend his pleas in law and heads of claim; 
         
─
in the alternative, declare that the decision of the Director of Cedefop of November was taken by an incompetent authority;
         consequently, annul that decision as well as Cedefop's implied decision rejecting the appellant's claim for payment of a resettlement
         allowance corresponding to two months' basic salary; and 
         
─
order Cedefop to pay him the sum of BEF together with default interest at the rate of 7% per annum from July 1999;
         
         
─
order Cedefop to pay the costs of both sets of proceedings. 
         
            
Cedefop contends that the appeal should be dismissed and the appellant ordered to pay all the costs. 
         The plea in law based on the refusal to grant Mr Hendrickx leave to amend his pleas in law and heads of claim in respect of
         the decision of November Arguments of the parties
         
            
Under his second plea in law, which it is appropriate to consider first, Mr Hendrickx claims that the Court of First Instance
         committed an error of law by not allowing him to amend his heads of claim and pleas in law and, as a result, by not enabling
         him to submit to the Community Court the dispute between him and Cedefop, first, as to the determination of the resettlement
         allowance to which he is entitled by reason of his transfer back to the Council in Brussels and, second, as to the recovery
         of a so-called overpayment of the installation allowance which was paid to him when he took up his duties in Thessalonika.
         
         
            
Mr Hendrickx submits that the decision of November was a decision confirming the disputed decision.  He points out,
         in that regard, the content of Mr Paraskevaïdis's message of December 1999.  Mr Paraskevaïdis encouraged him to submit
         a complaint against the implied rejection of his request, setting out in it the plea establishing that, as a seconded established
         official, he was entitled, on taking up his duties at Cedefop, to an installation allowance corresponding to his basic salary
         for two months and to the payment of the same allowance on his transfer back to Brussels in accordance with Article of
         the Staff Regulations, Articles and of Annex VII thereto, as well as Article 24(2) of the Conditions of Employment. 
         
            
Mr Hendrickx argues that, since his complaint had been made the subject only of an implied rejection, it was open to him to
         put forward, in his action for annulment, only pleas directly related to the disputed decision.  In the light of the case-law
         of the Court of First Instance and of the Court of Justice, according to which an applicant may amend his pleas in law and
         heads of claim following the replacement, in the course of proceedings, of the contested decision by a decision with the same
         subject-matter (
          Alpha Steel  v  
          Commission , cited above, paragraph 8;  
          Stahlwerke Peine-Salzgitter  v  
          Commission , cited above, paragraph 11, and Case T-23/De Persio  v  
          Commission  [1998] ECR-SC I-A-and II-1413, paragraphs to 34), he maintains that the Court of First Instance could not refuse him
         leave to amend his pleas and claims and, in particular, those establishing that Cedefop calculated the installation and resettlement
         allowances in disregard of his status as a seconded official. 
         
            
Mr Hendrickx also complains that he has been deprived, first, of the right to dispute the application to his resettlement
         allowance of the weighting applicable to officials posted to Greece and, second, of the right to plead infringement of the
         second subparagraph of Article 6(1) of Annex VII to the Staff Regulations, as well as of the principles resulting from the
         judgments of the Court of First Instance in Case T-42/Yorck von Wartenburg  v  
          Parliament  [1990] ECR II-and Case T-42/OP  
          Parliament  v  
          Yorck von Wartenburg  [1990] ECR II-299. 
         
            
Cedefop disputes the relevance of the case-law cited by Mr Hendrickx.  The decision of November was not a replacement
         measure in the sense contemplated in that case-law since it does not replace the decision of implied rejection of the request
         for grant of the resettlement allowance.  The decision of November accorded Mr Hendrickx the payment of the resettlement
         allowance which was the subject of his action at first instance.  As a result of this, the action has become devoid of purpose.
         
         
            
Cedefop points out that the object of the recovery of the installation allowance, just like the set-off between the two sums
         with which the decision of November dealt simultaneously, is clearly distinct from the resettlement allowance. 
         
            
Cedefop notes that Mr Hendrickx did not submit a complaint, within the meaning of Article 90(2) of the Staff Regulations in
         relation to the decision of November 2000.  According to Cedefop, Mr Hendrickx cannot avoid the rule according to which
         an action against a challengeable act must be preceded by a complaint within the meaning of the Article 90(2) of the Staff
         Regulations.  Granting the appellant leave to amend his claims and pleas at first instance would entail enabling him to evade
         his obligation to submit a prior complaint. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
According to the case-law of the Court of Justice, an applicant may amend his heads of claim and pleas in law following the
         replacement, in the course of the proceedings, of the contested decision by a decision with the same subject-matter (see,
         in particular,  
          Alpha Steel  v  
          Commission , paragraph 8, and  
          Stahlwerke Peine-Salzgitter  v  
          Commission , paragraph 11). 
         
            
In this case, the disputed decision impliedly rejects the request for payment of a resettlement allowance submitted by Mr Hendrickx
         whereas the decision of November 2000, while it leads, in the end, to an even more unfavourable result for him, recognises
         his right to payment of the allowance claimed.  Thus, the express decision of November 2000, whose purpose was to effect
         a set-off between the amount overpaid to Mr Hendrickx on his installation at Thessalonika and the amount of the sums which
         are due to him in respect of his return to Brussels, cannot be regarded as having the same subject as the earlier implied
         rejection. 
         
            
It follows that amendment of the claims and pleas at first instance was not permitted.  The Court of First Instance therefore
         correctly decided, at paragraphs to of the contested order, to refuse the appellant leave to amend his claims and pleas.
         
         
            
In those circumstances, this plea in law must be rejected. 
         The plea in law alleging lack of competence on the part of the Director of Cedefop
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
Mr Hendrickx submits that the decision of November 2000, taken by the Director of Cedefop, is a non-existent decision since
         it was adopted by an authority which lacked competence. 
         
            
In that respect, Mr Hendrickx sets out in detail the division of spheres of competence in relation to the powers of the appointing
         authority/authority authorised to conclude contracts  
         AHCC at Cedefop.  He maintains that the powers of the appointing authority/AHCC in respect of complaints within the meaning of
         Article 90(2) of the Staff Regulations have been delegated to the Claims Committee and that therefore that committee was the
         only authority competent to decide on the merits of his complaint submitted on February 2000.  However, the President of
         the Staff Committee informed him, by letter of September 2000, that the Claims Committee did not, on that date, know of
         that letter. 
         
            
Cedefop contends that this plea in law is inadmissible because Mr Hendrickx has no  
          locus standi  since the decision of November granted his request in full. 
         
            
In any event, the first plea is unfounded because the Director of Cedefop was the authority competent to adopt the decision
         of November 2000. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
To allow a party to put forward for the first time before the Court of Justice a plea in law which it has not raised before
         the Court of First Instance would be to allow it to bring before the former, whose jurisdiction in appeals is limited, a case
         of wider ambit than that which came before the Court of First Instance. In an appeal the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice
         is confined to review of the findings of law on the pleas argued before the Court of First Instance (see Case C-136/P 
         
          Commission  v  
          Brazzelli Lualdi and Others  [1994] ECR I-1981, paragraph 59; and the orders in Case C-422/P  
          Sateba  v  
          Commission  [1998] ECR I-4913, paragraph 30; Case C-437/P  
          Infrisa  v  
          Commission  [1999] ECR I-7145, paragraphs and 29, and in Case C-274/P  
          Simon  v  
          Commission  [2002] ECR I-5999, paragraph 39).  
         
            
It is clear from the documents before the Court that, at first instance, Mr Hendrickx never raised the issue of the lack of
         competence on the part of Cedefop's Director to take the decision of November 2000.  This plea in law must therefore be
         rejected as inadmissible. 
         
            
It follows from all the foregoing considerations that the appeal must be dismissed.   
         
Costs
            
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, which applies to the appeal procedure by virtue of Article 118, the unsuccessful
         party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party's pleadings. Since Cedefop has
         applied for costs and the latter has been unsuccessful in his appeal, he must be ordered to pay the costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
hereby:  
         
1.
 Dismisses the appeal; 
            
2.
 Orders Mr Hendrickx to pay the costs. 
            
Puissochet
Gulmann 
Macken 
Colneric
Cunha Rodrigues 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on April 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
J.-P. Puissochet  
Registrar
President of the Sixth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: French.
Top  
 