
ORDER OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
March (
*)
‛(Rectification of judgment’
In Joined Cases C‑203/REC and C‑698/REC,
REQUESTS for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU made by the Kammarrätten i Stockholm (Administrative Court of Appeal, Stockholm, Sweden) and the Court of Appeal (England & Wales) (Civil Division) (United Kingdom), by decisions, respectively, of April and December 2015, received at the Court on May and December 2015, in the proceedings
TeleSverige AB (C‑203/REC)
v
Post- och telestyrelsen,
and
Secretary of State for the Home Department (C‑698/REC)
v
Tom Watson,
Peter Brice,
Geoffrey Lewis,
interveners:
Open Rights Group,
Privacy International,
The Law Society of England and Wales,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President, A. Tizzano, Vice-President, R. Silva de Lapuerta, T. von Danwitz (Rapporteur), J.L. da Cruz Vilaça, E. Juhász and M. Vilaras, Presidents of the Chamber, A. Borg Barthet, J. Malenovský, E. Levits, J.-C. Bonichot, A. Arabadjiev, S. Rodin, F. Biltgen and C. Lycourgos, Judges,
Advocate General: H. Saugmandsgaard Øe,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
after hearing the Advocate General,
makes the following
Order
On December 2016, the Court (Grand Chamber) delivered its judgment in TeleSverige and Watson and Others (C‑203/and C‑698/15, EU:C:2016:970).
That judgment contains a clerical mistake in the English- and Swedish-language versions, which it is appropriate for the Court to rectify of its own motion pursuant to Article 103(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice.
 
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby orders:
 
1.
The first sentence of paragraph of the judgment of December 2016, TeleSverige and Watson and Others (C‑203/and C‑698/15, EU:C:2016:970), in the English-language version, shall be rectified as follows:
‘As regards the setting of limits on such a measure with respect to the public and the situations that may potentially be affected, the national legislation must be based on objective evidence which makes it possible to identify a public whose data is likely to reveal a link, at least an indirect one, with serious criminal offences, to contribute in one way or another to fighting serious crime or to prevent a serious risk to public security.’
 
2.
The second sentence of paragraph of the judgment of December 2016, TeleSverige and Watson and Others (C‑203/and C‑698/15, EU:C:2016:970), in the Swedish-language version, shall be rectified as follows:
‘Den nationella lagstiftningen ska grunda sig på objektiva omständigheter som gör det möjligt att ta sikte på en personkrets vars uppgifter kan avslöja en, åtminstone indirekt, koppling till grov brottslighet, på ett eller annat sätt bidra till att bekämpa grov brottslighet eller förhindra en allvarlig risk för den allmänna säkerheten.’
 
3.
The original of this order shall be annexed to the original of the rectified judgment. A note of this order shall be made in the margin of the original of the rectified judgment.
 
A. Calot Escobar
Registrar
K. Lenaerts
President
(
*)	Languages of the case: English and Swedish.
Top  
