
Order of the President of the Court of January – Commission v Éditions Odile Jacob
(Case C-404/P-R)
Application for interim measures – Access to documents of the institutions – Regulation (EC) No 1049/– Documents relating to a procedure concerning a merger between undertakings – Commission decision – Access to documents refused – Judgment of the General Court – Annulment of the Commission decision – Application for suspension of operation of the General Court’s judgment – Urgency
1.                     Applications for interim measures – Suspension of operation of a measure – Interim measures – Conditions for granting – Prima
            facie case – Urgency – Serious and irreparable damage – Cumulative nature – Weighing up all the interests involved – Order
            of assessment and method of verification – Discretion of the court dealing with the application for interim relief (Arts 256(1)
            TFEU, TFEU and TFEU; Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice Art. 83(2)) (see paras 19-21)
2.                     Applications for interim measures – Suspension of operation of a measure – Conditions for granting – Urgency – Serious and
            irreparable damage – Burden of proof (Art. TFEU) (see paras 30-31)
3.                     Applications for interim measures – Suspension of operation of a measure – Judgment of the General Court against which an
            appeal has been brought – Conditions for granting – Serious and irreparable damage – No administrative proceedings brought
            relating to the application of Regulation No 1049/regarding public access to documents (Art. TFEU; European Parliament
            and Council Regulation No 1049/2001) (see para. 32)
Re:
Appeal against the judgment of the General Court (Sixth Chamber) of June in Case T-237/Éditions Jacob
 v 
Commission
, by which that court annulled the Commission’s decision of April (D(2005)3286), to the extent that it refuses the
                  appellant access to the documents concerning merger control proceedings COMP/M.Lagardère/Natexis/VUP – Documents relating
                  to merger control procedures – Exception relating to the protection of the purpose of investigations – Duty of the institution
                  concerned to carry out a concrete, individual examination of the content of the documents covered by the application for access.
               
Operative part
1.
	The application for interim measures is dismissed. 
2.
	Costs are reserved.
Top  
 