
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-239/Commission of the European Communities
v
French Republic
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Convention for the protection of the Mediterranean Sea against pollution – Articles 4(1) and – Protocol for the protection of the Mediterranean Sea against pollution from land-based sources – Article 6(1) and (3) – Failure to adopt appropriate measures to prevent, abate and combat heavy and prolonged pollution of the Étang de Berre – Discharge authorisation)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Action for a declaration that a Member State has failed to comply with a mixed
            agreement concluded by the Community and the Member States – Protocol for the protection of the Mediterranean Sea against
            pollution from land-based sources – Jurisdiction of the Court – Admissible
(Art. EC; Barcelona Convention, Arts 4(1) and 8; Protocol for the protection of the Mediterranean Sea against pollution
            from land-based sources, Art. 6(1) and (3))
2.        International agreements – Community agreements – Protocol for the protection of the Mediterranean Sea against pollution from
            land-based sources – Obligation on the States to limit such pollution – Scope
(Protocol for the protection of the Mediterranean Sea against pollution from land-based sources, Art. 6(1) and (3))
1.        The application of Articles 4(1) and of the Barcelona Convention for the protection of the Mediterranean Sea against pollution
         and Article 6(1) and (3) of the Protocol for the protection of the Mediterranean Sea against pollution from land-based sources
         to discharges of fresh water and alluvia into a saltwater marsh falls within the Community framework, even though such discharges
         have not been the subject of specific Community legislation, since those articles are in mixed agreements concluded by the
         Community and its Member States and concern a field in large measure covered by Community law. The Court therefore has jurisdiction
         to assess a Member State’s compliance with those articles in proceedings brought before it under Article EC.
      
Mixed agreements concluded by the Community, its Member States and non-member countries have the same status in the Community
         legal order as purely Community agreements in so far as the provisions fall within the scope of Community competence. In ensuring
         compliance with commitments arising from an agreement concluded by the Community institutions, the Member States therefore
         fulfil, within the Community system, an obligation in relation to the Community, which has assumed responsibility for the
         due performance of the agreement.
      
(see paras 25-26, 31)
2.        Article 6(1) of the Protocol for the protection of the Mediterranean Sea against pollution from land-based sources, in conjunction
         with Article thereof, imposes a particularly rigorous obligation on the Contracting Parties, namely an obligation to limit
         strictly, by appropriate measures, pollution from land-based sources in the area caused by discharges of, inter alia, any
         substances even of a non-toxic nature which may become harmful to the marine environment. The strictness of this obligation
         reflects the nature of the instrument, which is designed in particular to avoid pollution caused by the failure of the public
         authorities to act. The scope of the obligation must be construed in the light of Article 6(3) of the Protocol which, by setting
         up a regime of prior authorisation by the competent national authorities of the discharge of substances referred to in Annex
         II to the Protocol, requires the Member States to control pollution from land-based sources in the area to which the Protocol
         applies.
      
Accordingly, a Member State which fails to take all appropriate measures to prevent, abate and combat heavy and prolonged
         pollution of the Mediterranean Sea area, and which fails to take account of the requirements of Annex III to the Protocol
         concerning the authorisation regime for discharges of those substances by not amending its national arrangements following
         the conclusion of the Protocol, fails to fulfil its obligations under inter alia Article 6(1) and (3) of the Protocol.
      
(see paras 50-51, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)October 2004(1)
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations  –  Convention for the protection of the Mediterranean Sea against pollution  –  Articles 4(1) and –  Protocol for the protection of the Mediterranean Sea against pollution from land-based sources  –  Article 6(1) and (3)  –  Failure to adopt appropriate measures to prevent, abate and combat heavy and prolonged pollution of the Étang de Berre  –  Discharge authorisation)
 In Case C-239/03,ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on June 2003,
            
Commission of the European Communities, represented by G. Valero Jordana and B. Stromsky, acting as Agents,
            
applicant,
v
French Republic, represented by G. de Bergues and E. Puisais, acting as Agents,
            
defendant,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),,
 composed of: C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, R. Schintgen (Rapporteur),  R. Silva de Lapuerta,  P. Kūris and
            G. Arestis, Judges,
            
 Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer, Registrar: R. Grass,
             having regard to the written procedure,
            
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By its application, the Commission of the European Communities requests the Court to declare that:
         
–
by failing to take all appropriate measures to prevent, abate and combat heavy and prolonged pollution of the Étang de Berre,
               and
            
–
by failing to take due account of the requirements of Annex III to the Protocol for the protection of the Mediterranean Sea
               against pollution from land-based sources, signed at Athens on May and approved on behalf of the European Economic
               Community by Council Decision 83/101/EEC of February (OJ L 67, p. 1; ‘the Protocol’), by amending the authorisation
               for the discharge of substances covered by Annex II to the Protocol following the conclusion of the latter,
            
 the French Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 4(1) and of the Convention for the protection of
         the Mediterranean Sea against pollution, signed at Barcelona on February and approved on behalf of the European Economic
         Community by Council Decision 77/585/EEC of July (OJ L 240, p. 1; ‘the Convention’), under Article 6(1) and (3)
         of the Protocol and under Article 300(7) EC.
         
Legal context
            
 Article 2(a) of the Convention defines the term ‘pollution’ as follows:
         ‘... the introduction by man, directly or indirectly, of substances or energy into the marine environment resulting in such
         deleterious effects as harm to living resources, hazards to human health, hindrance to marine activities including fishing,
         impairment of quality for use of sea water and reduction of amenities.’
         
            
 Article 4(1) of the Convention states:
         ‘The Contracting Parties shall individually or jointly take all appropriate measures in accordance with the provisions of
         this Convention and those Protocols in force to which they are party, to prevent, abate and combat pollution of the Mediterranean
         Sea area and to protect and enhance the marine environment in that area.’
         
            
 Article of the Convention provides:
         ‘The Contracting Parties shall take all appropriate measures to prevent, abate and combat pollution of the Mediterranean Sea
         area caused by discharges from rivers, coastal establishments or outfalls, or emanating from any other land-based sources
         within their territories.’
         
            
 Article of the Protocol similarly provides:
         ‘The Contracting Parties ... shall take all appropriate measures to prevent, abate, combat and control pollution of the Mediterranean
         Sea area caused by discharges from rivers, coastal establishments or outfalls, or emanating from any other land-based sources
         within their territories.’
         
            
 Article of the Protocol states:
         ‘The area to which this Protocol applies (hereinafter referred to as the “Protocol area”) shall be:
         …
         (c)     saltwater marshes communicating with the sea.’
         
            
 Article 4(1)(a) of the Protocol provides that the latter is to apply:
         ‘to polluting discharges reaching the Protocol area from land-based sources within the territories of the Parties, in particular,
          directly, from outfalls discharging into the sea or through coastal disposal, 
          indirectly, through rivers, canals or other watercourses, including underground watercourses, or through run-off’.
         
            
 Article 6(1) and (3) of the Protocol states:
         ‘1.     The Parties shall strictly limit pollution from land-based sources in the Protocol area by substances or sources listed in
         Annex II to this Protocol.
         ...
          3.       Discharges shall be strictly subject to the issue, by the competent national authorities, of an authorisation taking due account
         of the provisions of Annex III …’ 
         
            
 It is clear from paragraphs and of Section A of Annex II to the Protocol that the system laid down in Article of the
         Protocol covers ‘substances which have, directly or indirectly, an adverse effect on the oxygen content of the marine environment,
         especially those which may cause eutrophication’ and ‘substances which, though of a non-toxic nature, may become harmful to
         the marine environment or may interfere with any legitimate use of the sea owing to the quantities in which they are discharged’.
         
            
 Section B of Annex II states:
         ‘The control and strict limitation of the discharge of substances referred to in Section A above must be implemented in accordance
         with Annex III.’
         
            
 Annex III to the Protocol sets out the factors to be taken into account ‘with a view to the issue of an authorisation for
         the discharge of wastes containing substances referred to in Annex II ...’. The States party to the Protocol must thus take
         into account the ‘characteristics and composition of the waste’, the ‘characteristics of waste constituents with respect to
         their harmfulness’, the ‘characteristics of [the] discharge site and receiving marine environment’, the ‘availability of waste
         technologies’ and, finally, the ‘potential impairment of marine ecosystems and sea-water uses’.
         
            
 Also, Article 300(7) EC provides that agreements concluded by the Community ‘shall be binding on the institutions of the Community
         and on Member States’.
         
Subject-matter of the action and the pre-litigation procedure
            
 The Étang de Berre is a saltwater marsh of hectares which communicates directly with the Mediterranean Sea through
         the Caronte Canal. The volume of water in the Étang de Berre is m3.
         
            
 The Commission received a complaint concerning damage to the aquatic environment of the Étang de Berre, principally as a result
         of fresh water from the Durance being artificially discharged into the Étang de Berre whenever the turbines of the hydroelectric
         power station at Saint-Chamas run by Electricité de France (‘EDF’) were in operation.
         
            
 EDF developed and operates the Saint-Chamas fall under:
         
–
Law No 55-of January relating to development of the Durance (JORF of January and corrigendum at JORF of February 1955), Article of which declared as being in the public interest the construction of works for regulating the flow
               of the Durance, for use of the waters in irrigation and for the production of electric energy, a diversion being established
               between the Durance’s confluence with the Verdon and the Étang de Berre;
            
–
the Decree of September granting the EDF (national service) the right to develop and operate the Serre-Ponçon fall
               and reservoir, on the Durance, and falls to be established on the diversion of the Durance, between its confluence with the
               Verdon and the Étang de Berre (JORF of October 1959);
            
–
an agreement between EDF and the Minister for Infrastructure dated August 1966, clause of which provides:
‘Electricité de France will take all appropriate measures to stop discharges into the marsh once the solids content exceeds
               grams per litre, except where, in the event of an incident on the electricity network, that step proves exceptionally unacceptable’;
            
–
the Decree of April approving the agreement and the special conditions for the Salon and Saint-Chamas falls, on the
               Durance (departments of Bouches-du-Rhône, Vaucluse and Gard) (JORF of April 1972; ‘the Decree’). Clause of those
               conditions imposes the obligation to comply with the requirements of the agreement of August that relate to discharges
               into the Étang de Berre;
            
–
the operating instructions relating to the ‘transfer into the Durance of waters from the diversion, in connection with the
               reduction of liquid and solid inputs into the Étang de Berre’ (‘the operating instructions’), approved on April by
               the Regional Department for Industry, Research and the Environment.
            
            
 Point of the operating instructions sets the objectives for reducing water and alluvium inputs in the following terms:
         ‘Water inputs
         
–
limit on inputs per annum: hm–
limit on inputs from May to September: hmAlluvium inputs
         
–
limit on inputs per annum: tonnes
–
limit of 2g/for suspended matter
 Compliance with the quotas
          In the event of difficulty in complying with these quotas, EDF must inform the Étang de Berre Recovery Taskforce which will
         decide on the action to be taken.’
         
            
 According to the case-file, EDF’s Durance facilities not only serve to generate electricity at a regional level but also contribute
         to the security of electricity generation by providing a maximum output capacity that is immediately available to deal with
         incidents on the network.
         
            
 After taking the view that the French Republic had failed to take all appropriate measures to prevent, abate and combat heavy
         and prolonged pollution of the Étang de Berre or had failed to take due account of the provisions of Annex III to the Protocol
         by amending the authorisation for the discharge of substances covered by Annex II to the Protocol and, as a consequence, had
         failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 4(1) and of the Convention, Article 6(1) and (3) of the Protocol and Article
         300(7) EC, on May the Commission served a letter of formal notice on the French Government in order to enable it to
         submit its observations.
         
            
 Since the Commission was not persuaded by the arguments set out by the French Republic in its letter of October 1999, the
         Commission sent it a reasoned opinion reiterating the terms of the letter of formal notice and calling on it to take the measures
         necessary in order to comply with the reasoned opinion within a period of two months from notification thereof.
         
            
 By letter of October the French Government submitted to the Commission a dossier in response to the reasoned opinion.
         
            
 Since the Commission considered that the dossier did not enable it to abandon its complaints set out in the reasoned opinion,
         it brought the present action.
         
The Court’s jurisdiction
            
 The French Government submits that the Court lacks jurisdiction to adjudicate on the action on the ground that the obligations
         which the French authorities are alleged to have infringed do not fall within the scope of Community law. It states that no
         Community directive regulates discharges of fresh water and alluvia into a saltwater marsh, so that the provisions of the
         Convention and the Protocol that cover such discharges do not fall within Community competence.
         
            
 Since Treaty infringement proceedings can relate only to a failure to comply with obligations arising from Community law,
         it must be examined, before deciding if there has been a substantive infringement, whether the obligations owed by France
         which are the subject-matter of the action fall within the scope of Community law.
         
            
 The Convention and the Protocol were concluded by the Community and its Member States under shared competence. 
         
            
 In accordance with case-law, mixed agreements concluded by the Community, its Member States and non-member countries have
         the same status in the Community legal order as purely Community agreements in so far as the provisions fall within the scope
         of Community competence (see, to that effect, Case 12/Demirel [1987] ECR 3719, paragraph 9, and Case C-13/Commission v Ireland [2002] ECR I-2943, paragraph 14).
         
            
 From this the Court has inferred that, in ensuring compliance with commitments arising from an agreement concluded by the
         Community institutions, the Member States fulfil, within the Community system, an obligation in relation to the Community,
         which has assumed responsibility for the due performance of the agreement (Demirel, cited above, paragraph 11, and Commission v Ireland, cited above, paragraph 15).
         
            
 In the present case, the provisions of the Convention and the Protocol without doubt cover a field which falls in large measure
         within Community competence.
         
            
 Environmental protection, which is the subject-matter of the Convention and the Protocol, is in very large measure regulated
         by Community legislation, including with regard to the protection of waters against pollution (see, in particular, Council
         Directive 91/271/EEC of May concerning urban waste-water treatment (OJ L 135, p. 40), Council Directive 91/676/EEC
         of December concerning the protection of waters against pollution caused by nitrates from agricultural sources (OJ
         L 375, p. 1) and Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of October establishing a
         framework for Community action in the field of water policy (OJ L 327, p. 1)).
         
            
 Since the Convention and the Protocol thus create rights and obligations in a field covered in large measure by Community
         legislation, there is a Community interest in compliance by both the Community and its Member States with the commitments
         entered into under those instruments.
         
            
 The fact that discharges of fresh water and alluvia into the marine environment, which are at issue in the present action,
         have not yet been the subject of Community legislation is not capable of calling that finding into question. 
         
            
 It follows from the foregoing that the application of Articles 4(1) and of the Convention and Article 6(1) and (3) of the
         Protocol to discharges of fresh water and alluvia into a saltwater marsh, those discharges not having been the subject of
         specific Community legislation, falls within the Community framework since those articles are in mixed agreements concluded
         by the Community and its Member States and concern a field in large measure covered by Community law. The Court therefore
         has jurisdiction to assess a Member State’s compliance with those articles in proceedings brought before it under Article
         EC. 
         
Substance
            
 In support of its action, the Commission puts forward two complaints, respectively alleging:
         
–
breach of Article 6(1) of the Protocol, in conjunction with Articles 4(1) and of the Convention, on the ground that the
               French Republic has not taken the measures necessary to limit strictly the introduction into the Étang de Berre of substances
               having deleterious effects as set out in Article 2(a) of the Convention, in order to combat and abate over a long period the
               pollution of that marsh;
            
–
breach of Article 6(3) of the Protocol, on the ground that the authorisation for the discharge by the Saint-Chamas power station
               of waste into the Étang de Berre has not been issued on the basis of the criteria laid down by the Convention and the Protocol.
            
The first complaint Arguments of the parties
         
            
 The Commission submits that Article 6(1) of the Protocol contains an obligation as to the result to be achieved.
         
            
 According to the Commission, which relies on several scientific studies, a correlation exists between the volume of fresh
         water, alluvia and sediment discharged into the Étang de Berre by the Saint-Chamas hydroelectric power station, on the one
         hand, and the salinity rate, freshening and stratification of the waters of the marsh, the state of eutrophication due to
         an excessive input of nutrients (nutritive salts), and the harm to the marsh’s fauna, flora and amenities, on the other. The
         Commission does not allege that operation of the Saint-Chamas hydroelectric power station is the sole cause of the pollution
         of the Étang de Berre, but that a crucial part of the pollution is attributable to its operation.
         
            
 The Commission adds that Article 6(1) of the Protocol must be read in light of Article 6(3) thereof, under which discharges
         of the substances at issue are strictly subject to obtaining an authorisation taking due account of the provisions of Annex
         III to the Protocol. It follows that discharge of those substances, unless authorised, is prohibited, which means that the
         State has precise knowledge of the nature and amount of the substances discharged.
         
            
 The existence of a regional deficit, or fragility in the security of the electricity supply in the Provence-Alpes-Côte d’Azur
         region (‘the PACA region’) at issue, is not capable of justifying the infringement of Article 6(1) of the Protocol, especially
         as an alternative solution exists for guaranteeing the security of the network, namely the construction of a volt
         strategic line in the region, between Boutre and Carros.
         
            
 While it is true that pollution of the Étang de Berre has been reduced in recent years under the recovery plan for that marsh,
         the reduction in discharges has been of a belated, erratic and, above all, very limited nature. In particular, the Commission
         contends that the total volume of the maximum annual discharges laid down by that plan is incompatible with the sustainable
         restoration of a marine environment in the Étang de Berre. 
         
            
 The French Government contends that Article 6(1) of the Protocol contains an obligation as to the means employed. In the present
         case, the French Republic is therefore required to prove only that it has in fact created sufficient legal means in order
         to limit the pollution resulting from discharges of fresh water and alluvia.
         
            
 In this regard, the particular energy situation in the PACA region warrants the strategic interest in the Salon and Saint-Chamas
         hydroelectric power stations. The future volt ‘Boutre-Carros’ line is only one part of a more global programme intended
         to meet the energy difficulties encountered in the region.
         
            
 The French Government contests, first, the Commission’s statement that from there was heavy, prolonged and particular
         pollution of the Étang de Berre from a land-based source, having considerable adverse effects on fauna, flora and amenities.
         The French Government does not claim that operation of the Saint-Chamas power station is irrelevant to the pollution of the
         marsh, but it points out the significance of other polluting factors (the industrialisation of the marsh’s shores, a rapid
         increase in population and agricultural activities), contests on a scientific level the Commission’s views on the salinity
         of the marsh and stresses the effects, underestimated by the Commission, of wind on homogenisation of the water column.
         
            
 Only a global approach that endeavours to reduce the sources of pollution by acting on the most influential factors will lead
         to restoration of the marsh. An interpretation founded solely on the inputs of fresh water does not enable the phenomena to
         be explained or appropriate solutions to be found.
         
            
 Nor to this day has any serious study drawn up an inventory of the fish resources of the Étang de Berre, or analysed the underlying
         causes of the reduction in fishing activity on it in recent years or the factors liable to impede that activity.
         
            
 Finally, the arguments set out by the Commission with regard to eutrophication of the Étang de Berre are not founded. They
         are based on studies that are old, dating back to before 1993, and incomplete.
         
            
 The French Government contests, second, the Commission’s statement that the reduction in discharges has been of a ‘belated,
         erratic and very limited’ nature. It relies in this connection on figures showing the results of application of the measures
         prescribed by the Étang de Berre recovery plan.
         
            
 The French Government contests, finally, the allegation that the measures taken by the public authorities to reduce, over
         a long period, the pollution of the Étang de Berre have had a limited effect. In particular, the Commission’s appraisal as
         to the inadequacy of the reduction in discharges is based on too low an assessment of the improvements recorded since 1997,
         as the assessment of the Étang de Berre Recovery Taskforce for to shows.
         
 Findings of the Court
         
            
 It is apparent from Articles and of the Protocol that the latter is designed to prevent, abate, combat and control pollution
         of the Mediterranean Sea area caused by discharges from rivers, coastal establishments or outfalls, or emanating from any
         other land-based sources within the Contracting Parties’ territories. To this end, Article of the Protocol, reiterating
         the commitments entered into under Articles and of the Convention, obliges the Contracting Parties to take ‘all appropriate
         measures’.
         
            
 More specifically, Article 6(1) of the Protocol obliges the Contracting Parties to ‘strictly limit pollution from land-based
         sources in the Protocol area by substances or sources listed in Annex II’ to the Protocol. Section B of that annex also refers
         to the ‘strict limitation’ of the discharge of substances listed in Section A thereof.
         
            
 It is apparent from Article 3(c) of the Protocol that the area covered by the Protocol includes saltwater marshes communicating
         with the sea, and therefore the Étang de Berre. Even though the Étang de Berre has in its history truly contained saltwater
         for a short time only, since the Caronte Canal which links it to the sea was dug in and made deeper in 1925, it is accepted
         by the parties that the Étang de Berre, as a marine environment, constitutes the ecological reference condition.
         
            
 The substances referred to in Annex II include, at paragraphs and of Section A, ‘substances which have, directly or
         indirectly, an adverse effect on the oxygen content of the marine environment, especially those which may cause eutrophication’
         and ‘substances which, though of a non-toxic nature, may become harmful to the marine environment or may interfere with any
         legitimate use of the sea owing to the quantities in which they are discharged’.
         
            
 It is therefore a particularly rigorous obligation that is owed by the Contracting Parties pursuant to Article 6(1) of the
         Protocol in conjunction with Article thereof, namely an obligation to ‘strictly limit’ pollution from land-based sources
         in the area caused by discharges of, inter alia, any substances ‘even of a non-toxic nature’ which may become harmful to the
         marine environment, and to do so by ‘appropriate measures’. This strictness reflects the nature of the instrument, which is
         designed in particular to avoid pollution caused by the failure of the public authorities to act.
         
            
 As the Commission has correctly pointed out, the scope of that obligation must be construed in the light of Article 6(3) of
         the Protocol which, by setting up a regime of prior authorisation by the competent national authorities of the discharge of
         substances referred to in Annex II, requires the Member States to control pollution from land-based sources in the area to
         which the Protocol applies.
         
            
 In the present case, the Commission submits:
         
–
that since the Étang de Berre has suffered heavy, prolonged and particular pollution whose adverse effects on fauna,
               flora and amenities are considerable;
            
–
that this pollution is principally attributable to the discharge by the Saint-Chamas hydroelectric power station of massive
               quantities of fresh water, alluvia and sediment;
            
–
that while it is true that those discharges have diminished, in particular in and 1998, the reduction has proved belated,
               erratic and very limited, so that the measures taken by the public authorities, particularly under the Étang de Berre recovery
               plan, have not been appropriate.
            
            
 The French Government does not deny that the Étang de Berre is polluted or that operation of the Saint-Chamas hydroelectric
         power station contributes to the pollution, but it points out the significance of other sources of pollution, such as industrialisation
         of the marsh’s shores, the rapid increase in the population of the nearby communes, the extension of agricultural activity
         and the deterioration of the water quality of the rivers which flow into the marsh. Recovery of the marsh requires a global
         approach which cannot focus on a single cause of disturbance.
         
            
 This last proposition cannot be upheld.
         
            
 The fact that the pollution of the Étang de Berre is caused also by factors, whether or not anthropic, other than the inputs
         of fresh water from the Saint-Chamas hydroelectric power station cannot affect the very existence of pollution from a land-based
         source, attributable to turbine operation at the power station.
         
            
 The French Government has not disputed, or even sought to dispute, the Commission’s assertion that the inflow at an irregular
         rate, through EDF’s power canal, of an enormous mass of fresh water containing a high sediment load has seriously disturbed
         the ecological conditions of the biotope of the Étang de Berre. In accordance with the wording of paragraph of Section
         A of Annex II to the Protocol, such inputs, ‘though of a non-toxic nature, may become harmful to the marine environment …
         owing to the quantities in which they are discharged’. Moreover, one of the very objectives of the Étang de Berre recovery
         plan, adopted by the French Government in 1993, was, as the defendant has pointed out in its pleadings, to reduce the annual
         inputs of fresh water and suspended matter through the canal of the Saint-Chamas power station.
         
            
 It must therefore be determined whether the action of the public authorities, in light of their obligation strictly to limit
         the pollution from a land-based source that has thus been found to have been caused, has been appropriate.
         
            
 According to the French Government, the Étang de Berre recovery plan has, since 1994/95, enabled the average volume of fresh
         water discharged by the power station to be reduced by 40%, compared with previous periods. The quantities of inputs of alluvia
         have been cut by seven-eighths, having been reduced on average from to fewer than tonnes per annum in the
         past eight years, with an average daily concentration of suspended matter that is today limited to g/l. Nutritive salt inputs
         from the EDF power canal account for only 10% to 20% of the total for phosphorus. In any event, uncertainties remain as to
         the share of the inputs from the EDF canal in nitrogen and phosphorus pollution.
         
            
 The French Government further submits that it is incorrect that the reduction in discharges has been of a belated, erratic
         and limited nature.
         
            
 As to those submissions, the following is apparent from the documents in the case (in particular from the January progress
         report on the recovery of the Étang de Berre of the Conseil général des ponts et chaussées (General Civil Engineering Council)
         (‘the progress report’), at p. 11, the report of the groupement d’intérêt public pour la réhabilitation de l’étang de Berre
         (public interest group for the recovery of the Étang de Berre), entitled ‘Le Bilan des connaissances, “État de santé du milieu”’,
         of November (‘the GIPREB report’), at pp. and 37, and GIPREB’s updated assessment of 2002, at pp. and 17): 
         
–
the average annual volume of fresh water discharged by the Saint-Chamas power station between and 2000, a period covering
               that of the Protocol’s approval by the Community and its Member States, was m3;
            
–
after the recovery plan and the restrictions imposed on EDF were put in place, the average volume of water discharged was
               substantially reduced, annual inputs between November and October having averaged m3, thus representing a reduction of 30%;
            
–
however, the annual inputs of fresh water from the power station vary according to the season and from year to year, given
               the fluctuations in operation of the power station’s turbines. Thus, in 1999/2000, the period in the course of which the reasoned
               opinion was delivered in the present procedure, discharges from the power station were particularly high, a fact which, according
               to the GIPREB report, is due to an energy deficit in the PACA region;
            
–
the massive input of fresh water thus contributes to the anoxia of the central and deep part of the marsh, where the difference
               in the salinity of the surface water and the deepest water is significant. In this part, a density barrier is present which
               limits replenishment of the deep water and gives rise to tight stratification and to an oxygen deficit, with rare and brief
               periods of reoxygenation when gusts of wind are strong enough to allow homogenisation of the water.
            
            
 As to the quantities of alluvia washed along by the waters of the Durance, it is basically common ground that the inputs of
         those substances ‘adversely affect the environment and in particular animal and plant species, increasing the turbidity of
         the water. Light penetration is diminished, which limits the growth of aquatic plants. Deposited on the bed in large quantities,
         the alluvia are also restricting for benthic fauna’ (GIPREB’s updated assessment, p. 17).
         
            
 It is apparent from the GIPREB report (p. 41) that the entry into operation of the Cadarache sediment basin in and the
         adoption of the Étang de Berre recovery plan have enabled the power station’s inputs of alluvia to be reduced, with a quantity
         discharged in the order of tonnes per annum and a concentration of suspended matter limited to g/l. Inputs were
         as low as tonnes in 1999/and tonnes in 2000/2001, with a daily average concentration of g/l, whereas
         the average over the period from to was tonnes per annum.
         
            
 However, according to GIPREB’s updated report (p. 17), between and the power station discharged between 50% and
         80% of all the inputs of alluvia into the Étang de Berre. Furthermore, the progress report (p. 13) notes that discharges at
         the power station’s maximum rate of flow (m3/s) and at the maximum concentration (g/l) over a single day would be sufficient to carry more than tonnes of alluvia
         into the marsh. This level is very high if compared with the limit values fixed for sewage treatment plants, as the Commission
         has pointed out.
         
            
 As regards the hydroelectric power station’s inputs of nutritive salts, it is not in dispute that an excessive input of nutrients
         into the marine environment causes eutrophication as a result of the proliferation of plants and thus the accumulation of
         organic matter and oxygen depletion, which is responsible for an increased death rate for fish species, in particular benthic
         species.
         
            
 The French Government itself acknowledges that since 1995, and since especially, a spectacular development of ulvae (‘green
         tides’) has been witnessed and, to a lesser extent, of enteromorpha, nitrophilous species which are adapted to a low rate
         of salinity and whose development is favoured in a eutrophicated environment. In its updated report (p. 31), GIPREB similarly
         concludes that ‘the Étang de Berre is in a state of eutrophication marked by production of phytoplanktonic biomass that is
         still very significant in the surface waters and by the proliferation of macroalgae, essentially ulvae’. 
         
            
 In this connection, the GIPREB report reveals great uncertainties, in the absence of precise and homogeneous methods of analysis,
         which makes comparisons difficult when determining the hydroelectric power station’s share of eutrophicating inputs (nitrogen
         and phosphorus).
         
            
 That being so, the high level of eutrophication from which the shallow Étang de Berre suffers seems linked to an excessive
         input of nutrients, to whose presence the discharge of significant volumes of fresh water, even with a low concentration of
         nutritive salts, has in any event made an appreciable contribution, as is apparent from the GIPREB report (p. 92), given in
         particular the phenomenon of release of the phosphorus present in the sediment, to which the Commission has referred in its
         pleadings.
         
            
 In light of the foregoing, even though it has been possible to witness their reduction over the years as a result of successive
         measures taken under the recovery plan, large quantities of fresh water, the seasonal variation in which remains very substantial,
         were discharged by the Saint-Chamas power station into the Étang de Berre in the period corresponding to the end of the pre-litigation
         procedure. In particular, it must be stated that even a limited average annual volume of discharged water of mto mconstitutes a considerable quantity, especially if compared with the volume of the Étang de Berre (m3), which is half the size.
         
            
 The harmful effect of such discharges on the ecological balance of the Étang de Berre, in light both of their excessive quantities,
         compared with the capacity of the marsh, and their fluctuations was well known, as is apparent in particular from the GIPREB
         report which was lodged one year after the Commission delivered its reasoned opinion. This circumstance in itself attests
         the inadequacy of the measures taken by the French public authorities in light of the obligation set out in Article 6(1) of
         the Protocol.
         
            
 As regards inputs of alluvia, the figures adduced before the Court reveal a significant reduction in discharges since the
         entry into operation of the Cadarache settling basin and the adoption of the Étang de Berre recovery plan. However, the quantities
         that may be swept along by the waters from the power station’s turbines, particularly when the discharge is at the maximum
         rate of flow, remain very high.
         
            
 In conclusion, given the strict nature of the obligation set out in Article 6(1) of the Protocol, the first complaint must
         be considered well founded.
         
The second complaint Arguments of the parties
         
            
 In the Commission’s submission, while the Decree, read in conjunction with the agreement of August concluded
         by the Minister for Infrastructure and EDF, does appear to be an authorisation for the discharge by the Saint-Chamas power
         station of waste into the Étang de Berre, this authorisation, which predates the Convention and the Protocol, cannot have
         been issued on the basis of the criteria laid down by those instruments, in particular the criteria set out in Section E of
         Annex III to the Protocol. Nor can it have set qualitative and quantitative limits for each of the substances discharged by
         EDF’s power canal capable of harming the ecosystems and sea-water uses.
         
            
 The operating instructions fall outside any legislative framework and their breach cannot give rise to a legal penalty. However,
         Article 6(3) of the Protocol specifies that the authorisation must be issued by the competent national authorities, that is
         to say acting within the framework of the competence which the internal legal order of the State concerned confers upon them.
         
         
            
 In any event, those instructions do not comply with the criteria laid down in Annex III to the Protocol. An authorisation
         taking account of all the factors set out in that annex should have regard to the composition of the discharges, so that an
         authorisation should have been issued for a quantity of fresh water, of suspended matter, of nitrogen and of phosphorus, element
         by element.
         
            
 The French Government contends that the operating instructions have legally binding force having been approved by the prescribed
         authority, and penalties may be imposed if they are not complied with. They were adopted, pursuant to clause of the conditions
         annexed to the Decree, after consultation between the main State services concerned, and approved by the Regional Director
         for Industry, Research and the Environment on behalf of the prefect. In addition, if the operating instructions are not complied
         with, under the legislation in force the holder of the concession may be fined up to EUR and, in the case of repeated
         infringements, the concession may be forfeited.
         
            
 As to the content of the operating instructions, the nature of the measures prescribed with regard both to reduction of the
         turbidity of the waters discharged, from g/l to g/l, and to the reduction of inputs of fresh water and of alluvia corresponds
         to the provisions contained in Annex III to the Protocol.
         
            
 Consequently, the French authorities have issued to EDF an administrative authorisation to exploit and divert the waters of
         the Durance and discharge them into the Étang de Berre that is in accordance with Annex III to the Protocol.
         
 Findings of the Court
         
            
 As the Court held in Case C-213/Pêcheurs de l’étang de Berre [2004] ECR I‑0000, at paragraph 41, Article 6(3) of the Protocol clearly, precisely and unconditionally lays down the obligation
         for Member States to subject discharges of substances listed in Annex II to the Protocol to the issue by the competent national
         authorities of an authorisation taking due account of the provisions of Annex III to the Protocol.
         
            
 In the French Government’s submission, the operating instructions, which amend the provisions in the conditions annexed to
         the Decree relating to discharges into the Étang de Berre of the diverted waters of the Durance, specifically take account
         of the Étang de Berre recovery plan which falls within the framework of the requirements of the Convention and the Protocol.
         These operating instructions, whose requirements are based on the criteria of Annex III to the Protocol, constitute the authorisation
         issued under Article 6(3) of the Protocol.
         
            
 As to those submissions, suffice it to state that the operating instructions were approved by the Regional Department for
         Industry, Research and the Environment, while the agreement and the conditions for the Salon and Saint-Chamas falls on the
         Durance were the subject of the Decree. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, it is not clear from the French Government’s observations how the operating instructions could have
         legally amended the relevant provisions of the conditions annexed to the Decree in order to take account of the Protocol’s
         requirements concerning issue of authorisations under Article 6(3) of the Protocol.
         
            
 The French Government states that the operating instructions were adopted pursuant to Article of the Decree, as is
         moreover apparent from the legal basis cited in the instructions.
         
            
 Article of the Decree states:
         ‘Before the barrage of the Mallemort auxiliary inlet enters into operation, operating instructions shall be drawn up by the
         administrative authorities, after giving the holder of the concession the opportunity to be heard, in order to determine the
         conditions for opening the floodgates. These operating instructions shall be drawn up in agreement with the chief engineer
         in the civil engineering department at Avignon who has responsibility for the flood service in the Durance basin.’
         
            
 It is clear, as the Commission has pointed out, that that provision concerns exclusively ‘the conditions for opening the floodgates’
         before ‘the barrage of the Mallemort auxiliary inlet enters into operation’. No mention is made of the conditions in which
         substances such as those listed in Annex II to the Protocol may be discharged into the Étang de Berre in accordance with criteria
         designed to avoid harm to its ecosystem.
         
            
 Accordingly, whatever the content of the operating instructions, in light of the provisions of Annex III to the Protocol the
         French Government has not established that an authorisation for the discharge into the Étang de Berre of the substances listed
         in Annex II to the Protocol has been issued under Article 6(3) of the Protocol by the competent national authorities.
         
            
 The Commission’s second complaint must consequently also be upheld.
         
            
 In conclusion, the application must be granted.
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the French Republic has been
         unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs.
         
 On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
         
 
1.
 Declares that:
 
–
by failing to take all appropriate measures to prevent, abate and combat heavy and prolonged pollution of the Étang de Berre,
                           and
                        
 
–
by failing to take due account of the requirements of Annex III to the Protocol for the protection of the Mediterranean Sea
                           against pollution from land-based sources, signed at Athens on May and approved on behalf of the European Economic
                           Community by Council Decision 83/101/EEC of February 1983, by amending the authorisation for the discharge of substances
                           covered by Annex II to the Protocol following the conclusion of the latter,
                        
the French Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 4(1) and of the Convention for the protection of
                           the Mediterranean Sea against pollution, signed at Barcelona on February and approved on behalf of the European Economic
                           Community by Council Decision 77/585/EEC of July 1977, under Article 6(1) and (3) of the Protocol for the protection of
                           the Mediterranean Sea against pollution from land-based sources, signed at Athens on May and approved on behalf of
                           the European Economic Community by Council Decision 83/101/EEC of February 1983, and under Article 300(7) EC;
 
2.
Orders the French Republic to pay the costs.
 Signatures.
      
 –
            
Language of the case: French.
Top  
 