
Avis juridique important
|
61989JJudgment of the Court of June 1990.  -  Commission of the European Communities v Kingdom of Belgium.  -  Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations - Non-compliance with a directive - Reports concerning the disposal of water.  -  Case C-162/89.  
European Court reports Page I-Pub.RJ Page Pub somm 
Summary
Parties
Operative part
Keywords
++++Member States - Obligations - Implementation of directives - Failure - Justification - Not permissible  ( EEC Treaty, Art . )  
Summary
As the Court has consistently held, a Member State may not plead provisions, practices or circumstances in its internal legal system in order to justify a failure to comply with obligations and time-limits laid down by Community directives . 
Parties
In Case C-162/Commission of the European Communities, represented originally by T . van Rijn, a member of its Legal Department, acting as Agent, and subsequently by E . Vliebergh, a member of its Legal Department, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of Georgios Kremlis, a member of its Legal Department, Wagner Centre, Kirchberg,  applicant,  v  Kingdom of Belgium, represented by J . Devadder, Deputy Adviser in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Trade and Cooperation with Developing Countries, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Belgian Embassy, rue des Girondins,  defendant,  APPLICATION for a declaration, that, by failing to forward to the Commission within the prescribed periods the reports referred to in Article of Council Directive 75/439/EEC of June on the disposal of waste oils ( Official Journal 1975, L 194, p . ), as amended by Council Directive 87/101/EEC of December ( Official Journal 1987, L 42, p . ), Article of Council Directive 75/442/EEC of July on waste ( Official Journal 1975, L 194, p . ), Article of Council Directive 76/403/EEC of April on the disposal of polychlorinated biphenyls and polychlorinated terphenyls ( Official Journal 1976, L 108, p . ) and Article of Council Directive 78/319/EEC of March on toxic and dangerous waste ( Official Journal 1978, L 84, p . ), in relation to the Flemish Region and the Region of Brussels-Capital, the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty,  THE COURT  composed of : O . Due, President, Sir Gordon Slynn and F . A . Schockweiler ( Presidents of Chambers ), G . F . Mancini, R . Joliet, T . F . O' Higgins, G . C . Rodríguez Iglesias, M . Diez de Velasco and P . G . J . Kapteyn, Judges,  ( the grounds of the judgment are not reproduced )  hereby :  
Operative part
( ) Declares that, by failing to forward to the Commission within the prescribed periods the reports needed, in relation to the Region of Brussels-Capital, in order to comply with Article of Council Directive 75/439/EEC of June on the disposal of waste oils, as amended by Council Directive 87/101/EEC of December 1986, Article of Council Directive 75/442/EEC of July on waste, Article of Council Directive 76/403/EEC of April on the disposal of polychlorinated biphenyls and polychlorinated terphenyls and Article of Council Directive 78/319/EEC of March on toxic and dangerous waste, the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty;  ( ) Orders the Kingdom of Belgium to pay the costs .  
Top  
 