
ORDER OF THE VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE COURT
November (*)
      
(Appeal – Order for interim measures – Regulation (EC) No 1049/– Access to documents of the institutions – Documents held by the European Medicines Agency in the context of an application for authorisation to place a medicinal product
         on the market – Decision to grant a third party access to the documents – Serious and irreparable damage – Evidence)
      
In Case C‑389/P(R),
APPEAL under the second paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on July 2013,
      
European Medicines Agency (EMA), represented by T. Jabłoński, A. Humphreys, A. Spina and N. Rampal Olmedo, acting as Agents,
      
appellant,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
AbbVie, Inc., established in Wilmington (United States),
      
AbbVie Ltd, established in Maidenhead (United Kingdom),
      
represented by P. Bogaert, advocaat, and by D. Anderson QC, and D. Scannell, Barrister, instructed by B. Kelly and G. Castle,
         Solicitors,
      
applicants at first instance,
THE VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE COURT,
having heard the First Advocate General, P. Cruz Villalón,
makes the following
Order
By its appeal, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) seeks to have set aside the order of the President of the General Court
         of April in Case T‑44/R AbbVie v EMA (‘the order under appeal’), whereby the President of the General Court suspended the operation of EMA decision EMA/748792/of January (‘the contested decision’) granting a third party access, pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 1049/of the
         European Parliament and of the Council of May regarding public access to European Parliament, Council and Commission
         documents (OJ L 145, p. 43), to Clinical Study Reports M02‑404, M04-and M05-(‘the clinical study reports’) submitted
         by AbbVie, Inc. and AbbVie Ltd (together, ‘the AbbVie companies’) as part of an application for authorisation to place the
         medicinal product Humira, used to treat Crohn’s Disease, on the market (‘the MA’), and ordered the EMA not to disclose those
         reports.
      
 Legal context and EMA administrative practice
The legal context and EMA administrative practice were summarised as follows in paragraphs to of the order under appeal:
      
‘[The EMA], established by Regulation (EC) No 726/of the European Parliament and of the Council of March laying
         down Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products for human and veterinary use and establishing
         a European Medicines Agency (OJ L 136, p. 1), has as its main responsibility the protection and promotion of public and
         animal health, through the evaluation and supervision of medicines for human and veterinary use. To that end, the EMA is responsible
         for the scientific evaluation of applications for European Union [MAs] for human and veterinary medicines (centralised procedure).
         Under the first subparagraph of Article 57(1) of Regulation No 726/2004, the EMA is to provide the Member States and the institutions
         of the European Union with the best possible scientific advice on any question relating to the evaluation of the quality,
         safety and efficacy of medicinal products for human or veterinary use which is referred to it.
      
Under Regulation No 726/2004, certain categories of medicinal products, including medicinal products resulting from biotechnology
         such as Humira, which is the subject-matter of the present proceedings, must be approved under the centralised procedure pursuant
         to that regulation. That procedure entails the submission, by the pharmaceutical company concerned, of an application for
         [an MA], which is examined by the EMA, and a decision by the European Commission on the MA. The information which an MA applicant
         is to provide to the EMA must include a quality dossier (particulars on product composition and description of the manufacturing
         processes), non-clinical data (physico-chemical, biological or microbiological and results of animal tests) and results of
         clinical trials (actual tests and data assessing the use of the product in humans), in support of the intended therapeutic
         use of the product. Once the MA has been granted, the details thereof may be amended; amendments may range from mere administrative
         changes to more significant amendments, such as adding a new therapeutic indication.
      
The first paragraph of Article of Regulation No 726/states that [Regulation No 1049/2001], a regulation which is aimed
         at guaranteeing the broadest public access possible to documents held by the European Union administrative bodies, is applicable
         to documents held by the EMA.
      
Article 4(2) of Regulation No 1049/provides that the institutions are to refuse access to a document where disclosure
         would undermine, inter alia, the protection of commercial interests of a natural or legal person, including intellectual property,
         unless there is an overriding public interest in disclosure of the document in question. As regards third-party documents,
         Article 4(4) of Regulation No 1049/provides that the institution is to consult the third party with a view to assessing
         whether an exception in paragraph is applicable, unless it is clear that the document must or must not be disclosed. Pursuant
         to Article 4(6) of Regulation No 1049/2001, if only parts of the requested document are covered by any of those exceptions,
         the remaining parts of the document are to be released.
      
Under the first paragraph of Article of Regulation No 726/2004, the EMA is to adopt rules to ensure the availability to
         the public of regulatory, scientific or technical information concerning the authorisation or supervision of medicinal products
         which is not of a confidential nature. Thus, on December 2006, the EMA adopted rules implementing Regulation No 1049/on access to its documents. Article of those rules provides that EMA documents are to be classified in one of the following
         three categories: public, restricted or confidential. 
      
Under a policy governing access to its documents which the EMA applied consistently until 2007, public access to documents
         contained in the dossier submitted by a company for the purposes of an MA, including clinical study reports, was generally
         refused on the ground that such data fell under the exceptions contained in the aforementioned implementing rules, and more
         particularly Article 3(2)(a), which, mirroring the provisions of the first subparagraph of Article 4(2) of Regulation (EC)
         No 1049/2001, refers to the protection of commercial interests of a natural or legal person, including intellectual property.
      
In 2007, a research and information centre in the field of health care contacted the EMA, requesting access to clinical study
         reports concerning two medicinal products. The EMA refused access on the grounds that it would undermine the commercial interests
         of the producers of those medicinal products. The research and information centre then filed a complaint with the European
         Ombudsman who, following an investigation into the relevant reports, concluded that they did not contain information on the
         composition of the medicinal products or other commercially confidential information. In its view, their disclosure would
         consequently not undermine the sector’s commercial interests. In its draft recommendation, the Ombudsman therefore called
         on the EMA to disclose the documents.
      
In its reply of August 2010, the EMA stated that it had decided to grant access to those reports and committed itself to
         taking appropriate measures in order to implement the Ombudsman’s draft recommendation. In line with the Ombudsman’s recommendations,
         on November the EMA adopted a new policy on access to its documents. In the press release accompanying the adoption
         of this policy, the EMA stated that documents submitted to it as part of an MA application, such as clinical trial reports,
         could henceforth be disclosed, provided that the decision-making process for the application in question was finalised. The
         policy on access to EMA documents became effective on December 2010.
      
Under its new policy, the EMA drew up an output table for the various documents in its possession. More specifically, MA dossiers
         or updates and amendments to those dossiers, including clinical trial reports, are considered to be public, that is to say,
         they may be disclosed once, inter alia, the Commission’s MA decision is available for the medicinal product concerned. In
         March the output table was complemented by guidelines from the EMA and heads of national medicines agencies regarding
         the types of information included in an MA application that can be publicly released after the final decision on the application.
         The objective is to enable a consistent approach to be adopted in order to provide guidance on the identification of commercially
         confidential information which must be protected after an MA has been granted.
      
According to the guidelines, the following are considered commercially confidential information: detailed information concerning
         the quality and manufacturing of the medicinal products; information concerning the development of the product, including
         detailed information on the synthesis and manufacturing of the active substance; formulation, test procedures, validation,
         as well as manufacturers and suppliers of the active substance and excipients; and detailed descriptions of the manufacturing
         and control processes for the finished product. By contrast, information encompassing clinical and non-clinical development
         of a medicinal product is not per se commercially confidential. Accordingly, as a rule the data included in clinical trial
         reports is regarded as data that can be disclosed.
      
Consequently, since its new policy on access to documents has been in place, the EMA has been releasing documents submitted
         as part of MA applications, including clinical study reports, on request pursuant to Regulation No 1049/2001.
      
Some clinical study reports have also been published by the EMA, inasmuch as assessment reports of its Committee for Medicinal
         Products for Human Use (CHMP) reproduce information contained in clinical study reports submitted by MA applicants. Those
         assessment reports are published after deletion of any information of a commercially confidential nature, as is the European
         Public Assessment Report (EPAR), giving a summary of the product’s characteristics that is understandable to the public (Article
         13(3) and point (b) of the second subparagraph of Article 57(1) of Regulation No 726/2004).’
      
 Background to the dispute and procedure before the President of the General Court
The background to the dispute was set out as follows in paragraphs to of the order under appeal:
      
‘By correspondence of March 2002, [the AbbVie companies] had filed an MA application in respect of the medicinal product
         Humira, containing the active substance Adalimumab. By decision of September 2003, the Commission granted the MA sought.
      
In 2006, [the AbbVie companies] submitted [the clinical study reports] to the EMA as part of an application for extension
         of the therapeutic use of Humira for the treatment of Crohn’s Disease. The documents concerning those two clinical studies
         cover the safety and efficacy of Humira in the treatment of Crohn’s Disease. The extension of the indication was authorised
         by the Commission on June 2007.
      
Clinical study report M05-was submitted to the EMA by [the AbbVie companies] in as part of a variation procedure
         directed at updating the summary of the product characteristics and removing a recommendation of use of the medicinal product.
         That report demonstrated the safety risks associated with the concomitant use of Humira with corticosteroid drugs. By decision
         of July 2010, the Commission updated the summary of the product characteristics for Humira.
      
In August and September 2012, the EMA notified [the AbbVie companies], pursuant to Article 4(4) of Regulation No 1049/2001,
         that it had received a request from the pharmaceuticals company UCB Pharma under Regulation No 1049/for access to the
         documents filed by [the AbbVie companies] as part of their MA application for Humira.
      
On September 2012, [the AbbVie companies] informed the EMA that they opposed disclosure of the documents requested, relying,
         firstly, on the exception provided for in Article 4(2) of Regulation No 1049/and, secondly, on there being no overriding
         public interest requiring disclosure. They reiterated on a number of occasions their refusal to disclose the documents due
         to their confidential nature.
      
By decision of November 2012, the EMA granted the request for access to the documents, on the grounds, inter alia, that
         it was under no legal obligation to consider all of the information submitted in connection with an MA application as confidential
         information and that clinical information concerning the safety and efficacy of a medicinal product authorised for treatment
         in human beings need not be considered commercially confidential. However, UCB Pharma withdrew its request for access on November 2012, which did not prevent [the AbbVie companies] from bringing an action on January to have the decision
         of November 2012, registered under number T‑29/13, annulled.
      
On November 2012, a university science student submitted a request to the EMA for access to [the clinical study reports],
         in connection with the preparation of a Master’s (MSc) thesis.
      
On November 2012, [the AbbVie companies] reiterated their refusal to consent to disclosure of the documents referred to
         in the student’s request, stating that the three clinical study reports were covered by the exception in Article 4(2) of Regulation
         No 1049/and reiterating the concerns expressed in relation to the previous request for access to similar documents concerning
         Humira.
      
By the contested decision, the EMA granted the request for access filed by the student, referring to the grounds stated in
         the decision of November 2012, to the effect that clinical study reports on medicinal products could not be regarded as
         confidential information. The contested decision was notified to [the AbbVie companies] on January 2013.
      
By correspondence of January 2013, the EMA notified [the AbbVie companies] that the documents covered by the contested
         decision would not be disclosed if an application for interim measures was lodged within days.’
      
By application lodged at the Registry of the General Court on January 2013, the AbbVie companies brought an action for
         annulment of the contested decision. In support of that action they argue, in essence, that the contested decision infringes
         Article 4(2) of Regulation No 1049/and their fundamental right to protection of confidential information under Article
         of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (‘the Charter’), Article of the European Convention for the
         Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, signed in Rome on November (‘the ECHR’), and Article TFEU.
      
By a separate document, lodged at the Registry of the General Court on the same date, the AbbVie companies made an application
         for interim measures, whereby they claimed, in essence, that the President of the General Court should:
      
–        suspend the operation of the contested decision until the General Court has ruled on the main action;
–        order the EMA to refrain from disclosing the clinical study reports; and
–        order the EMA to pay the costs.
In its observations on the application for interim measures, lodged at the Registry of the General Court on February 2013,
         the EMA contended that the President of the General Court should:
      
–        dismiss the application for interim measures; and
–        order the AbbVie companies to pay the costs.
 The order under appeal
In paragraphs to of the order under appeal, the President of the General Court, having noted that there is a dispute
         between the parties as regards the question whether certain parts of the clinical study reports are already accessible to
         the public, with the result that those reports could no longer be considered confidential in their entirety, observed that,
         if those reports did enjoy a general presumption of confidentiality, the question of partial disclosure of the public components
         of those reports under Article 4(6) of Regulation No 1049/would not arise, since a document covered by such a presumption
         falls outside the scope of the obligation to disclose its contents, in whole or in part. He added that the case before him
         did not involve the issue of the possible confidentiality of only a few bits of specific and isolated information, but rather
         concerned the possible confidentiality of three reports comprising over pages in total and that neither arguments by the
         parties about the accuracy of a non-confidential version of those reports nor an assessment of those arguments by the judge
         hearing the application for interim measures would be compatible with the expeditiousness required in interim proceedings
         and the summary nature of the proceedings.
      
The President of the General Court, referring to his order of March in Case T‑462/R Pilkington Group v Commission (ECR II‑0000, paragraphs and 25), observed, in paragraphs to of the order under appeal, that the grant of interim
         measures is subject to two cumulative conditions relating, first, to the urgent nature of their grant, in so far as it is
         necessary, in order to avoid serious and irreparable harm to the interests of the party applying for the measures, that those
         measures be ordered and take effect before a decision is reached in the main action, and, secondly, to the finding that the
         grant of those interim measures is justified, prima facie, in fact and in law (fumus boni juris). Moreover, the President of the General Court indicated, that, where appropriate, the judge hearing an application for interim
         measures must also weigh up the interests involved. He pointed out that the judge hearing such an application enjoys a broad
         discretion and is free to determine the manner in which those various conditions are to be examined and, considering that
         he had all the information needed to rule on the application without its being necessary to hear oral argument from the parties,
         he decided first to examine together the questions relating to the weighing up of interests and to urgency.
      
In paragraphs and of the order under appeal, the President of the General Court, referring to paragraphs and of
         the order in Pilkington Group v Commission, noted that the weighing up of the various interests involved requires the judge hearing the application for interim measures
         to determine whether or not the applicant’s interest in obtaining those measures outweighs the interest in immediate application
         of the contested measure by examining, in particular, whether annulment of that measure by the court ruling on the main application
         would allow the situation which would be brought about by its immediate operation to be reversed, and, conversely, whether
         suspension of its operation would prevent it from being fully effective in the event of the main application being dismissed.
         The President of the General Court added that the decision made by the judge hearing an application for interim measures is,
         by its nature, interim in the sense that it must not prejudge the future decision on the substance of the case, nor render
         it illusory by depriving it of its effectiveness.
      
The President of the General Court continued by pointing out, in paragraphs and of the order under appeal, that in order
         to protect the effectiveness of a judgment annulling the contested decision, the AbbVie companies had to be able to ensure
         that the EMA would not allow access to the clinical study reports, because such a judgment and, accordingly, its enforcement,
         would be deprived of effectiveness if the application for interim measures were to be dismissed, since the consequence of
         that dismissal would be that the EMA would be free to grant immediate access to the clinical study reports, notwithstanding
         the fact that even the actual disclosure of those reports would probably not deprive the AbbVie companies of an interest in
         bringing proceedings for the annulment of the contested decision.
      
Consequently, in paragraph of the order under appeal, the President of the General Court, weighing up the interests involved,
         considered that the interest defended by the AbbVie companies prevailed over the EMA’s interest in the dismissal of the application
         for interim measures, a fortiori as the grant of the interim measures requested amounted to no more than maintaining, for a limited period, the status quo
         which had existed since the disputed reports were submitted to the EMA in August and in December 2009. The fact that
         the party requesting disclosure of those reports had a right of access to documents under Article 15(3) TFEU did not call
         that conclusion into question, since the exercise of that right would merely be delayed if the interim measures were granted,
         whilst the competing right of the AbbVie companies to protection of the confidentiality of those reports would be reduced
         to nothing if the application for interim relief were dismissed.
      
In paragraph of that order, the President of the General Court found that since the balance of interests involved was in
         the AbbVie companies’ favour, there was a clear urgency, from that perspective, in protecting the interest defended by them,
         but that it remained to be determined whether those parties were likely to suffer serious and irreparable harm in the event
         of their application for interim measures being dismissed. In that regard, the AbbVie companies maintained that the situation
         that would result from disclosure of the clinical study reports would be irremediable.
      
The President of the General Court noted, in paragraph of the order under appeal, that, according to the AbbVie companies,
         disclosure of the clinical study reports before the end of the main proceedings would deprive them of their right to an effective
         remedy, enshrined in Article of the ECHR and Article of the Charter. Such a disclosure would also infringe their fundamental
         rights under Article TFEU, Article of the ECHR and Article of the Charter. An infringement of those fundamental rights
         would constitute serious and irreparable damage, a fortiori because disclosure of a document under Regulation No 1049/has erga omnes effect, preventing the relevant institution from objecting to dissemination of that document to other parties requesting
         access and allowing anyone to have access to it, as the General Court held in paragraph of its judgment of October
         in Case T‑439/Agapiou Joséphidès v Commission and EACEA (not published in the ECR). Consequently, even if access to the disputed reports were granted only to one student, the confidential
         information could be disclosed to anybody, including current or potential competitors of the AbbVie companies.
      
In paragraphs and of that order, the President of the General Court held that the condition relating to urgency was,
         in principle, satisfied. He found that disclosure of the clinical study reports would irreparably infringe the AbbVie companies’
         right to the protection of their business secrets under Article TFEU, Article of the ECHR and Article of the Charter.
         Moreover, the AbbVie companies’ fundamental right to an effective remedy, enshrined in Article of the ECHR and Article of the Charter, was likely to be jeopardised if the EMA were to be authorised to disclose the clinical study reports before
         the General Court adjudicates on the main action.
      
In paragraph et seq. of the order under appeal, the President of the General Court rejected the EMA’s arguments to the
         contrary. In that respect, he found, in paragraph of that order, that the EMA’s assertion that the grant of the interim
         measures sought by the AbbVee companies would confer a ‘confidential’, as opposed to a ‘public’, nature on the clinical study
         reports, was irrelevant to the examination of the requirement of urgency, since it related rather to the requirement that
         there be a prima facie case. He also found, in paragraphs to of that order, that the EMA’s arguments concerning the
         purely financial nature of the damage could not succeed, since, in the area of disclosure of allegedly confidential information,
         an approach that reduces the breach of professional secrecy to a purely financial loss is not appropriate inasmuch as it disregards
         the fundamental rights relied upon. Referring to paragraph of the order in Pilkington Group v Commission, the President of the General Court stated in that regard that, at least since the entry into force – on December – of the Treaty of Lisbon, which raised the Charter to the level of primary European Union law and which, under the first
         subparagraph of Article 6(1) TEU, provides that it is to have the same legal value as the Treaties, an imminent risk of a
         serious and irreparable breach of the fundamental rights conferred by Articles and of the Charter in that field has had
         to be regarded, in itself, as harm justifying the grant of the interim protection requested.
      
In paragraph et seq. of the order under appeal, the President of the General Court examined the condition that there be
         a prima facie case. Having noted, in paragraph 54, that the condition in question is satisfied where at least one of the pleas
         in law put forward by the applicant for interim measures in support of the main action appears, prima facie, to be relevant
         and in any event not unfounded, he observed, in paragraph of that order that, in the specific context of interim protection
         for information alleged to be confidential, the judge hearing the application for interim measures – if he is not to disregard
         the intrinsically ancillary and provisional nature of proceedings for interim measures and the imminent risk of negation of
         the fundamental rights relied on by the party seeking interim protection of those rights – may, as a rule, conclude that there
         is no prima facie case only where the information in question is obviously not confidential.
      
It was on the basis of those considerations that the President of the General Court examined, in paragraph et seq. of the
         order under appeal, the first plea in law raised by the AbbVie companies in support of their main action, whereby they claim
         that the EMA infringed Article 4(2) of Regulation No 1049/2001, inasmuch as it did not act in conformity with the Court’s
         case-law on access to documents in the context of a regulated administrative procedure, according to which Article 4(2) should
         be applied in the light of the procedural rules governing the administrative procedure under which the documents were provided,
         and a third party may not rely on Regulation No 1049/to obtain more extensive access to the documents than that provided
         for under the applicable specific procedural rules. It can be seen from paragraph of the order under appeal that the AbbVie
         companies claimed, consequently, that a general presumption of confidentiality applies to the documents provided to the EMA
         by an MA applicant and continues even after the close of the administrative procedure. According to the AbbVie companies,
         Regulation No 1049/does not prevail over the approval procedure for an MA under Regulation No 726/2004.
      
It is apparent from paragraphs to of the order under appeal that, according to the AbbVie companies, clinical study
         reports, such as those at issue in the present case, contain proprietary information and specialist technical know-how of
         the company which produces them. Regarding more specifically the clinical study reports relating to the medicinal product
         Humira, the AbbVie companies submitted that disclosure would undermine the protection of their commercial interests, given,
         inter alia, the erga omnes effect of disclosure of a document under Regulation No 1049/2001. In particular, those clinical study reports describe the
         manner in which the AbbVie companies planned and implemented the clinical trials necessary in order to obtain the MA for that
         medicinal product for the indication of Crohn’s disease and therefore provide a very specific road map for a company wishing
         to develop a medicinal product in the very competitive field of tumour necrosis factor (TNF) antagonists. Furthermore, it
         would be possible to obtain approvals for competing products in countries outside the European Union on the basis of clinical
         study reports and detailed clinical overviews of the medicinal product Humira.
      
In paragraphs and of the order under appeal, the President of the General Court noted that, according to the EMA, the
         disclosure of the clinical study reports was based solely on its new policy on access to documents, which became effective
         on December 2010. The EMA submitted, moreover, that there is no provision in European Union law indicating that the documents
         submitted by an MA applicant containing information on the results of a clinical trial must be deemed to be confidential.
         The EMA did not dispute that some parts of the extensive documentation submitted by MA applicants do contain information which
         is commercially confidential, but submitted that it is unreasonable to claim that clinical study reports, which contain information
         relating to the safety or efficacy of the medicinal products on human health and the environment, should enjoy the same level
         of protection.
      
It was on the basis of those considerations, set out in paragraphs to of the order under appeal, that the President
         of the General Court held, in paragraphs to of that order, that the documents in the case did not support the conclusion
         that there was clearly no prima facie case. He observed that there was no case-law enabling an answer to be given easily to
         the question on which judgment would have to be delivered subsequently on the substance, that is to say, whether the contested
         decision, based on the EMA’s new disclosure policy, infringes the AbbVie companies’ right to professional secrecy, as guaranteed
         by Article TFEU, Article of the ECHR and Article of the Charter, on the ground that the disputed reports are confidential
         in nature and must therefore be protected against any disclosure. The President of the General Court concluded that such a
         question of principle could not be ruled on for the first time by a judge hearing an application for interim measures, but
         rather required an in-depth examination in the context of the main proceedings. The President of the General Court added,
         in paragraph of the order under appeal, that the AbbVie companies’ argument concerning the content, value and characteristics
         of the three disputed reports, which comprise over pages, raised complex questions which deserved to be resolved through
         a thorough examination, which could not be done by the judge hearing the application for interim measures.
      
The President of the General Court also held, in paragraph of the order under appeal, that, in any event, it was for the
         court adjudicating on the substance of the case to decide whether an overriding public interest justifies disclosure of the
         clinical study reports, by weighing the AbbVee companies’ commercial interest in not having those reports disclosed against
         the general interest guaranteeing the broadest public access possible to documents held by the European Union. Lastly, the
         President of the General Court observed, in paragraph of the order under appeal, that inasmuch as the EMA emphasised the
         importance of transparency in the decision-making process in the assessment and supervision of medicinal products in order
         to ensure efficient pharmacovigilance, it did not set out the reasons why the question of principle which is the subject-matter
         of the main proceedings should receive a particularly expeditious answer. In that respect, the President of the General Court
         added that it was open to the EMA to include in its statement of defence an application for an expedited procedure under Article
         76a of the Rules of Procedure of the General Court.
      
It is on the basis of all of those considerations that the President of the General Court decided to grant the interim measures
         sought by the AbbVie companies, without ruling on the various applications for leave to intervene that had been lodged. Paragraphs
         and of the operative part of the order under appeal are worded as follows:
      
‘1.      The operation of [the contested decision] is suspended.
2.      The EMA is ordered not to disclose the [clinical study reports].’
 Procedure before the Court of Justice and forms of order sought
The EMA claims that the Court should:
      
–        set aside the order under appeal; and
–        order the AbbVie companies to pay all the costs of the proceedings, including those incurred before the General Court.
The AbbVie companies contend that the appeal should be dismissed and the EMA ordered to pay the costs.
      
On October 2013, the parties presented oral argument and replied to questions put to them by the Court at a joint hearing
         with Case C‑390/P(R) EMA v InterMune UK and Others, pending before the Court.
      
 The appeal
In support of its appeal, the EMA relies on three grounds, alleging respectively:
      
–        incorrect interpretation of the case-law leading to a manifestly erroneous definition of the subject-matter of the case;
–        an error of law in the assessment of the weighing up of the interests and the urgency condition; and
–        a failure to state reasons and a manifestly incorrect assessment of the condition that there be a prima facie case.
It is appropriate to begin by examining the second ground relied on by the EMA in support of its appeal, relating to the weighing
         up of interests and to urgency. By that ground of appeal, which is composed of two parts, the EMA claims, in particular, that
         the President of the General Court erred in his application of the case-law, thereby vitiating the order under appeal by an
         error of law, in so far as he found, first, that the balance of interests was in favour of the AbbVie companies and that the
         condition relating to urgency was met and, secondly, that the interests claimed by the AbbVie companies were protected by
         the fundamental right to private life under Article of the ECHR and Article of the Charter.
      
More specifically, it is appropriate to examine, in the first place, the first branch of the second ground relied on by the
         EMA in support of its appeal, in so far as it is based on an error of law allegedly made by the President of the General Court
         in finding that the condition relating to urgency was met in the present case.
      
 Arguments of the parties
The EMA claims, in essence, that in the order under appeal, in assessing whether the condition relating to urgency was satisfied,
         the President of the General Court erred in law in his assessment inasmuch as, in particular, he failed to examine whether
         the AbbVie companies had demonstrated that the harm resulting from the alleged potential loss of a competitive and commercial
         advantage could not be sufficiently compensated in the context of an action for damages. It submits that, contrary to settled
         case-law, the President of the General Court did not take into account the fact that the harm resulting from the loss of an
         advantage would, in any event, be of a purely financial nature.
      
At the hearing, the EMA added, in reply to questions put to it by the Court, that the order under appeal is vitiated by the
         same error of law as the order of the President of the General Court in Pilkington Group v Commission, for the reasons set forth in the order of the Vice-President of the Court of September in Case C‑278/P(R) Commission v Pilkington Group ([2013] ECR I‑0000). It submitted, at that hearing, that the AbbVie companies can establish a risk of damage affecting them
         only if they can prove that the disclosure of the three clinical study reports is liable to provide a commercial advantage
         to their competitors, and they have not demonstrated that this is the case. In any event, even if such damage were established,
         it would not be irreparable since it would be pecuniary damage, which could be remedied in the context of an action for damages.
         Such damage, resulting from the disclosure of scientific evidence to third parties, is not comparable to that which was at
         issue in the Commission v Pilkington Group case, which arose from the publication on the Internet of specific commercial information, in particular to the extent that,
         in contrast to that at issue in abovementioned case, the damage invoked in the present case may be identified and quantified.
      
At the hearing, the AbbVie companies acknowledged that, in the light of the order in Commission v Pilkington Group, the existence of a risk of serious and irreparable harm cannot be regarded as arising from the mere alleged infringement
         of certain fundamental rights such as the right to property or the right to protection of confidential information. They submitted,
         however, that although the damage that they are liable to suffer is, inter alia, of a financial nature, in practice it is
         impossible to assess it, given the many ways in which the clinical study reports could be used by an indeterminate number
         of competing undertakings throughout the world, before an indeterminate number of regulatory authorities.
      
The AbbVie companies indicate that the financial damage that they are liable to suffer – arising from the future use of the
         information contained in the clinical study reports by their competitors in order to develop a medicinal product which would
         compete with the medicinal product Humira – cannot be identified and quantified, within the meaning of paragraph of the
         order in Commission v Pilkington Group, essentially for five reasons. First, even if those reports were disclosed to only one person, they would become ‘public’,
         since the decision to disclose a document has erga omnes effect; secondly, the person having access to the disclosed document would not be bound by specific confidentiality obligations
         imposed by the EMA; thirdly, the AbbVie companies would not have any way of identifying all of the persons who had obtained
         a copy of the clinical study reports following their disclosure; fourthly, the EMA does not inform MA holders, such as the
         AbbVie companies, when it receives a request for access concerning the contents of their file; and, fifthly, the AbbVie companies
         would have no effective means of knowing whether their competitors had actually used the clinical study reports in order to
         obtain approval for a medicinal product which would compete with the medicinal product Humira, in particular in the case of
         an approval sought outside the European Union.
      
 Findings of the Court
It must be pointed out, first of all, that, in accordance with Article TFEU, actions brought before the Court of Justice
         of the European Union are not to have suspensory effect, but the Court may, if it considers that circumstances so require,
         order that application of the contested act be suspended or, in accordance with Article TFEU, adopt other necessary interim
         measures. Thus, the grant of interim measures represents an exception to the general rule that the acts adopted by the European
         Union institutions enjoy a presumption of legality and are, in principle, enforceable.
      
Article 104(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the General Court provides that applications for interim measures must state ‘the
         subject-matter of the proceedings, the circumstances giving rise to urgency and the pleas of fact and law establishing a prima
         facie case for the interim measures applied for’. Thus, the judge hearing an application for interim relief may order the
         suspension of operation of an act, or other interim measures, if it is established that such an order is justified, prima
         facie, in fact and in law (fumus boni juris) and that it is urgent in so far as, in order to avoid serious and irreparable harm to the applicant’s interests, it must
         be made and produce its effects before a decision is reached in the main action. Those conditions are cumulative, so that
         an application for interim measures must be dismissed if either of them is absent (order in Commission v Pilkington, paragraph and the case-law cited). Where appropriate, the judge hearing such an application must also weigh up the interests
         involved (order of the President in Case C‑445/R Austria v Council [2001] ECR I‑1461, paragraph 73).
      
In that respect, it must be noted that the purpose of interlocutory proceedings is to guarantee the full effectiveness of
         the final future decision in order to ensure that there is no lacuna in the legal protection provided by the Court of Justice.
         To attain that objective, urgency must be assessed in the light of the need for an interlocutory order in order to avoid serious
         and irreparable damage to the party seeking the interim relief (see, to that effect, order of the President of December
         in Case C‑404/P(R) Commission v Euroalliages and Others, ECR I‑10367, paragraphs and 62). It is for that party to prove that it cannot wait for the outcome of the main proceedings
         without suffering damage of that nature (see order of the President of October in Case C‑278/R Greece v Commission ECR I‑8787, paragraph 14).
      
Although in order to establish the existence of serious and irreparable damage it is not necessary for the occurrence of the
         damage to be demonstrated with absolute certainty, it being sufficient to show that damage is foreseeable with a sufficient
         degree of probability, the party seeking an interim measure is nevertheless required to prove the facts forming the basis
         of its claim that serious and irreparable damage is likely (order of the President of December in Case C‑335/P(R)
         HFB and Others v Commission ECR I‑8705, paragraph 67).
      
It must be pointed out that, in the present case, the damage invoked by the AbbVie companies is that which would arise from
         the disclosure to an individual of three clinical study reports which contain allegedly confidential information capable of
         being used by competitors of those companies, which could thus produce and obtain marketing approval for their own medicinal
         products. In particular, those reports are said to describe the manner in which the AbbVie companies planned and implemented
         the clinical trials necessary in order to obtain the MA for the medicinal product Humira for the indication of Crohn’s disease.
      
In order to assess whether there was a risk of serious and irreparable damage, and without prejudice to the examination of
         the condition that there be a prima facie case, which is linked to but distinct from that assessment, the President of the
         General Court necessarily had to start from the premiss that the allegedly confidential information was indeed confidential,
         as claimed by the AbbVie companies, both in the main action and in the proceedings for interim relief.
      
In that respect, it must be pointed out that, in paragraphs and of the order under appeal, the President of the General
         Court inferred the existence of a risk of serious and irreparable damage from the fact that the AbbVie companies’ fundamental
         right to the protection of their business secrets, as well as their fundamental right to an effective remedy, were liable
         to be seriously and irreparably breached by the immediate disclosure of their allegedly confidential information. It is apparent
         from paragraphs and of that order that the President of the General Court held that, in the area of disclosure of allegedly
         confidential information, an approach that reduces the breach of professional secrecy to a purely financial loss is not appropriate
         inasmuch as it disregards the fundamental rights relied upon by the person seeking interim protection for that information.
         In support of that line of reasoning, the President of the General Court referred, inter alia, to the entry into force of
         the Treaty of Lisbon and the resulting enhanced protection of the rights enshrined in the Charter.
      
However, according to the settled case-law of the Court of Justice, the argument that harm is, by definition, irreparable
         because it falls within the scope of fundamental freedoms cannot be accepted, since it is not sufficient to allege infringement
         of fundamental rights in the abstract for the purpose of establishing that the harm which could result would necessarily be
         irreparable (see, to that effect, the order of the President in Case C‑43/P(R) Camar v Commission and Council [1998] ECR I‑1815, paragraphs and 47). That case-law is not called into question by the enhanced protection of fundamental
         rights brought about by the Treaty of Lisbon, since those rights, in particular the rights invoked in the present case, already
         enjoyed protection under European Union law before the entry into force of that treaty (order in Commission v Pilkington Group, paragraph 40).
      
It is true that the infringement of certain fundamental rights, such as the prohibition of torture and inhuman or degrading
         treatment or punishment, enshrined in Article of the Charter, is liable, because of the very nature of the right infringed,
         to give rise by itself to serious and irreparable harm. Nevertheless, in accordance with the case-law referred to in paragraphs
         and of the present order, it is still for the party seeking an interim measure to set forth and establish the likelihood
         of such harm occurring in its particular case.
      
That is the case, in particular, where one undertaking seeks the adoption of interim measures in order to prevent the disclosure
         of information allegedly covered by the obligation of professional secrecy. The extent to which the disclosure of such information
         causes serious and irreparable harm depends on a combination of circumstances, such as, inter alia, the professional and commercial
         importance of the information for the undertaking which provides it and the utility of that information for other undertakings
         which are liable to examine and use it subsequently.
      
It follows from all of the foregoing considerations that the President of the General Court erred in law in finding, in particular
         in paragraphs and of the order under appeal, that the alleged infringement of the AbbVie companies’ fundamental right
         to the protection of their business secrets, enshrined in Article TFEU, in Article of the ECHR, and in Article of
         the Charter, and of their right to an effective remedy, enshrined in Article of the ECRH and Article of the Charter,
         was sufficient in itself to establish the risk of serious and irreparable harm in the circumstances of the present case.
      
As regards the inferences that should be drawn from that error of law, it must be noted that, according to the AbbVie companies,
         the harm that they are liable to suffer is serious and irreparable because the disclosure of a document, under Regulation
         No 1049/2001, acquires erga omnes effect. Moreover, those companies claim that the harm they would suffer would indeed include a financial component, but that
         that component would be impossible to identify and quantify, given the many ways in which the clinical study reports could
         be used by a number of competing businesses and before an indeterminate number of regulatory authorities. In that regard,
         the AbbVie companies stated during the hearing the specific reasons why the financial harm they would suffer could not be
         identified and quantified in the present case. It is necessary to examine whether those arguments, relating to financial harm
         which would allegedly arise from the use, for commercial purposes, of the three clinical study reports by competitors of the
         AbbVie companies, may justify a substitution of grounds, as in Commission v Pilkington Group.
      
As regards the irreparable nature of that harm, it is undisputed that if the General Court were to annul the contested decision
         in the main action, it would not eliminate the harm already suffered and thereby bring about a restitutio in integrum. Indeed, if the disclosure of the clinical study reports is not prohibited until the decision in the main action has been
         delivered, the harm arising from the potential use of those reports by competitors of the AbbVie companies during the course
         of the main proceedings could no longer be reversed.
      
However, damage of a pecuniary nature cannot, otherwise than in exceptional circumstances, be regarded as irreparable since,
         as a general rule, pecuniary compensation is capable of restoring the aggrieved person to the situation that obtained before
         he suffered the damage. Any such damage could be recouped by the applicant’s bringing an action for compensation on the basis
         of Articles TFEU and TFEU (order in Commission v Pilkington Group, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Nevertheless, it must be pointed out that harm of a financial nature may be considered to be serious and irreparable if the
         harm, even when it occurs, cannot be quantified (order of the Vice-President of the Court of March in Case C‑551/P(R)
         EDF v Commission ECR I‑0000, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
It is true that the uncertainty of obtaining compensation for pecuniary damage if an action for damages is brought cannot
         in itself be regarded as a factor capable of establishing that such damage is irreparable within the meaning of the case-law
         of the Court of Justice. At the interlocutory stage, the possibility of subsequently obtaining compensation for pecuniary
         damage if an action for damages is brought following annulment of the contested measure is necessarily uncertain. Interlocutory
         proceedings are not intended to act as a substitute for an action for damages in order to remove that uncertainty, since their
         purpose is only to guarantee the full effectiveness of the final future decision that will be made in the main action (in
         this case an action for annulment), to which the interlocutory proceedings are an adjunct (order of the President of December
         in Case C‑446/P(R) Alcoa Trasformazioni v Commission, paragraphs to 57).
      
However, the situation is different where it is already clear, when the assessment is carried out by the judge hearing the
         application for interim measures, that, in view of its nature and the manner in which it will foreseeably occur, the harm
         alleged, should it occur, may not be adequately identified or quantified and that, in practice, it will not therefore be possible
         to make good that harm by bringing an action for damages (order in Commission v Pilkington Group, paragraph 54).
      
In that respect, it must be noted that the risk of the financial harm alleged by the AbbVie companies in the present case,
         concerning the use of the three clinical study reports for commercial purposes by competitors of those companies following
         the disclosure of those reports, is not comparable, in principle, particularly as regards its nature and the manner in which
         it will foreseeably occur, to the risk arising in the case which gave rise to the order in Commission v Pilkington Group from the publication on the internet of specific and purportedly confidential commercial information relating to matters such
         as the identity of customers, the number of parts supplied, price calculations and price changes. The financial harm invoked
         in the present case would allegedly arise from the future use by third parties of the information contained in the three clinical
         study reports.
      
As noted in paragraph of the present order, although it is not necessary for the occurrence of the damage to be demonstrated
         with absolute certainty, it must be foreseeable with a sufficient degree of probability and, moreover, the party seeking an
         interim measure is required to prove the facts forming the basis of its claim that serious and irreparable damage is likely.
      
However, in the present case, it cannot be excluded, in the light of the foregoing considerations, so far as concerns information
         contained in the three clinical study reports, considered individually or as a whole, the disclosure of which, according to
         the AbbVie companies, is liable to cause them serious and irreparable harm, that they will be able to establish the existence
         of such a risk with regard to some of that information, while ultimately being unable to do so with regard to the potential
         disclosure of other information contained in those reports.
      
In that respect, and contrary to the President of the General Court’s conclusion in paragraph of the order under appeal,
         the expeditiousness required in interim proceedings was not in itself such as to preclude the judge hearing the application
         for interim measures from examining one by one in the present case, the arguments and evidence put forward at first instance
         by the AbbVie companies and intended to prove the necessity of maintaining the confidentiality of certain information or of
         certain documents in order to prevent serious and irreparable harm to those companies. Moreover, it is clear from the case-law,
         of both the Court of Justice and the General Court, that the judge hearing an application for interim relief may, where he
         considers it appropriate, adopt temporary solutions, in particular by granting an application seeking the suspension in part
         of the operation of an act (see, to that effect, orders of the President in Case 71/R and BR Nederlandse Vereniging voor de Fruit- en Groentenimporthandel and Nederlandse Bond van Grossiers in Zuidvruchten en ander
            Geimporteerd Fruit v Commission [1974] ECR 1031, paragraphs to 8, and in Joined Cases 43/R and 63/R VBVB and VBBB v Commission [1982] ECR 1241, paragraphs to 12, and the order of the President of the General Court in Joined Cases T‑24/R and T‑28/R
         Langnese-Iglo and Schöller Lebensmittel v Commission [1992] ECR II‑1839, paragraphs to and points and of the operative part).
      
In the event that the AbbVie companies produce such proof with regard to certain information or certain documents, the principle
         of effective legal protection, enshrined in Article of the Charter, requires that the interim measure sought be granted
         to them, in respect of that information or those documents only.
      
It should be pointed out in that respect that, in the part of their application for interim relief before the General Court
         concerning the condition that there be a prima facie case, and more particularly, by reference to the third part of their
         first plea in law in support of their application for annulment, the AbbVie companies noted that, in their letters of September
         and October and by a reference to those letters in an e-mail of November 2012, those companies had proposed the
         redaction of certain information set out in the ‘Humira Crohn documents’. It was therefore for the President of the General
         Court to examine, in the light of those proposals, whether it was possible to authorise partial access to the three clinical
         study reports, without that authorisation’s creating a sufficiently probable risk of serious and irreparable damage to the
         AbbVie companies.
      
In those circumstances, the order under appeal must be set aside and, since the state of the proceedings does not permit final
         judgment to be given, it must be referred back to the General Court for judgment, in accordance with Article of the Statute
         of the Court of Justice of the European Union.
      
On those grounds, the Vice-President of the Court hereby orders:
1.      The order of the President of the General Court of the European Union of April in Case T‑44/R AbbVie v EMA is set aside.
2.      The case is referred back to the General Court of the European Union.
3.      The costs are reserved.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 