
Joined Cases C-402/and C-432/Christopher Sturgeon and Others
v
Condor Flugdienst GmbH
and
Stefan Böck and Cornelia Lepuschitz
v
Air France SA 
(References for a preliminary ruling from the Bundesgerichtshof and the Handelsgericht Wien)
(Air transport – Regulation (EC) No 261/– Article 2(l) and Articles 5, and – Concept of flight ‘delay’ and ‘cancellation’ – Right to compensation in the event of delay – Concept of ‘extraordinary circumstances’)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Transport – Air transport – Regulation No 261/– Common rules on compensation and assistance to passengers in the event
            of denied boarding and of cancellation or long delay of flights
(European Parliament and Council Regulation No 261/2004, Arts 2(l), and 6)
2.        Transport – Air transport – Regulation No 261/– Common rules on compensation and assistance to passengers in the event
            of denied boarding and of cancellation or long delay of flights
(European Parliament and Council Regulation No 261/2004, Arts 5, and 7)
3.        Transport – Air transport – Regulation No 261/– Compensation and assistance to passengers in the event of cancellation
            of flights
(European Parliament and Council Regulation No 261/2004, Art. 5(3))
1.        Articles 2(l), and of Regulation No 261/establishing common rules on compensation and assistance to passengers in
         the event of denied boarding and of cancellation or long delay of flights must be interpreted as meaning that a flight which
         is delayed, irrespective of the duration of the delay, even if it is long, cannot be regarded as cancelled where the flight
         is operated in accordance with the air carrier’s original planning.
      
A flight is delayed for the purposes of Article of that regulation if it is operated in accordance with the original planning
         and its actual departure time is later than the scheduled departure time, whilst, according to Article 2(l) of that regulation,
         flight cancellation is the result of non-operation of a flight which was previously planned.
      
(see paras 32-33, 39, operative part 1)
2.        Articles 5, and of Regulation No 261/establishing common rules on compensation and assistance to passengers in the
         event of denied boarding and of cancellation or long delay of flights must be interpreted as meaning that passengers whose
         flights are delayed may be treated, for the purposes of the application of the right to compensation, as passengers whose
         flights are cancelled and they may thus rely on the right to compensation laid down in Article of the regulation when they
         suffer, on account of a flight delay, a loss of time equal to or in excess of three hours, that is, where they reach their
         final destination three hours or more after the arrival time originally scheduled by the air carrier. Such a delay does not,
         however, entitle passengers to compensation if the air carrier can prove that the long delay was caused by extraordinary circumstances
         which could not have been avoided even if all reasonable measures had been taken, namely circumstances beyond the actual control
         of the air carrier. 
      
(see para. 69, operative part 2)
3.        Article 5(3) of Regulation No 261/establishing common rules on compensation and assistance to passengers in the event
         of denied boarding and of cancellation or long delay of flights must be interpreted as meaning that a technical problem in
         an aircraft which leads to the cancellation or delay of a flight is not covered by the concept of ‘extraordinary circumstances’
         within the meaning of that provision, unless that problem stems from events which, by their nature or origin, are not inherent
         in the normal exercise of the activity of the air carrier concerned and are beyond its actual control. 
      
(see para. 72, operative part 3)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Air transport – Regulation (EC) No 261/– Article 2(l) and Articles 5, and – Concept of flight ‘delay’ and ‘cancellation’ – Right to compensation in the event of delay – Concept of ‘extraordinary circumstances’)
In Joined Cases C‑402/and C‑432/07, 
REFERENCES for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Bundesgerichtshof (Germany) and the Handelsgericht Wien
         (Austria) made by decisions of July and June 2007, received at the Court on August and September respectively,
         in the proceedings
      
Christopher Sturgeon,
Gabriel Sturgeon,
Alana Sturgeon 
v
Condor Flugdienst GmbH (C-402/07),
and
Stefan Böck,
Cornelia Lepuschitz
v
Air France SA (C-432/07),
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Third Chamber, acting for the President of the Fourth Chamber, R. Silva de Lapuerta,
         E. Juhász, G. Arestis and J. Malenovský (Rapporteur), Judges, 
      
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: R. Şereş, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2008,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        C. Sturgeon, G. Sturgeon and A. Sturgeon, by R. Schmid, Rechtsanwalt,
–        S. Böck and C. Lepuschitz, by M. Wukoschitz, Rechtsanwalt,
–        Condor Flugdienst GmbH, by C. Marko and C. Döring, Rechtsanwälte,
–        Air France SA, by O. Borodajkewycz, Rechtsanwalt,
–        the Austrian Government, by E. Riedl, acting as Agent,
–        the Greek Government, by S. Chala and D. Tsagkaraki, acting as Agents,
–        the French Government, by G. de Bergues and A. Hare, acting as Agents,
–        the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and W. Ferrante, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Polish Government, by M. Dowgielewicz, acting as Agent,
–        the Swedish Government, by A. Falk, acting as Agent,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by T. Harris, acting as Agent, and D. Beard, Barrister,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by R. Vidal-Puig and P. Dejmek, acting as Agents, 
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on July 2009,
gives the following
Judgment
These references for a preliminary ruling concern the interpretation of Articles 2(l), 5, and of Regulation (EC) No 261/of the European Parliament and of the Council of February establishing common rules on compensation and assistance
         to passengers in the event of denied boarding and of cancellation or long delay of flights, and repealing Regulation (EEC)
         No 295/(OJ L 46, p. 1).
      
The references were made in proceedings between (i) Mr Sturgeon and his family (‘the Sturgeons’) and Condor Flugdienst GmbH
         (‘Condor’) (C‑402/07) and (ii) Mr Bock and Ms Lepuschitz and Air France SA (‘Air France’) (C-432/07), concerning the refusal
         of those airlines to pay compensation to the passengers concerned, whose arrival at the airport of destination was delayed
         by and hours respectively in relation to the scheduled arrival time.
      
 Legal context
Recitals to in the preamble to Regulation No 261/state:
      
‘(1)      Action by the Community in the field of air transport should aim, among other things, at ensuring a high level of protection
         for passengers. Moreover, full account should be taken of the requirements of consumer protection in general.
      
(2)      Denied boarding and cancellation or long delay of flights cause serious trouble and inconvenience to passengers.
(3)      While Council Regulation (EEC) No 295/of February establishing common rules for a denied boarding compensation system
         in scheduled air transport [(OJ L 36, p. 5)] created basic protection for passengers, the number of passengers denied
         boarding against their will remains too high, as does that affected by cancellations without prior warning and that affected
         by long delays.
      
(4)      The Community should therefore raise the standards of protection set by that Regulation both to strengthen the rights of passengers
         and to ensure that air carriers operate under harmonised conditions in a liberalised market.’
      
According to Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 261/2004:
      
‘Extraordinary circumstances should be deemed to exist where the impact of an air traffic management decision in relation
         to a particular aircraft on a particular day gives rise to a long delay, an overnight delay, or the cancellation of one or
         more flights by that aircraft, even though all reasonable measures had been taken by the air carrier concerned to avoid the
         delays or cancellations.’
      
Article of Regulation No 261/2004, headed ‘Definitions’, provides:
      
‘For the purposes of this Regulation:
…
(l)      “cancellation” means the non-operation of a flight which was previously planned and on which at least one place was reserved.’
Article of that regulation, headed ‘Cancellation’, states:
      
‘1.      In case of cancellation of a flight, the passengers concerned shall:
(a)      be offered assistance by the operating air carrier in accordance with Article 8; and
…
(c)      have the right to compensation by the operating air carrier in accordance with Article 7, unless:
         …
(iii) they are informed of the cancellation less than seven days before the scheduled time of departure and are offered re-routing,
         allowing them to depart no more than one hour before the scheduled time of departure and to reach their final destination
         less than two hours after the scheduled time of arrival.
      
…
3.      An operating air carrier shall not be obliged to pay compensation in accordance with Article 7, if it can prove that the cancellation
         is caused by extraordinary circumstances which could not have been avoided even if all reasonable measures had been taken.
      
…’
Article of Regulation No 261/2004, headed ‘Delay’, is worded as follows:
      
‘1.      When an operating air carrier reasonably expects a flight to be delayed beyond its scheduled time of departure:
(a)      for two hours or more in the case of flights of kilometres or less; or
(b)      for three hours or more in the case of all intra-Community flights of more than kilometres and of all other flights
         between and kilometres; or
      
(c)      for four hours or more in the case of all flights not falling under (a) or (b),
passengers shall be offered by the operating air carrier:
(i)      the assistance specified in Article 9(1)(a) and 9(2); and
(ii)      when the reasonably expected time of departure is at least the day after the time of departure previously announced, the assistance
         specified in Article 9(1)(b) and 9(1)(c); and
      
(iii) when the delay is at least five hours, the assistance specified in Article 8(1)(a).
2.      In any event, the assistance shall be offered within the time-limits set out above with respect to each distance bracket.’
Article of Regulation No 261/2004, headed ‘Right to compensation’, provides:
      
‘1.      Where reference is made to this Article, passengers shall receive compensation amounting to:
(a)      EUR for all flights of kilometres or less;
(b)      EUR for all intra-Community flights of more than kilometres, and for all other flights between and kilometres;
(c)      EUR for all flights not falling under (a) or (b).
In determining the distance, the basis shall be the last destination at which the denial of boarding or cancellation will
         delay the passenger’s arrival after the scheduled time.
      
2.      When passengers are offered re-routing to their final destination on an alternative flight pursuant to Article 8, the arrival
         time of which does not exceed the scheduled arrival time of the flight originally booked:
      
(a)      by two hours, in respect of all flights of kilometres or less; or
(b)      by three hours, in respect of all intra-Community flights of more than kilometres and for all other flights between
         and kilometres; or
      
(c)      by four hours, in respect of all flights not falling under (a) or (b),
the operating air carrier may reduce the compensation provided for in paragraph by 50%.
…’
Article 8(1) of Regulation No 261/provides that where reference is made to Article 8, passengers are to be offered the
         choice between, under paragraph 1(a), reimbursement of the ticket and a return flight to the first point of departure or,
         under paragraph 1(b) and (c), re-routing, under comparable transport conditions, to their final destination.
      
Article 9(1) of that regulation, where reference is made to Article 9, passengers are to be offered free of charge, under
         Article 9(1)(a), meals and refreshments and, under Article 9(1)(b) and (c), hotel accommodation and transfer to the place
         of accommodation; in addition, under Article 9(2), they are to be offered free of charge two telephone calls, telex or fax
         messages, or e-mails. 
      
 The disputes in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 Case C-402/The Sturgeons booked return tickets with Condor from Frankfurt am Main (Germany) to Toronto (Canada).
      
The return flight from Toronto to Frankfurt was due to depart at 16.on July 2005. Following check-in, passengers on that
         flight were informed that the flight was cancelled, as was indicated on the airport departures board. Their luggage was returned
         to them and they were then driven to a hotel where they spent the night. The following day, the passengers were checked in
         at another airline’s counter for a flight with the same number as that on their booking. Condor did not schedule another flight
         with the same number for the day concerned. The passengers were given different seats from those they had been allocated on
         the previous day. The booking was not converted into a booking for a flight scheduled by another airline. The flight concerned
         arrived in Frankfurt at around 07.on July 2005, some hours after its scheduled arrival time.
      
The Sturgeons took the view that, in light of all the abovementioned circumstances, in particular the delay of more than hours, the flight had been not delayed but cancelled. 
      
The Sturgeons brought an action against Condor before the Amtsgericht Rüsselsheim (Local Court, Rüsselsheim) (Germany), claiming
         compensation of EUR per person plus damages, since, in their view, the damage sustained was the result not of a flight
         delay but of a cancellation. 
      
Condor contended that the action as framed should be dismissed on the ground that the flight in question was delayed and not
         cancelled. Prior to the proceedings before the national court, Condor claimed that the flight had been delayed as the result
         of a hurricane in the Caribbean but during the proceedings it attributed the delay to technical faults on the plane and illness
         among the crew. 
      
The Amtsgericht Rüsselsheim concluded that the flight had been delayed not cancelled and, consequently, dismissed the Sturgeons’
         claim for compensation. The Sturgeons appealed to the Landgericht Darmstadt (Regional Court, Darmstadt) which upheld the decision
         of the lower court. 
      
The Sturgeons then appealed on a point of law (‘Revision’) to the Bundesgerichtshof (Federal Court of Justice). 
      
Taking the view that the outcome of the appeal depended on the interpretation of Articles 2(l) and 5(1)(c) of Regulation No
         261/2004, the Bundesgerichtshof decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary
         ruling:
      
‘1.      Is it decisive for the interpretation of the term “cancellation” whether the original flight planning is abandoned, with the
         result that a delay, regardless of how long, does not constitute a cancellation if the air carrier does not actually abandon
         the planning for the original flight?
      
2.      If Question is answered in the negative: in what circumstances is a delay of the planned flight no longer to be regarded
         as a delay but as a cancellation? Is the answer to this question dependent on the length of the delay?’
      
 Case C-432/Mr Böck and Ms Lepuschitz booked return tickets with Air France from Vienna (Austria) to Mexico City (Mexico) via Paris (France).
      
The Mexico City-Paris flight which Mr Böck and Ms Lepuschitz were due to take was scheduled to depart at 21.on March
         2005. When they came to check in, they were immediately informed, without the check-in taking place, that their flight was
         cancelled. The cancellation resulted from a change in the flight planning between Mexico City and Paris, which arose because
         of a technical breakdown on the aircraft due to fly from Paris to Mexico City and on account of the need to observe the rest
         period prescribed by law for the crew.
      
In order to get back earlier, Mr Böck and Ms Lepuschitz accepted Air France’s offer of seats on a flight operated by Continental
         Airlines, which was scheduled to leave the following day, March 2005, at 12.20. Their tickets were first cancelled and then
         new tickets were issued to them at the Continental Airlines counter. 
      
The other passengers on the Mexico City-Paris flight, who did not take the Continental Airlines flight, left Mexico City,
         with a number of additional passengers, on March at 19.35. That flight, whose original number was followed by the letter
         ‘A’, was operated in addition to the regular flight scheduled by Air France on the same day. 
      
Mr Böck and Ms Lepuschitz arrived in Vienna almost hours after the scheduled arrival time. 
      
Mr Böck and Ms Lepuschitz brought an action against Air France before the Bezirksgericht für Handelssachen Wien (District
         Commercial Court, Vienna) (Austria), claiming EUR compensation per person for cancellation of their flight, on the basis
         of Articles and 7(1)(c) of Regulation No 261/2004. That court dismissed their claim on the ground that, despite the evident
         flight delay, Regulation No 261/did not support the conclusion that there was a flight cancellation. Mr Böck and Ms Lepuschitz
         appealed against that decision to the Handelsgericht Wien (Commercial Court, Vienna). 
      
In those circumstances, the Handelsgericht Wien decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the
         Court for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘1.      Must Article 5, read in conjunction with Articles 2(l) and 6, of Regulation … No 261/…, be interpreted as meaning that
         a 22-hour delay in the time of departure constitutes a “delay” within the meaning of Article 6?
      
2.      Must Article 2(l) of Regulation … No 261/be interpreted as meaning that instances in which passengers are transported
         significantly later (hours later) on a flight operating under a longer flight number (original flight number supplemented
         by an “A”) and carrying only an – albeit large – proportion of the passengers booked on the initial flight, but also additional
         passengers not booked on the initial flight, constitute “cancellations” rather than “delays”?
      
If Question is to be answered in the affirmative:
3.      Must Article 5(3) of Regulation … No 261/be interpreted as meaning that technical problems with a plane and the resulting
         changes to the flight schedule represent extraordinary circumstances (which could not have been avoided even if all reasonable
         measures had been taken)?’
      
By order of the President of the Court of October 2007, Cases C‑402/and C‑432/were joined for the purposes of the
         written and oral procedure and of the judgment. 
      
 Consideration of the questions referred 
Before the national courts, the applicants in the main actions claim from Condor and Air France respectively the compensation
         provided for in Article of Regulation No 261/on the ground that with those airlines they reached their airports of
         destination, in the first case, and, in the second case, hours after the scheduled arrival times. Condor and Air France
         assert that the applicants are not entitled to any compensation, since the flights concerned were not cancelled but delayed
         and Regulation No 261/provides for a right to compensation only in the case of flight cancellation. Furthermore, the
         airlines maintain that the late arrival of the flights was attributable to technical faults on the aircraft, which are covered
         by the concept of ‘extraordinary circumstances’ within the meaning of Article 5(3) of Regulation No 261/2004, and that they
         are thus released from the obligation to pay compensation. 
      
In those circumstances, in order to give the national courts a useful answer, the questions referred should be understood
         as seeking, in essence, to ascertain:
      
–        whether a flight delay must be regarded as a flight cancellation for the purposes of Articles 2(l) and of Regulation No
         261/where the delay is long;
      
–        whether Articles 5, and of Regulation No 261/must be interpreted as meaning that passengers whose flights are delayed
         may, for the purpose of the application of the right to compensation laid down in Article of that regulation, be treated
         as passengers whose flights are cancelled, and
      
–        whether a technical problem in an aircraft is covered by the concept of ‘extraordinary circumstances’ within the meaning of
         Article 5(3) of Regulation No 261/2004.
      
 The first part of the questions referred, concerning the concept of delay 
Regulation No 261/does not contain a definition of ‘flight delay’. That concept may, however, be clarified in the light
         of the context in which it occurs.
      
In that regard, it should be recalled, first, that a ‘flight’ within the meaning of Regulation No 261/consists in an
         air transport operation, performed by an air carrier which fixes its itinerary (Case C‑173/Emirates Airlines [2008] ECR I‑5237, paragraph 40). Thus, the itinerary is an essential element of the flight, as the flight is operated in
         accordance with the carrier’s pre-arranged planning.
      
It is clear furthermore from Article of Regulation No 261/that the Community legislature adopted a notion of ‘flight
         delay’ which is considered only by reference to the scheduled departure time and which implies as a consequence that, after
         the departure time, the other elements pertaining to the flight must remain unchanged.
      
Thus, a flight is ‘delayed’ for the purposes of Article of Regulation No 261/if it is operated in accordance with the
         original planning and its actual departure time is later than the scheduled departure time. 
      
Second, according to Article 2(l) of Regulation No 261/2004, flight cancellation, unlike delay, is the result of non-operation
         of a flight which was previously planned. It follows that, in that regard, cancelled flights and delayed flights are two quite
         distinct categories of flights. It cannot therefore be inferred from Regulation No 261/that a flight which is delayed
         may be classified as a ‘cancelled flight’ merely on the ground that the delay is extended, even substantially. 
      
Consequently, a flight which is delayed, irrespective of the duration of the delay, even if it is long, cannot be regarded
         as cancelled where there is a departure in accordance with the original planning. 
      
In those circumstances, where passengers are carried on a flight whose departure time is later than the departure time originally
         scheduled, the flight can be classified as ‘cancelled’ only if the air carrier arranges for the passengers to be carried on
         another flight whose original planning is different from that of the flight for which the booking was made.
      
Thus, it is possible, as a rule, to conclude that there is a cancellation where the delayed flight for which the booking was
         made is ‘rolled over’ onto another flight, that is to say, where the planning for the original flight is abandoned and the
         passengers from that flight join passengers on a flight which was also planned – but independently of the flight for which
         the passengers so transferred had made their bookings.
      
By contrast, it cannot, as a rule, be concluded that there is a flight delay or cancellation on the basis of a ‘delay’ or
         a ‘cancellation’ being shown on the airport departures board or announced by the air carrier’s staff. Similarly, the fact
         that passengers recover their luggage or obtain new boarding cards is not, as a rule, a deciding factor. Those circumstances
         are not connected with the objective characteristics of the flight as such. They can be attributable to inaccurate classifications
         or to factors obtaining in the airport concerned or, yet again, they may be unavoidable given the waiting time and the fact
         that it is necessary for the passengers concerned to spend the night in a hotel. 
      
Nor, as a rule, is it conclusive that the composition of the group of passengers who initially held reservations is essentially
         identical to that of the group subsequently transported. Indeed, as the delay grows longer by reference to the departure time
         originally scheduled, the number of passengers in the first of those groups may decrease because some passengers have been
         offered re-routing on another flight and others, for personal reasons, have decided not to take the delayed flight. Conversely,
         to the extent that seats have become available on the flight for which the booking was made, there is nothing to prevent the
         carrier accepting, before departure of the plane which is delayed, additional passengers.
      
In view of the foregoing, the answer to the first part of the questions referred is that Articles 2(l), and of Regulation
         No 261/must be interpreted as meaning that a flight which is delayed, irrespective of the duration of the delay, even
         if it is long, cannot be regarded as cancelled where the flight is operated in accordance with the air carrier’s original
         planning.
      
 The second part of the questions referred, concerning the right to compensation in the event of delay 
Article 5(1) of Regulation No 261/provides that in the event of cancellation of a flight, the passengers concerned are
         to have the right to compensation by the operating air carrier in accordance with Article of the regulation. 
      
By contrast, it does not expressly follow from the wording of Regulation No 261/that passengers whose flights are delayed
         have such a right. Nevertheless, as the Court has made clear in its case-law, it is necessary, in interpreting a provision
         of Community law, to consider not only its wording, but also the context in which it occurs and the objectives pursued by
         the rules of which it is part (see, inter alia, Case C-156/Germany v Commission [2000] ECR I-6857, paragraph 50, and Case C-306/SGAE [2006] ECR I-11519, paragraph 34).
      
In that regard, the operative part of a Community act is indissociably linked to the statement of reasons for it, so that,
         when it has to be interpreted, account must be taken of the reasons which led to its adoption (Case C‑298/P Italy v Commission [2004] ECR I‑4087, paragraph and the case-law cited). 
      
It must be stated that, even though the possibility of relying on ‘extraordinary circumstances’, allowing air carriers to
         be released from the obligation to pay compensation under Article of Regulation No 261/2004, is provided for only in Article
         5(3) thereof, which concerns flight cancellation, Recital in the preamble to the regulation nevertheless states that that
         ground may also be relied on where an air traffic management decision in relation to a particular aircraft on a particular
         day gives rise to ‘a long delay [or] an overnight delay’. As the notion of long delay is mentioned in the context of extraordinary
         circumstances, it must be held that the legislature also linked that notion to the right to compensation. 
      
That is implicitly borne out by the objective of Regulation No 261/2004, since it is apparent from Recitals to in the
         preamble, in particular from Recital 2, that the regulation seeks to ensure a high level of protection for air passengers
         regardless of whether they are denied boarding or whether their flight is cancelled or delayed, since they are all caused
         similar serious trouble and inconvenience connected with air transport.
      
That is a fortiori the case since the provisions conferring rights on air passengers, including those conferring a right to compensation, must
         be interpreted broadly (see, to that effect, Case C-549/Wallentin-Hermann [2008] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 17). 
      
In those circumstances it cannot automatically be presumed that passengers whose flights are delayed do not have a right to
         compensation and cannot, for the purposes of recognition of such a right, be treated as passengers whose flights are cancelled.
         
      
Next, it must be stated that, according to a general principle of interpretation, a Community act must be interpreted, as
         far as possible, in such a way as not to affect its validity (see, to that effect, Case C‑403/Italy v Commission [2001] ECR I‑6883, paragraph 37). Likewise, where a provision of Community law is open to several interpretations, preference
         must be given to that interpretation which ensures that the provision retains its effectiveness (see, inter alia, Case 187/Land de Sarre and Others [1988] ECR 5013, paragraph 19, and Case C‑434/Commission v France [2000] ECR I‑1129, paragraph 21). 
      
In that regard, all Community acts must be interpreted in accordance with primary law as a whole, including the principle
         of equal treatment, which requires that comparable situations must not be treated differently and that different situations
         must not be treated in the same way unless such treatment is objectively justified (Case C‑210/Swedish Match [2004] ECR I‑11893, paragraph 70, and Case C‑344/IATA and ELFAA [2006] ECR I‑403, paragraph 95).
      
In view of the objective of Regulation No 261/2004, which is to strengthen protection for air passengers by redressing damage
         suffered by them during air travel, situations covered by the regulation must be compared, in particular by reference to the
         type and extent of the various types of inconvenience and damage suffered by the passengers concerned (see, to that effect,
         IATA and ELFAA, paragraphs 82, 85, and 98).
      
In this instance, the situation of passengers whose flights are delayed should be compared with that of passengers whose flights
         are cancelled. 
      
In that connection, Regulation No 261/seeks to redress damage in an immediate and standardised manner and to do so by
         various forms of intervention which are the subject of rules relating to denied boarding, cancellation and long flight delay
         (see, to that effect, IATA and ELFAA, paragraph 43).
      
Regulation No 261/has, in those measures, the objective of repairing, inter alia, damage consisting, for the passengers
         concerned, in a loss of time which, given that it is irreversible, can be redressed only by compensation.
      
In that regard, it must be stated that that damage is suffered both by passengers whose flights are cancelled and by passengers
         whose flights are delayed if, prior to reaching their destinations, the latter’s journey time is longer than the time which
         had originally been scheduled by the air carrier.
      
Consequently, passengers whose flights have been cancelled and passengers affected by a flight delay suffer similar damage,
         consisting in a loss of time, and thus find themselves in comparable situations for the purposes of the application of the
         right to compensation laid down in Article of Regulation No 261/2004.
      
More specifically, the situation of passengers whose flights are delayed is scarcely distinguishable from that of passengers
         whose flights are cancelled, who are re-routed in accordance with Article 5(1)(c)(iii) of Regulation No 261/and who may
         be informed of the flight cancellation at the very last moment, when they actually arrive at the airport (see Case C‑204/Rehder [2009] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 19). 
      
First, both categories of passengers are informed, as a rule, at the same time of the incident which will make their journey
         by air more difficult. Second, even if they are transported to their final destination, they reach it after the time originally
         scheduled and, as a consequence, they suffer a similar loss of time. 
      
That said, passengers who are re-routed under Article 5(1)(c)(iii) of Regulation No 261/are afforded the right to compensation
         laid down in Article of the regulation where the carrier fails to re-route them on a flight which departs no more than one
         hour before the scheduled time of departure and reaches their final destination less than two hours after the scheduled time
         of arrival. Those passengers thus acquire a right to compensation when they suffer a loss of time equal to or in excess of
         three hours in relation to the duration originally planned by the air carrier. 
      
If, by contrast, passengers whose flights are delayed did not acquire any right to compensation, they would be treated less
         favourably even though, depending on the circumstances, they suffer a similar loss of time, of three hours or more, in the
         course of their journey.
      
There appears, however, to be no objective ground capable of justifying such a difference in treatment. 
      
Given that the damage sustained by air passengers in cases of cancellation or long delay is comparable, passengers whose flights
         are delayed and passengers whose flights are cancelled cannot be treated differently without the principle of equal treatment
         being infringed. That is a fortiori the case in view of the aim sought by Regulation No 261/2004, which is to increase protection for all air passengers. 
      
In those circumstances, the Court finds that passengers whose flights are delayed may rely on the right to compensation laid
         down in Article of Regulation No 261/where they suffer, on account of such flights, a loss of time equal to or in excess
         of three hours, that is to say when they reach their final destination three hours or more after the arrival time originally
         scheduled by the air carrier.   
      
That solution is, moreover, consistent with Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 261/2004. As stated at paragraph of this judgment, it must be held that the legislature, in that recital, also linked the notion of ‘long delay’ to the right
         to compensation. That notion corresponds to a delay to which the legislature attaches certain legal consequences. As Article
         of the regulation already accepts such legal consequences in the case of certain flights which are delayed for two hours,
         Recital necessarily covers delays of three hours or more.
      
It is important to point out that the compensation payable to a passenger under Article 7(1) of Regulation No 261/may
         be reduced by 50% if the conditions laid down in Article 7(2) of the regulation are met. Even though the latter provision
         refers only to the case of re-routing of passengers, the Court finds that the reduction in the compensation provided for is
         dependent solely on the delay to which passengers are subject, so that nothing precludes the application mutatis mutandis of that provision to compensation paid to passengers whose flights are delayed. It follows that the compensation payable
         to a passenger whose flight is delayed, who reaches his final destination three hours or more after the arrival time originally
         scheduled, may be reduced by 50%, in accordance with Article 7(2)(c) of Regulation No 261/2004, where the delay is – in the
         case of a flight not falling under points (a) or (b) of Article 7(2) – less than four hours. 
      
The conclusion set out in paragraph of this judgment is not undermined by the fact that Article of Regulation No 261/provides for different forms of assistance under Articles and thereof for passengers whose flights are delayed. 
      
As the Court has already stated, Regulation No 261/provides for various forms of intervention in order to redress, in
         a standardised and immediate manner, the different types of damage constituted by the inconvenience that delay in the carriage
         of passengers by air causes (see, to that effect, IATA and ELFAA, paragraphs and 45). 
      
Those measures are autonomous in the sense that they address different aims and seek to make up for various types of damage
         caused by such delay. 
      
That said, it should be recalled that, with the adoption of Regulation No 261/2004, the legislature was also seeking to strike
         a balance between the interests of air passengers and those of air carriers. Having laid down certain rights for those passengers,
         it provided at the same time, in Recital and Article 5(3) of the regulation, that air carriers are not obliged to pay compensation
         if they can prove that the cancellation or long delay is caused by extraordinary circumstances which could not have been avoided
         even if all reasonable measures had been taken, namely circumstances which are beyond the air carrier’s actual control. 
      
Moreover, the discharge of obligations pursuant to Regulation No 261/is without prejudice to air carriers’ rights to
         seek compensation from any person who caused the delay, including third parties, as Article of the regulation provides.
         Such compensation may accordingly reduce or even remove the financial burden borne by carriers in consequence of those obligations.
         Nor does it appear unreasonable for those obligations initially to be borne, subject to the abovementioned right to compensation,
         by the air carriers with which the passengers concerned have a contract of carriage that entitles them to a flight that should
         be neither cancelled nor delayed (IATA and ELFAA, paragraph 90).
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the second part of the questions referred is that Articles 5, and of Regulation
         No 261/must be interpreted as meaning that passengers whose flights are delayed may be treated, for the purposes of the
         application of the right to compensation, as passengers whose flights are cancelled and they may thus rely on the right to
         compensation laid down in Article of the regulation where they suffer, on account of a flight delay, a loss of time equal
         to or in excess of three hours, that is, where they reach their final destination three hours or more after the arrival time
         originally scheduled by the air carrier. Such a delay does not, however, entitle passengers to compensation if the air carrier
         can prove that the long delay was caused by extraordinary circumstances which could not have been avoided even if all reasonable
         measures had been taken, namely circumstances beyond the actual control of the air carrier.
      
 The third question in Case C-432/07, concerning extraordinary circumstances resulting from a technical problem in an aircraft
The Court has already held that Article 5(3) of Regulation No 261/must be interpreted as meaning that a technical problem
         in an aircraft which leads to the cancellation of a flight is not covered by the concept of ‘extraordinary circumstances’
         within the meaning of that provision, unless that problem stems from events which, by their nature or origin, are not inherent
         in the normal exercise of the activity of the air carrier concerned and are beyond its actual control (Wallentin-Hermann, paragraph 34). 
      
The same conclusion applies when Article 5(3) of Regulation No 261/is pleaded in the case of flight delay. 
      
Thus, the answer to the third question in Case C‑432/is that Article 5(3) of Regulation No 261/must be interpreted
         as meaning that a technical problem in an aircraft which leads to the cancellation or delay of a flight is not covered by
         the concept of ‘extraordinary circumstances’ within the meaning of that provision, unless that problem stems from events which,
         by their nature or origin, are not inherent in the normal exercise of the activity of the air carrier concerned and are beyond
         its actual control.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Articles 2(l), and of Regulation (EC) No 261/of the European Parliament and of the Council of February establishing
            common rules on compensation and assistance to passengers in the event of denied boarding and of cancellation or long delay
            of flights, and repealing Regulation (EEC) No 295/91, must be interpreted as meaning that a flight which is delayed, irrespective
            of the duration of the delay, even if it is long, cannot be regarded as cancelled where the flight is operated in accordance
            with the air carrier’s original planning.
2.      Articles 5, and of Regulation No 261/must be interpreted as meaning that passengers whose flights are delayed may
            be treated, for the purposes of the application of the right to compensation, as passengers whose flights are cancelled and
            they may thus rely on the right to compensation laid down in Article of the regulation where they suffer, on account of
            a flight delay, a loss of time equal to or in excess of three hours, that is, where they reach their final destination three
            hours or more after the arrival time originally scheduled by the air carrier. Such a delay does not, however, entitle passengers
            to compensation if the air carrier can prove that the long delay was caused by extraordinary circumstances which could not
            have been avoided even if all reasonable measures had been taken, namely circumstances beyond the actual control of the air
            carrier. 
3.      Article 5(3) of Regulation No 261/must be interpreted as meaning that a technical problem in an aircraft which leads
            to the cancellation or delay of a flight is not covered by the concept of ‘extraordinary circumstances’ within the meaning
            of that provision, unless that problem stems from events which, by their nature or origin, are not inherent in the normal
            exercise of the activity of the air carrier concerned and are beyond its actual control. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 