
ORDER OF THE COURT (Eighth Chamber)
March (*)
      
(Appeal – Application for registration of Community word mark ARCOL – Opposition by proprietor of Community word mark CAPOL – Implementation by OHIM of a judgment annulling a decision of its Boards of Appeal – Right to be heard – Likelihood of confusion – Minimal degree of similarity of the marks required – Rejection for manifest irrelevance of new evidence adduced before the Board of Appeal – Articles 8(1)(b), 61(2), 63(6), 73, second sentence, and 74(2) of Regulation No 40/94)
In Case C‑193/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice brought on June 2009,
Kaul GmbH, established in Elmshorn (Germany), represented by R. Kunze, Rechtsanwalt and Solicitor,
      
appellant,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM), represented by G. Schneider, acting as Agent,
      
defendant at first instance,
Bayer AG, established in Leverkusen (Germany),
      
party to the proceedings before the Board of Appeal of OHIM, 
THE COURT (Eighth Chamber),
composed of C. Toader, President of the Chamber, K. Schiemann (Rapporteur) and P. Kūris, Judges,
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: R. Grass,
after hearing the Advocate General,
makes the following
Order
By its appeal, Kaul GmbH (‘Kaul’) asks the Court to set aside the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European
         Communities (now ‘the General Court’) of March in Case T‑402/Kaul v OHIM – Bayer (ARCOL) (not yet published in the ECR, ‘the judgment under appeal’), which dismissed its action brought against the decision of the
         Second Board of Appeal of the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM) of August
         rejecting its opposition to the registration as a Community trade mark of the word sign ‘ARCOL’ (‘the contested decision’).
      
 Legal context
 Regulation (EC) No 40/Article 8(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EC) No 40/of December on the Community trade mark (OJ L 11, p. 1) provides:
      
‘Upon opposition by the proprietor of an earlier trade mark, the trade mark applied for shall not be registered:
...
(b)      if because of its identity with or similarity to the earlier trade mark and the identity or similarity of the goods or services
         covered by the trade marks there exists a likelihood of confusion on the part of the public in the territory in which the
         earlier trade mark is protected; the likelihood of confusion includes the likelihood of association with the earlier trade
         mark.’
      
Article 61(2) of that regulation provides:
      
‘In the examination of the appeal, the Board of Appeal shall invite the parties, as often as necessary, to file observations,
         within a period to be fixed by the Board of Appeal, on communications from the other parties or issued by itself.’
      
Article 63(6) of that regulation provides:
      
‘[OHIM] shall be required to take the necessary measures to comply with the judgment of the Court of Justice.’
Article of that regulation provides:
      
‘Decisions of [OHIM] shall state the reasons on which they are based. They shall be based only on reasons or evidence on which
         the parties concerned have had on opportunity to present their comments.’
      
Article 74(2) of Regulation No 40/provides:
      
‘[OHIM] may disregard facts or evidence which are not submitted in due time by the parties concerned.’
 Backgound to the dispute
On April 1996, Atlantic Richfield Co. submitted to OHIM an application to register the word sign ‘ARCOL’ as a Community
         trade mark for, inter alia, ‘chemical substances for preserving foodstuffs’ within Class of the Nice Agreement concerning
         the International Classification of Goods and Services for the Purposes of the Registration of Marks of June 1957, as revised
         and amended.
      
On October 1998, Kaul filed an opposition against the registration of that word sign as a trade mark. The opposition was
         based on the existence of an earlier Community trade mark comprising the sign ‘CAPOL’, registered on February and
         relating to goods described as ‘chemical preparations for keeping fresh and preserving foodstuffs, namely raw materials for
         smoothing and preserving prepared food products, in particular confectionery’, also within Class 1. In support of its opposition,
         Kaul relied on the ground for refusal set out in Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/By decision of June 2000, OHIM’s Opposition Division rejected the opposition on the ground that, even assuming identity
         of goods, there could be no likelihood of confusion between the opposing signs owing to their visual and phonetic differences.
      
On July 2000, Kaul filed an appeal against the decision of the Opposition Division in support of which it argued, in particular,
         as it had argued before the Opposition Division, that the earlier mark had a highly distinctive character and therefore, under
         the case-law, it should have benefited from increased protection. In this connection, Kaul none the less claimed that its
         highly distinctive character was attributable not only to the fact that the term ‘CAPOL’ was not descriptive for the goods
         in question, as it had already submitted before the Opposition Division, but also to the fact that that mark had become well
         known through use. In order to substantiate its well-known character, Kaul produced, in the annex to its written statement
         before the Board of Appeal, an affidavit by its managing director, and a list of its customers.
      
The transfer of the application for registration of the mark ‘ARCOL’ to Bayer AG was entered in the Register of Community
         trade marks on November 2000.
      
By decision of March (‘the decision’), the Third Board of Appeal of OHIM dismissed Kaul’s appeal. The Board found
         that the goods covered by the mark applied for and the earlier trade mark were identical and, having compared the two signs
         from a visual, phonetic and conceptual standpoint, then carried out a global assessment of the likelihood of confusion, in
         the course of which it found, inter alia, that it could not take into account the supposedly highly distinctive character
         of the earlier mark, linked to the fact that it was well known, since that factor and the evidence mentioned above seeking
         to substantiate it were introduced for the first time in support of the appeal brought before it. 
      
On May 2002, Kaul brought an action against the decision before the General Court. In support of its action, it relied
         in particular on a plea of infringement by the Board of Appeal of the obligation to examine the evidence adduced by it before
         the Board.
      
By judgment in Case T‑164/Kaul v OHIM – Bayer (ARCOL) [2004] ECR II‑3807, the General Court accepted that plea and annulled the decision on that basis. In essence, the Court
         considered that, in the decision, the Third Board of Appeal had infringed Article of Regulation No 40/by refusing
         to consider the factual evidence adduced by the appellant for the first time before it. According to the Court, since that
         evidence was produced in the annex to the pleadings filed by Kaul before the Board of Appeal within the four‑month period
         laid down for this purpose, it was in fact produced in due time and the Board of Appeal was, therefore, required to take the
         evidence into account.
      
On January 2005, OHIM lodged an appeal against the judgment of the General Court before the Court of Justice. 
      
By its judgment in Case C‑29/P OHIM v Kaul [2007] ECR I‑2213, the Court of Justice allowed the appeal and set aside the judgment in Case T‑164/Kaul v OHIM – Bayer (ARCOL). Then, giving final judgment in the case itself, the Court of Justice annulled the decision.
      
The Court of Justice found that the Third Board of Appeal had refused, in the decision, to take into account the facts
         and evidence submitted by the appellant in support of its appeal, by holding, essentially, that the taking into account of
         such information was automatically precluded since those facts and that evidence had not been submitted earlier before the
         Opposition Division within the time‑limit set by that division. The Court held that that reasoning infringes Article 74(2)
         of Regulation No 40/94, which grants the Board of Appeal, when presented with facts or evidence which are submitted late,
         a discretion as to whether or not to take account of such information when making the decision which it is called upon to
         give. Since, instead of exercising the discretion which it thus had, the Third Board of Appeal had wrongly considered itself
         to be lacking any discretion as to whether or not to take account of the facts and evidence at issue, the Court annulled the
         decision.
      
By decision of June 2007, notified to the parties to the proceedings before OHIM on June 2007, the Presidium of the
         Boards of Appeal of OHIM reallocated the case to the Second Board of Appeal.
      
On August 2007, the Second Board of Appeal of OHIM adopted the contested decision, notified to Kaul on September 2007,
         by which it dismissed the appellant’s appeal and upheld the decision of the Opposition Division which had rejected Kaul’s
         opposition. In essence, the Second Board of Appeal, after finding that the marks at issue could not in any way be regarded
         as similar by the relevant public, made up of manufacturers of food and confectionery products, came to the conclusion that
         one of the conditions for the application of Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/was not satisfied and that the Opposition
         Division had been correct to reject the opposition. In the light of that conclusion, the Second Board of Appeal found that
         the facts and evidence presented by Kaul for the first time before the Board of Appeal at the appeal stage, in support of
         its argument that the earlier mark had acquired a highly distinctive character resulting from its use on the market, were
         irrelevant, because such an argument, even if it were proved, could not have any bearing on the application of Article 8(1)(b)
         of Regulation No 40/in the present case, and that it should therefore be disregarded.
      
 The proceedings before the General Court and the judgment under appeal
By application lodged at the Registry of the General Court on November 2007, Kaul brought an action against the contested
         decision.
      
In support of that action, it relied on three pleas in law, namely, first, infringement of Articles 63(6) and 74(2) of Regulation
         No 40/94; secondly, infringement of the right to be heard, as enshrined, inter alia, in Articles 61(2) and 73, second sentence,
         of that regulation; and, thirdly, infringement of Article 8(1)(b) of that regulation.
      
In support of its first plea, Kaul argued that the Board of Appeal had disregarded the operative part and reasoning of OHIM v Kaul, in that it had not, or had not properly, exercised the discretion conferred on it by Article 74(2) of Regulation No 40/as to whether or not to take account of the facts and evidence not previously adduced before the Opposition Division.
      
In dismissing this plea, the General Court, as a preliminary matter, held as follows at paragraphs 21, and of the judgment
         under appeal:
      
‘According to settled case-law, a judgment annulling a measure, such as OHIM v Kaul, cited … above, takes effect ex tunc and thus has the effect of retroactively eliminating the annulled measure from the legal system …
      
In the present case, following annulment of the decision, the appeal brought by the applicant before the Board of Appeal
         again became pending. In order to comply with its obligation under Article 63(6) of Regulation No 40/to take the measures
         necessary to comply with the Court’s judgment, OHIM had to ensure that the appeal led to a new decision of a Board of Appeal.
         That was indeed what occurred because the case was reallocated to the Second Board of Appeal, which adopted the contested
         decision.
      
The applicant does not contest the lawfulness of the reallocation of the case to the Second Board of Appeal. It nevertheless
         argues that the latter confined itself to declaring that the decision was well founded and that the facts and evidence
         which the applicant had submitted for the first time at the appeal stage before the Board of Appeal were irrelevant and, therefore,
         inadmissible, without exercising its discretion under Article 74(2) of Regulation No 40/to decide whether or not to take
         those facts and evidence into account.’
      
Next, the General Court pointed to various principles from the case-law with regard to the notion of the likelihood of confusion
         referred to in Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94. Thus it stated as follows at paragraphs to of the judgment under
         appeal:
      
‘According to settled case-law, the risk that the public might believe that the goods or services in question come from the
         same undertaking or, as the case may be, from economically-linked undertakings, constitutes a likelihood of confusion. According
         to the same case-law, the likelihood of confusion must be assessed globally, according to the perception which the relevant
         public has of the signs and the goods or services in question, taking into account all factors relevant to the circumstances
         of the case, including the interdependence between the similarity of the signs and that of the goods and services covered
         (order of the Court of Justice of April in Case C‑131/P Castellblanch v OHIM, not published in the ECR, paragraph 55; see Case T‑162/Laboratorios RTB v OHIM – Giorgio Beverly Hills (GIORGIO BEVERLY HILLS) [2003] ECR II‑2821, paragraphs to and the case-law cited).
      
In addition, the more distinctive the earlier mark, the greater will be the likelihood of confusion. Therefore, marks with
         a highly distinctive character, either per se or because of the recognition they possess on the market, enjoy broader protection
         than marks with a less distinctive character. The distinctive character of the earlier trade mark, and in particular its reputation,
         must therefore be taken into account when assessing whether there exists a likelihood of confusion (see judgment of April
         in Case C‑108/P Ferrero Deutschland v OHMI and Cornu, not published in the ECR, paragraphs and and the case-law cited). 
      
While it is the case that, under the principle of the interdependence between the factors taken into account in a global assessment
         of the likelihood of confusion, and in particular between the similarity of the trade marks and that of the goods or services
         covered, a lesser degree of similarity between those goods or services may be offset by a greater degree of similarity between
         the marks, and vice versa (judgment of March in Case C‑171/P T.I.M.E. ART v OHIM, not published in the ECR, paragraph 35), the Court of Justice has held that, for the purposes of applying Article 8(1)(b)
         of Regulation No 40/94, the likelihood of confusion presupposes both that the mark applied for and the earlier mark are identical
         or similar, and that the goods or services covered in the application for registration are identical or similar to those in
         respect of which the earlier mark was registered. Those conditions are cumulative (Case C‑106/P Vedial v OHIM [2004] ECR I‑9573, paragraph 51, and Case C‑234/P Il Ponte Finanziaria v OHIM [2007] ECR I‑7333, paragraph 48).
      
It follows that, where the goods or the services covered by the trade marks at issue are identical, if those trade marks,
         considered individually, do not display the minimum degree of similarity required for it to be possible to establish a likelihood
         of confusion solely on the basis of the highly distinctive character of the earlier mark or solely because the goods or services
         covered by the earlier marks and those covered by the trade mark applied for are identical, the opposition must be rejected,
         without the principle of interdependence in the global assessment of the likelihood of confusion precluding such a result
         (see Il Ponte Finanziaria v OHIM, paragraphs and 51).’
      
Finally, with regard to the contested decision, the General Court held inter alia as follows at paragraphs and and to of the judgment under appeal:
      
‘The Second Board of Appeal, to which the case was reallocated following the annulment of the decision, dismissed, after
         re‑examination, the applicant’s appeal against the decision of the Opposition Division, on the ground that the earlier mark
         and the mark applied for could not in any way be regarded as identical or similar by the relevant public and that, therefore,
         there was no likelihood of confusion within the meaning of Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/in the instant case (paragraphs
         to of the contested decision).
      
Without prejudice to the examination of the conclusion of the Second Board of Appeal with regard to the absence of any similarity
         between the marks at issue, a conclusion which the applicant contests in its third plea in law examined below, it must be
         held that, in dismissing the applicant’s appeal against the decision of the Opposition Division and confirming that decision
         on the ground that the marks at issue were not identical or similar, the Second Board of Appeal correctly applied the case-law
         referred to in paragraph above, to which it also refers in paragraph of the contested decision.
      
…
Taking into account its conclusion that the marks at issue were not in any way similar, the Second Board of Appeal found,
         in paragraph of the contested decision, that the facts and evidence concerning the supposed well-known character of the
         earlier mark, submitted by the applicant for the first time at the appeal stage before the Board of Appeal “[were] irrelevant
         to the outcome of the opposition and so [were] inadmissible since, even if the facts alleged were fully proved, it could not
         have any bearing on the application of Article 8(1)(b) of [Regulation No 40/94] in this case”.
      
The appellant claims that, by thus refusing to take into account those facts and evidence, the Second Board of Appeal infringed
         Article 74(2) of Regulation No 40/94, as interpreted by the judgment in OHIM v Kaul … 
      
The relevance of the facts and evidence submitted to OHIM by the parties to opposition proceedings outside the time-limits
         prescribed for that purpose constitutes one of the criteria which OHIM must take into account in order to decide, when exercising
         its discretion under Article 74(2) of Regulation No 40/94, whether or not to take account of such facts and evidence (see,
         to that effect, OHIM v Kaul, … paragraph 44).
      
Consequently, the Second Board of Appeal cannot be accused of infringing the latter provision and disregarding OHIM v Kaul, … when, in deciding to ignore the facts and evidence submitted by the applicant for the first time at the stage of its appeal
         against the decision of the Opposition Division, it took into account the complete lack of relevance of such facts and evidence
         for the resolution of the case.
      
In any case, the applicant’s complaint relating to the alleged infringement of Article 74(2) of Regulation No 40/is irrelevant.
         Having found that there was no similarity between the mark applied for and the earlier mark, the Second Board of Appeal was
         not bound to take into consideration the supposed well-known character of the earlier mark, since it was properly entitled
         to conclude that there was no likelihood of confusion, whatever the supposed especially distinctive character of the earlier
         mark (see, to that effect, judgment of June in Case T‑224/Otto v OHIM – L’Altra Moda (l’Altra Moda), not published in the ECR, paragraph 50).
      
Consequently, even if the refusal of the Second Board of Appeal to take into consideration, in the exercise of its discretion
         deriving from Article 74(2) of Regulation No 40/94, the supposed well‑known character of the earlier mark and the evidence
         supporting that was an error of law, such an error had no effect on the operative part of the contested decision, which was
         properly based, in law, on the conclusion that the mark applied for and the earlier mark are neither identical nor similar.’
         
      
In dismissing the second plea, alleging infringement of Articles 61(2) and 73, second sentence, of Regulation No 40/94, on
         the basis that the Board of Appeal had not given Kaul an opportunity to submit its observations before adopting the contested
         decision, particularly with regard to the scope and consequences of the judgment in OHIM v Kaul, the General Court held, inter alia, as follows at paragraphs and 56, to 61, and of the judgment under appeal:
         
      
‘It should be noted that, under the second sentence of Article of Regulation No 40/94, the decisions of OHIM may be based
         only on reasons or evidence on which the parties concerned have had an opportunity to present their comments. The general
         principle of protection of the right to defend oneself is enshrined in the law of Community trade marks by that provision.
         According to that general principle of Community law, a person whose interests are appreciably affected by a decision taken
         by a public authority must be given the opportunity to make his point of view known. The right to be heard extends to all
         the matters of fact or of law which form the basis of the decision, but not to the final position which the authority intends
         to adopt (see Case T‑317/Kustom Musical Amplification v OHIM (Shape of a guitar) [2007] ECR II‑427, paragraphs 24, and and the case-law cited).
      
In the present case, it is common ground that, in the course of the proceedings which led to the adoption of the decision,
         the applicant had the opportunity to submit, before the Third Board of Appeal, its observations relating to all aspects of
         its opposition, including the supposedly similar character of the marks at issue. A summary of those observations is in fact
         contained in paragraph of the decision.
      
…
There is no indication at all in the contested decision that the Second Board of Appeal, when it adopted that decision, relied
         on matters of law or of fact different from those available to the Third Board of Appeal when it adopted the decision
         and on which the applicant had been able to submit observations. That is made all the more evident by the fact that the Second
         Board of Appeal largely reproduced the reasoning of the decision concerning the visual, phonetic and conceptual comparison
         of the signs at issue.
      
While it is, admittedly, correct that the Second Board of Appeal drew from the reasoning of the decision, reproduced
         in its own decision, a conclusion concerning the lack of similarity between the two marks at issue, which was not, as such,
         contained in the decision, the fact remains that, with regard to the final position that the Second Board of Appeal intended
         to adopt, the latter was not in any way bound, in the light of the case-law referred to in paragraph above, to hear the
         applicant again before adopting its decision.
      
The applicant nevertheless claims, essentially, that the judgment in OHIM v Kaul … was a new legal issue on which it should have been heard, before the contested decision was adopted.
      
…
With regard to the question whether, before adoption of the contested decision, the Second Board of Appeal should have heard
         the applicant again concerning the application of Article 74(2) of Regulation No 40/94, following the clarification as to
         the interpretation and application of that provision given by the judgment in OHIM v Kaul, … it suffices to recall that, even if the refusal of the Second Board of Appeal to take into consideration, in the exercise
         of its discretion deriving from Article 74(2) of Regulation No 40/94, the facts and evidence concerning the supposedly well-known
         character of the earlier mark was vitiated by an error of law, such an error would have no bearing on the solution adopted
         in the contested decision.
      
Since, according to the case-law referred to in paragraph above, the right to be heard under Article of Regulation No 40/extends, in particular, to the matters of law which form the basis of the decision, the Second Board of Appeal was not bound
         to hear the applicant on the application of Article 74(2) of Regulation No 40/94, since the facts and evidence concerning
         the well-known character of the earlier mark, relied on on the basis of that provision, were not part of the basis of the
         contested decision.’
      
In rejecting the third plea, alleging infringement of Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94, the General Court held, inter
         alia, as follows at paragraphs and 72, to 80, to 85, and to of the judgment under appeal:
      
‘As a preliminary point, the complaints of the applicant alleging that the Board of Appeal disregarded, first, the case-law
         relating to the enhanced protection enjoyed by marks with a highly distinctive character and, second, the interdependence
         of the different criteria to be taken into consideration in the global assessment of the likelihood of confusion, must be
         rejected as irrelevant.
      
As noted in the examination of the first plea, the rejection of the opposition in this case was based on the absence of any
         similarity between the marks at issue and not on a global assessment of the likelihood of confusion.
      
…
With regard to the complaint alleging disregard by the Board of Appeal of the “function of trade mark protection”, it should
         be pointed out that the applicant claims in that context that, apart from its function as an indicator of the commercial origin
         and of the quality of the goods or services and as an advertising tool, a trade mark also fulfils a competitive function by
         securing a competitive advantage for the proprietor.
      
These arguments, even if correct, are not in any way capable of affecting the assessment as to whether the two marks are similar.
         That complaint is therefore also irrelevant.
      
With regard to the complaint alleging erroneous definition of the relevant public, to be taken into account in the assessment
         of the likelihood of confusion in the present case, the applicant does not contest the conclusion of the decision, reproduced
         in the contested decision, according to which that public is made up of producers of food and confectionery products. It challenges,
         rather, the assertions, made in paragraph of the decision and reproduced in paragraph of the contested decision,
         that the choice, by the specialised public concerned, of one or other of the types of goods covered by the marks at issue
         “will only minimally be affected or influenced by the marking accompanying the products and ingredients [it] uses in [its]
         manufacturing concerns” and, “[i]n this type of situation, before a finding of a likelihood of confusion can be arrived at
         there must be a high degree of similarity between the marks”.
      
That is a complaint that is therefore also irrelevant. There is no need to determine what degree of similarity of the marks
         at issue would, in the present case, be enough to result in a likelihood of confusion within the meaning of Article 8(1)(b)
         of Regulation No 40/94, it being sufficient to point out that the Board of Appeal concluded that those marks were not at all
         similar.
      
It suffices, therefore, in order to respond to this plea in law, to examine that latter conclusion in the contested decision,
         taking into account, first, the perception of the marks at issue by the public referred to above, which was correctly identified
         by the Board of Appeal in the contested decision, and second, the applicant’s argument regarding the alleged errors committed
         by the Board of Appeal in the visual and phonetic comparison of those marks.
      
In paragraph of the decision, reproduced in paragraph of the contested decision, the Board of Appeal first carried
         out a visual comparison of the two marks at issue. In that regard, the Board of Appeal pointed out that the fact that those
         marks both consisted of five letters was no more than a “likely coincidence”. In addition, it added that, although those marks
         shared the letter “a” and the ending “ol”, they “clearly differ[ed]” visually.
      
The applicant contests those considerations, which it regards as empty and meaningless. …
…
What matters in the assessment of the visual similarity of two word marks is, rather, the presence, in each of them, of several
         letters in the same order. Thus, the Board of Appeal rightly did not attach particular importance to the presence, in the
         two marks at issue, of the letter “a”, that being the first letter in the mark applied for, followed by the letters “rc”,
         whereas it is the second letter in the earlier mark, situated between two different letters, namely “c” and “p”.
      
By contrast, the ending “ol” of the marks at issue constitutes, as the Board of Appeal accepted, a common element of the marks.
         However, since that group of letters comes at the end of those marks and is preceded, in each, by completely different groups
         of letters (respectively, “arc” and “cap”), the Board of Appeal concluded, correctly, that that ending was not capable of
         calling into question the conclusion that those marks, considered as a whole, were not visually similar.
      
That is all the more true because, as the [General Court] has repeatedly held, the consumer generally pays greater attention
         to the beginning of a mark than to the end (see Case T‑133/Meric v OHIM – Arbora & Ausonia (PAM-PIM’S BABY-PROP) [2006] ECR II‑2737, paragraph 51, and l’Altra Moda, … at paragraph 43).
      
…
The applicant’s complaint relating to the disregard, by the Board of Appeal, of the position supposedly adopted by the OHIM
         representative during the proceedings before the Community Courts must also be rejected.
      
Decisions concerning registration of a sign as a Community trade mark which the Boards of Appeal are called on to take under
         Regulation No 40/are adopted in the exercise of circumscribed powers and are not a matter of discretion. Accordingly, the
         question whether a sign may be registered as a Community trade mark must be assessed solely on the basis of that regulation,
         as interpreted by the Community Courts, and not on the basis of a previous practice of OHIM (see Case T‑304/Reber v OHIM – Chocoladefabriken Lindt & Sprüngli (Mozart) [2008] ECR II‑1927, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Those considerations are all the more valid as regards a declaration supposedly made by the OHIM representative before the
         Community Courts, particularly because, in the light of the independence of the President and members of the Boards of Appeal
         of OHIM, laid down in Article 131(4) of Regulation No 40/94, they are not bound by the position adopted by OHIM in a dispute
         before the Community Courts.
      
Consequently, even if the OHIM representative did in fact make the declaration alleged by the applicant, the Board of Appeal
         was not bound by it and did not have to explain, in the contested decision, the grounds on which it disregarded it.’
      
 Forms of order sought by the parties before the Court of Justice
Kaul claims that the Court should set aside the judgment under appeal and order OHIM to pay the costs.
      
OHIM contends that the Court should dismiss the appeal and order Kaul to pay the costs.
      
 Appeal
Under Article of its Rules of Procedure, where the appeal is, in whole or in part, clearly inadmissible or clearly unfounded,
         the Court may, at any time, acting on a report from the Judge-Rapporteur, and after hearing the Advocate General, by reasoned
         order dismiss the appeal.
      
In support of its appeal, the appellant raises three grounds of appeal, namely infringement of Article 74(2) of Regulation
         No 40/94, infringement of the right to be heard and infringement of Article 8(1)(b) of that regulation.
      
 First ground of appeal: infringement of Article 74(2) of Regulation No 40/Arguments of the parties
By its first ground of appeal, Kaul submits that the General Court confirmed, at paragraph of the judgment under appeal,
         that the Second Board of Appeal had not complied with Article 74(2) of Regulation No 40/in failing to exercise the discretion
         conferred on it by that provision when documents are adduced for the first time when the appeal was brought before the Board
         of Appeal. The Second Board of Appeal infringed that provision by rejecting the documents in question as inadmissible without
         any explanation as to the reason why it was refusing to take them into account. In doing so, it also disregarded OHIM v Kaul, by failing to undertake a new, comprehensive examination of the substance of the opposition, both in fact and in law.
      
However, Kaul criticises the General Court for then having held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that such infringement
         of Article 74(2) could in the present case be remedied by the fact that, even if the Board of Appeal had taken into account
         the evidence adduced to support the argument that the earlier mark enjoyed increased distinctive character, the operative
         part of the contested decision would have remained identical, owing to the fact that the absence of any similarity between
         the opposing marks found by that Board of Appeal was sufficient in this case to exclude any likelihood of confusion.
      
In so holding, the General Court first of all disregarded the fact that the infringement of Article 74(2) by the Second Board
         of Appeal was an absolute error of law which could not be remedied by means of such a purely speculative presumption.
      
Secondly, the General Court also erred in law by accepting that a simple examination of the similarity between the opposing
         marks could give rise to a finding that there was no likelihood of confusion. According to Kaul, that approach in fact disregards
         the requirement that, in assessing whether or not there is a likelihood of confusion, account must always be taken of the
         interdependence between the various relevant criteria and, more particularly, of the principle that a lesser degree of similarity
         of the opposing marks may be offset by increased distinctiveness of the earlier mark.
      
In Kaul’s submission, as a consequence of the second error in law, the investments made in a trade mark and the recognition
         it enjoys are no longer taken into consideration or protected against infringement, although the marks none the less benefit
         from the protection enshrined in Protocol No to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
         Freedoms signed at Rome on November 1950.
      
OHIM challenges this reasoning.
      
 Findings of the Court
It should be noted at the outset that it is clear from the arguments in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal that,
         contrary to Kaul’s contention, which takes paragraph of the judgment – wrongly identified by it as paragraph – out of
         context, the General Court in no sense held that the Board of Appeal had failed to exercise the discretion conferred on it
         by Article 74(2) of Regulation No 40/94. On the contrary, in paragraphs to 43, the General Court found that, by declaring
         the new evidence adduced by Kaul at the stage of the appeal before the Board of Appeal inadmissible on the ground that it
         was irrelevant to the decision it was called upon to make, the Second Board of Appeal had correctly applied Article 74(2)
         as interpreted by the judgment in OHIM v Kaul.
      
It is also necessary to point out that the General Court was correct to observe, at paragraph of the judgment under appeal,
         that the manifest irrelevance of the facts and evidence submitted to OHIM by the parties to opposition proceedings, outside
         the time-limits prescribed for that purpose, is precisely one of the criteria which OHIM may take into account in deciding,
         in the exercise of the discretion which it enjoys under Article 74(2) of Regulation No 40/94, that there is no need to take
         account of these facts and evidence, as is clear, in particular, from paragraphs and of OHIM v Kaul.
      
It follows that the finding of the General Court at paragraph of the judgment under appeal – that even if an infringement
         of Article 74(2) of Regulation No 40/were proved, that fact could not have caused the contested decision to be annulled
         – is a subsidiary consideration in the reasoning which led that Court to reject the appellant’s plea alleging infringement
         of that provision.
      
In those circumstances, the first limb of the first ground of appeal, in which Kaul criticises the General Court for having
         held that an infringement of Article 74(2) of Regulation No 40/could be remedied by the fact that it had no consequences
         for the outcome of the decision finally adopted by the Board of Appeal, must be dismissed as manifestly inoperative.
      
The second limb of that ground of appeal alleging that the General Court erred in law in holding that an opposition based
         on Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/could, in some cases, be rejected on the basis of a simple examination of the similarity
         of the marks and, therefore, in particular, without examining the alleged highly distinctive character of the earlier mark,
         is, for its part, manifestly unfounded.
      
In this respect, it is sufficient to observe, as the General Court essentially did at paragraph of the judgment under appeal,
         that it is clear from the case-law that for the purposes of applying Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/a likelihood of
         confusion presupposes both that the mark applied for and the earlier mark are identical or similar, and that the goods or
         services covered in the application for registration are identical or similar to those in respect of which the earlier mark
         was registered, and that these conditions are cumulative (see Vedial v OHIM, paragraph 51, and Il Ponte Finanziaria v OHIM, paragraph 48). 
      
The General Court was also right to observe, in this connection, at paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that when it
         is found that two opposing marks, considered individually, do not display the minimum degree of similarity required for it
         to be possible to establish a likelihood of confusion solely on the basis of the highly distinctive character of the earlier
         mark or solely because the goods covered by the earlier mark and those covered by the trade mark applied for are identical,
         the opposition must be rejected, and this is not precluded by the principle of interdependence (see, to that effect, Il Ponte Finanziaria v OHIM, paragraph 50).
      
Nor, therefore, did the General Court err in law in finding, at paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, that, when
         the Second Board of Appeal had reached the conclusion that the marks at issue could in no way be regarded as similar by the
         relevant public, the Board was entitled under the case-law mentioned above to infer that there was no likelihood of confusion,
         without having first to apply the principle of interdependence and, in particular, to examine the possible highly distinctive
         character of the earlier mark in the course of an overall assessment of the likelihood of confusion (see, to that effect,
         Il Ponte Finanziaria v OHIM, paragraph 51).
      
As to the appellant’s argument that such an interpretation of Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/would be likely to reduce
         the protection of investments in a mark and the recognition it enjoys, it is clear that that argument does not meet the conditions
         for the admissibility of a ground of appeal.
      
Indeed, it is clear from Article EC, Article 58, first paragraph, of the Statute of the Court of Justice, and Article
         112(1)(c) of the Rules of Procedure that an appeal must indicate precisely the contested elements of the judgment which the
         appellant seeks to have set aside, and also the legal arguments specifically advanced in support of the appeal (see, inter
         alia, order in Case C‑488/P Martinez v Parliament [2003] ECR I‑13355, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
The appellant’s argument in the present case contains no legal reasoning to demonstrate how the General Court erred in law
         on this point. In particular, the appellant does not even attempt, in its appeal, to criticise the grounds on the basis of
         which the Court, in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, dismissed the arguments it had presented in this connection
         at first instance (see, to that effect, inter alia, order in Martinez v Parliament, paragraph 41, and Il Ponte Finanziaria v OHIM, paragraph 45). 
      
It follows from all of the foregoing that the first ground of appeal must be rejected as in part manifestly unfounded and
         in part manifestly inadmissible.
      
 Second ground of appeal: infringement of the right to be heard and of Articles 61(2), and of Regulation No 40/Arguments of the parties 
By its second ground of appeal, the appellant submits that, by failing to invite it to submit its observations on the issues
         addressed in OHIM v Kaul, and on the observations made by the parties in the context of the proceedings which gave rise to the judgment in Case T‑164/Kaul v OHIM – Bayer (ARCOL), and by the General Court itself in that judgment, the Second Board of Appeal infringed its right to be heard. Therefore,
         in dismissing the second plea, alleging infringement of Articles 61(2), and of Regulation No 40/94, the General Court,
         in turn, disregarded those provisions.
      
According to Kaul, following the annulment by the Court of Justice of the decision, the procedure before the Board of
         Appeal was restored to its initial status, that is to say the stage prior to the filing of the form giving notice of appeal
         and to the submission of the statement of grounds of appeal, so that the Second Board of Appeal was bound, inter alia, in
         accordance with Article 61(2) of Regulation No 40/94, to invite the parties, as often as necessary, and, in this case at least
         once, to file their observations.
      
The statement of the General Court claiming to justify a posteriori the failure to invite the parties to file their observations,
         based on the fact that they had already had an opportunity to file their observations during the proceedings pending before
         the Third Board of Appeal, is speculative and infringes both the rule that proceedings have to be reheard before the Board
         of Appeal and also Kaul’s right to be heard.
      
OHIM contends that the right to be heard enshrined in Article 73, second sentence, of Regulation No 40/was in fact observed
         in this case. In finding that the alleged reputation of the earlier mark could not, in this case, alter the overall assessment
         of the likelihood of confusion, the Second Board of Appeal remained within the same framework, as to both the law – in this
         case Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/– and the facts, as that within which the Opposition Division and the Third Board
         of Appeal made their findings. However, Kaul had, and indeed made full use of, the opportunity to put forward its view on
         the global assessment of the likelihood of confusion, and in particular on the allegedly higher distinctive character of its
         trade mark, both during the proceedings before the Third Board of Appeal and before the Community Courts.
      
With regard to Kaul’s argument criticising the judgment under appeal for having failed to acknowledge that it ought to have
         been able to submit observations on OHIM v Kaul, OHIM contends, with regard to Article 63(6) of Regulation No 40/94, that it is for OHIM alone to draw the consequences resulting
         from the judgment of the Court of Justice and to adopt the necessary measures in this regard. Any invitation to the parties
         to file observations on this matter would thus be a mere matter of ‘procedural politeness’ and would not in any circumstances
         be mandatory under Article of the regulation.
      
 Findings of the Court
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the General Court found that, following the annulment by the Court of Justice
         of the decision, the appellant’s appeal had become pending again and, in order to comply with its obligation under Article
         63(6), OHIM had to ensure that the appeal resulted in a new decision by a Board of Appeal. The General Court found, in this
         connection, that that was indeed what had occurred because the case had been reallocated to the Second Board of Appeal, which
         had then adopted the contested decision.
      
Without challenging this assessment on the part of the General Court, Kaul none the less argues that Articles 63(6), 61(2)
         and 73, second sentence, of Regulation No 40/required the Board of Appeal to which the case had thus been reallocated to
         allow it an opportunity to file its observations, and that the General Court erred in law in ruling that that was not so.
      
However, none of the arguments advanced by Kaul in this regard is persuasive.
      
In fact, the General Court was right to recall at paragraph of the judgment under appeal that Article 73, second sentence,
         of Regulation No 40/94, according to which decisions of OHIM may be based only on reasons or evidence on which the parties
         concerned have had on opportunity to present their comments, establishes, in the context of Community trade mark law, the
         general principle of protection of the right to defend oneself, under which a person whose interests are appreciably affected
         by a decision taken by a public authority must be given the opportunity to make his point of view known.
      
It also found, at paragraph of the judgment, that, in this case, it was common ground that in the course of the proceedings
         which led to the adoption of the decision the appellant had had the opportunity to present, before the Third Board of
         Appeal, its observations on all aspects of its opposition, including the supposed similarity of the opposing marks. The General
         Court further pointed out, at paragraph of the judgment that there was no indication in the contested decision that, when
         the Second Board of Appeal adopted the decision, it relied on matters of law or of fact different from those available to
         the Third Board of Appeal when it adopted the decision, and on which the appellant had been able to submit observations.
      
In the light of its findings, it is clear that the General Court was properly entitled to conclude, without erring in law,
         that Article 73, second sentence, of Regulation No 40/in no way required that, following the resumption of the proceedings
         before OHIM after the annulment of the decision, the appellant again be invited to file observations on points of law
         and fact on which it had already had ample opportunity to express its views in the course of the written procedure previously
         conducted before the Third Board of Appeal, given that the file as then constituted was taken over by the Second Board of
         Appeal.
      
Nor, further, can it usefully be argued, in the light of those findings, that the Board of Appeal disregarded Article 61(2)
         of Regulation No 40/94, which provides that the Board is to invite the parties as often as necessary to file observations
         on communications issued by itself or from the other parties.
      
Contrary to the appellant’s contention, Article 73, second sentence, and Article 61(2) of Regulation No 40/did not, any
         more than Article 63(6), require that the appellant be heard on the consequences to be drawn from the judgment in OHIM v Kaul.
      
In fact, it must be observed that, in that judgment, the Court of Justice merely annulled the decision on the ground
         that the Third Board of Appeal had wrongly considered itself to be legally precluded from taking into account all facts and
         evidence adduced for the first time by an applicant in support of its appeal before a Board of Appeal, and that consequently
         it had failed to exercise its discretion in that regard under Article 74(2) of Regulation No 40/and to give reasons for
         its decision on that point.
      
In order to remedy the error of law censured by the Court of Justice, it was therefore essentially incumbent on the Board
         of Appeal to exercise its discretion as to whether to take account of the evidence, to give reasons for its decision, and
         to rule again on the appeal before it.
      
As has already been stated at paragraphs and of this order, the General Court was properly entitled to find that the
         Board of Appeal had fulfilled that obligation.
      
In addition, it is plain that neither the correct implementation of the judgment, nor the right to be heard enshrined in Article
         73(2) of Regulation No 40/94, required that before the Second Board of Appeal, in the exercise of its discretion under Article
         74(2) of Regulation No 40/94, excluded the evidence thus submitted by Kaul on the basis of its total irrelevance to the decision
         it was called upon to make, it had to offer Kaul a further opportunity to comment on that evidence. It must also be noted
         that a party which, like Kaul in the present case, itself submitted the facts and evidence in question was by definition in
         a position to state their possible relevance to the resolution of the dispute at the time when it submitted them.
      
Nor can it be argued in those circumstances that the Board of Appeal disregarded Article 61(2) of Regulation No 40/94, which
         requires it to invite the parties to submit as often as necessary their comments on the notifications addressed to them by
         it or on communications from the other parties.
      
It follows from the foregoing that the second ground of appeal is manifestly unfounded and must therefore be rejected.
      
 Third ground of appeal: infringement of Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/By its third ground of appeal, the appellant maintains, first of all, that, as it has already argued in the context of the
         first ground of appeal, by failing to take account of the heightened distinctiveness of the earlier mark, the Board of Appeal
         was unable to make a complete and correct assessment of the likelihood of confusion under Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No
         40/94, and the General Court erred in law in the interpretation of that provision by failing to annul the contested decision.
         In addition, the error of law, inter alia, led the General Court, at paragraph of the judgment under appeal, to dismiss
         as inoperative an argument formulated by the appellant as to how the two marks at issue are assessed in professional circles.
      
For the reasons already set out at paragraphs to of this order, the first limb of this ground of appeal must, like the
         second limb of the first ground of appeal, be rejected as manifestly unfounded.
      
Secondly, the appellant submits that the General Court was wrong to hold, at paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that
         the argument formulated by it alleging disregard by the Board of Appeal of a position adopted by OHIM’s representative before
         the Community Courts had to be dismissed in the light of the independence of the President and the members of the Boards of
         Appeal of OHIM.
      
In this connection, it must however be observed that the General Court was plainly right to find that a Board of Appeal whose
         task, as the General Court noted at paragraph of the judgment under appeal, is inter alia to ensure the proper application
         of Regulation No 40/94, cannot, in the exercise of this task, in particular in the light of the independence enjoyed by its
         members, as noted in paragraph of the judgment, be bound by a position allegedly defended by an OHIM official at a hearing
         before the Community Courts; accordingly this second limb of the ground of appeal must also be rejected as manifestly unfounded.
      
The appellant submits, thirdly, that the assessment in paragraph of the judgment under appeal to the effect that the only
         thing which the marks at issue have in common is their ending ‘ol’ reflects an approach based on dissection and disregards
         the principle that, in the case of short marks, it is the overall impression they give that is crucial in determining whether
         they are similar.
      
In this connection, it is however sufficient to note that, in thereby isolating a passage in the reasoning in the judgment
         under appeal in which the General Court made a visual comparison of the marks, Kaul is distorting the scope of this passage.
         In fact, it is clear from the series of findings made at paragraphs to of the judgment, and also from the second sentence
         of paragraph 84, that the General Court is in fact making a global assessment of the whole formed by each of the marks at
         issue, from a visual perspective, with a view to confirming the correctness of the Board of Appeal’s assessment that the marks
         are significantly different in this respect, and in this connection the findings made at paragraph of the judgment under
         appeal plainly constitute only a link in the reasoning of the General Court.
      
In addition, it is clear that, in thus comparing the marks visually, the General Court made factual findings which it is not
         for the Court of Justice to review in the context of an appeal. It is settled case-law that the effect of Article EC and
         the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice is that an appeal lies on points of law only and
         the appraisal of the facts by the General Court does not, save where they are distorted, which is not alleged in this case,
         constitute a point of law which is subject, as such, to review by the Court of Justice on appeal (see, in particular, Il Ponte Finanziaria v OHIM, paragraph and case-law cited, and orders of March in Case C‑245/P Saiwa v OHIM paragraphs and 48, and February in Case C‑243/P Brinkmann v OHIM, paragraph 36).
      
Accordingly, the third limb of the third ground of appeal must be dismissed as being in part manifestly unfounded and in part
         manifestly inadmissible.
      
It follows from all of the foregoing that the appeal must be dismissed in its entirety.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, which applies to appeal proceedings by virtue of Article thereof, the unsuccessful
         party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since OHIM has
         applied for costs and the appellant has been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Eighth Chamber) hereby orders:
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
2.      Kaul GmbH shall pay the costs.
Luxembourg, March 2010.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 