
Case C-305/European Commission
v
Italian Republic
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – State aid – Tax incentives in favour of companies taking part in trade fairs abroad – Recovery)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        State aid – Recovery of unlawful aid – Obligation – Duty to comply immediately and effectively with the Commission’s decision
            
(Arts 88(2) EC and EC)
2.        Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Failure to fulfil the obligation to recover unlawful aid – Defences – Absolutely
            impossible to give effect 
(Arts EC, 88(2) EC and EC)
3.        State aid – Recovery of unlawful aid – Application of national law – Conditions and limits – Duties of the national courts
(Council Regulation No 659/1999, Art. 14(3))
1.        The Member State to which a decision requiring recovery of unlawful aid is addressed is obliged under Article EC to take
         all measures necessary to ensure that the decision is given effect and must actually recover the sums owed. Recovery out of
         time, after the prescribed period, or legislative steps intended to ensure the enforcement by national courts of a Commission
         decision requiring a Member State to recover unlawful aid which are taken too late or prove ineffective cannot satisfy the
         requirements of the Treaty.
      
The fact that, after expiry of all the periods fixed by the Commission, part of the unlawful aid had still not been recovered
         by the Member State is clearly irreconcilable with the obligation of the Member State actually to recover the sums owed and
         constitutes a breach of the duty to comply, immediately and effectively, with the Commission’s decision. That finding is not
         affected by the fact that about 90% of the capital of the unlawful aid had been recovered by the day of the hearing before
         the Court of Justice in the present case. 
      
(see paras 26-27, 29-30, 40)
2.        In infringement proceedings brought by the Commission under Article 88(2) EC, the only defence available to a Member State
         is to plead that it was absolutely impossible for it to give proper effect to the decision at issue. The condition that it
         be absolutely impossible to give effect to a decision is not fulfilled when the defendant Member State merely informs the
         Commission of the legal, political or practical difficulties involved in giving effect to the decision, without taking any
         real steps to recover the aid from the undertakings concerned, and without proposing to the Commission any alternative arrangements
         for giving effect to the decision of such a kind as to enable those difficulties to be overcome.
      
In particular, the fact that the Member State in question considers it necessary to verify the individual situation of each
         company concerned, to conduct a screening to identify persons in receipt of benefits covered by the Commission’s decision,
         cannot justify failure to give effect to that decision. 
      
A Member State which, in giving effect to a Commission decision on State aid, encounters unforeseen and unforeseeable difficulties
         or becomes aware of consequences overlooked by the Commission, must submit those problems to the Commission for consideration,
         together with proposals for suitable amendments to the decision at issue. In such a case, the Member State and the Commission
         must, in accordance with the rule imposing on the Member States and on the Union institutions mutual duties of genuine cooperation,
         which is the basis of, in particular, Article EC, work together in good faith with a view to overcoming difficulties while
         fully observing the Treaty provisions and, in particular, the provisions on State aid. 
      
(see paras 32-34, 37)
3.        Although the review by a national court of the formal legality of a national measure seeking the recovery of unlawful State
         aid must be viewed simply as giving concrete expression to the general principle of Union law of effective judicial protection,
         national courts are required, under Article 14(3) of Regulation No 659/on the application of Article EC, to ensure
         that the decision ordering the recovery of the unlawful aid is fully effective and achieves an outcome consistent with the
         objective pursued by that decision. In fact, annulment of a national measure giving effect to a Commission decision ordering
         recovery of unlawful aid, which impedes immediate and effective compliance with that decision, is irreconcilable with the
         requirements arising from Article 14(3) of that regulation.
      
(see paras 46-47)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – State aid – Tax incentives in favour of companies taking part in trade fairs abroad – Recovery)
In Case C‑305/09,
ACTION under Article 88(2) EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on July 2009,
European Commission, represented by L. Flynn, V. Di Bucci and E. Righini, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant
v
Italian Republic, represented by G. Palmieri, acting as Agent, assisted by D. Del Gaizo and P. Gentili, avvocati dello Stato, with an address
         for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of A. Tizzano, President of the Chamber, A. Borg Barthet, M. Ilešič, M. Safjan (Rapporteur) and M. Berger, Judges,
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: A. Impellizzeri, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on December 2010,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities claimed that the Court should declare that, by failing to adopt,
         within the prescribed time-limits, all necessary measures to abolish the aid scheme declared unlawful and incompatible with
         the common market by Commission Decision 2005/919/EC of December [on direct] tax incentives in favour of companies
         taking part in trade fairs abroad (OJ L 335, p. 39) and to recover from the beneficiaries the aid granted under that
         scheme, the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EC Treaty and under Articles to of that decision.
      
 Legal context
Recital in the preamble to Council Regulation (EC) No 659/of March laying down detailed rules for the application
         of Article [EC] (OJ L 83, p. 1) is worded as follows:
      
‘Whereas in cases of unlawful aid which is not compatible with the common market, effective competition should be restored;
         whereas for this purpose it is necessary that the aid, including interest, be recovered without delay; whereas it is appropriate
         that recovery be effected in accordance with the procedures of national law; whereas the application of those procedures should
         not, by preventing the immediate and effective execution of the Commission decision, impede the restoration of effective competition;
         whereas to achieve this result, Member States should take all necessary measures ensuring the effectiveness of the Commission
         decision’.
      
Article of Regulation No 659/1999, entitled ‘Recovery of aid’, provides:
      
‘1.      Where negative decisions are taken in cases of unlawful aid, the Commission shall decide that the Member State concerned shall
         take all necessary measures to recover the aid from the beneficiary (hereinafter referred to as a “recovery decision”). The
         Commission shall not require recovery of the aid if this would be contrary to a general principle of Community law.
      
2.      The aid to be recovered pursuant to a recovery decision shall include interest at an appropriate rate fixed by the Commission.
         Interest shall be payable from the date on which the unlawful aid was at the disposal of the beneficiary until the date of
         its recovery.
      
3.      Without prejudice to any order of the Court of Justice of the European Communities pursuant to Article [EC], recovery
         shall be effected without delay and in accordance with the procedures under the national law of the Member State concerned,
         provided that they allow the immediate and effective execution of the Commission’s decision. To this effect and in the event
         of a procedure before national courts, the Member States concerned shall take all necessary steps which are available in their
         respective legal systems, including provisional measures, without prejudice to Community law’.
      
Article 23(1) of that regulation is in the following terms:
      
‘Where the Member State concerned does not comply with conditional or negative decisions, in particular in cases referred
         to in Article 14, the Commission may refer the matter to the Court of Justice of the European Communities direct in accordance
         with Article [88(2) EC].’
      
 Background to the dispute
According to Recital in the preamble to Decision 2005/919:
      
‘Italy enacted Decree-Law No of September laying down urgent measures to promote development and correct the trend
         in public finances [“Decree-Law No 269/2003”], published in [the GURI] No of October 2003. Article 1(1)(b) [thereof]
         provides for specific tax incentives for participation in trade fairs abroad and was subsequently converted, without amendments,
         into Law No of November … , published in [the GURI] No of November 2003.’
      
As is clear from that decision, the aid scheme in question allowed any undertaking liable to corporate income tax in Italy
         and in business on October to reduce its taxable income by the amount of the expenses directly incurred with respect
         to its participation in trade fairs abroad. For undertakings whose business cycle followed the calendar year, that reduction
         affected the determination of their taxable income.
      
Following the opening of a formal investigation by the Commission, the Italian authorities officially warned potential beneficiaries
         of the aid scheme in question of the possible consequences, should that scheme be declared to be incompatible with the common
         market. The Commission decided, having found the aid scheme in question to be incompatible, that it was necessary to recover
         from the beneficiaries the aid already made available.
      
More specifically, Articles to of Decision 2005/provided as follows:
      
‘Article The state aid scheme in the form of tax incentives in favour of companies taking part in trade fairs abroad, provided for
         by Article 1(1)(b) of Decree-Law No of September 2003, which Italy has unlawfully put into effect in breach of Article
         88(3) of the EC Treaty, is incompatible with the common market.
      
Italy shall abolish the aid scheme referred to in the first paragraph.
Article 1.      Italy shall take the necessary measures to recover from the beneficiaries the aid referred to in Article and unlawfully
         made available to them.
      
Recovery shall be effected without delay and in accordance with the procedures of national law.
2.      Where the aid has already been made available by means of lower part payments of taxes due for the current tax year, Italy
         shall collect the entire tax due by means of the final scheduled payment for 2004.
      
In all other cases, Italy shall recover the tax due at the latest by the end of the first tax year following the date of notification
         of this Decision.
      
3.      The aid to be recovered shall bear interest, running from the date on which it was first put at the disposal of the beneficiaries
         until its actual recovery and calculated in accordance with the Articles 9, and of Regulation (EC) No 794/2004.
      
Article Within two months of the date of notification of this Decision, Italy shall inform the Commission, using the questionnaire
         in the Annex to the Decision, of the measures taken to comply with it.
      
Within the same period of time as that referred to in the first paragraph, Italy shall:
(a)      enjoin all beneficiaries of the aid referred to in Article to reimburse the illegal aid, with interest;
(b)      transmit all documents giving evidence that the recovery proceedings have been initiated against the beneficiaries of the
         illegal aid.
      
Article This Decision is addressed to the Republic of Italy.’
 Pre-litigation procedure
On December 2004, Decision 2005/was notified to the Italian Republic.
      
In order to implement that decision, the Italian authorities adopted a number of measures and informed the Commission accordingly.
         Thus, in particular, the implementation procedure was composed of the following steps:
      
–        the Italian authorities informed the Commission of the adoption of Law No of January (GURI No 32, of February
         2006; ‘Law No 29/2006’), which entered into force on February and provided, in particular, for the cessation of the
         aid scheme in question, as well as the detailed rules for identifying,  determining and recovering the aid unlawfully received;
      
–        the Agenzia delle Entrate (Revenue Authority) adopted codes for recovery for the repayment of the aid in question, sent to
         the local agencies directives and practical instruments for the recovery of that aid and, lastly, adopted a computerised procedure
         appropriate for tracking the progress of the recovery;
      
–        the Italian legislature attempted to solve the procedural problem arising as a result of the suspension by the national courts
         of enforcement of the repayment orders by making use of legislative means, through the adoption of Decree-Law No of April
         (GURI No 84, of April 2008, p. 3; ‘Decree-Law No 59/2008’), which entered into force on April and was converted
         into law by Law No of June (GURI No 132, of June 2008, p. 4).
      
Throughout the pre-litigation procedure, the Commission emphasised the need for the immediate and effective implementation
         of Decision 2005/919. In addition, the Commission several times requested additional information and clarification regarding
         the beneficiaries of the aid in question and the procedural rules for the adoption of a legislative framework for recovery
         of that aid. The Italian authorities informed the Commission, by a series of letters, of the procedure for implementing Decision
         2005/and the progress made.
      
The Commission drew the attention of the Italian Republic to the inadequacy of the procedures for the recovery of the aid
         declared unlawful and incompatible with the common market. More precisely, by its letter of December 2007, the Commission
         noted that the recovery effected by the Italian authorities corresponded to less than 50% of the aid which it was appropriate
         to presume had been paid. Accordingly, since it considered that the recovery of the aid had not progressed despite the legislative
         action, the Commission decided to bring the present action.
      
 The action
 Arguments of the parties
In its application, the Commission submits that the Member State to which a decision requiring recovery of unlawful aid is
         addressed is, under Article EC, obliged to take all necessary measures to ensure the implementation of that decision.
      
The Commission submits that the obligation to recover constitutes a genuine obligation to achieve a result. In addition, the
         recovery must be not only effective but also immediate.
      
With regard to the necessity of adopting a law and the corresponding implementing administrative measures in order to implement
         Decision 2005/919, the Commission stated more than once that the choice of a legislative instrument was not the most suitable
         way of ensuring the immediate and effective implementation of that decision.
      
The Commission next observes that the only defence available to the Italian Republic in the present case is to plead that
         it was absolutely impossible for it to implement Decision 2005/properly. However, the Italian authorities have never pleaded
         that it was absolutely impossible to implement the decision properly.
      
In any event, in the Commission’s submission, the condition that it be absolutely impossible to implement a decision is not
         fulfilled where, as in the present case, the defendant Member State merely informs the Commission of the legal, political
         or practical difficulties involved in implementing Decision 2005/919.
      
With regard to orders of national courts suspending the operation of measures, the Commission stresses that the principle
         of effectiveness must also apply to national courts. Confronted with an application from the aid beneficiary for suspension
         of enforcement of the recovery measure, the national court must apply the conditions laid down in the Court’s case-law, in
         order to prevent the recovery decision from being deprived of its effectiveness. As it is, in the present case, the suspension
         orders made by the national courts do not comply with the requirements under that case-law.
      
Even though, pursuant to Decree-Law No 59/2008, referred to in paragraph of the present judgment, in the event of suspension
         on grounds relating to the unlawfulness of the repayment order, the national court must in principle make a reference for
         a preliminary ruling immediately to the Court of Justice, the Commission is of the opinion that that national legislation
         does not seem to have had a significant effect on the procedural practice of the national courts. In fact, more than four
         years after the adoption of Decision 2005/919, the Italian authorities had recovered no more than about 65% of the aid in
         respect of which repayment orders had been issued.
      
Lastly, as regards the obligation to provide information which is incumbent on the Italian authorities under both Article
         of Decision 2005/and Article EC, the Commission points out that no information was sent about recovery of the aid
         in question from beneficiaries who were not initially authorised to use the aid scheme. That situation constitutes a breach
         of the abovementioned obligation.
      
The Italian Republic contends that the law of the European Union does not require that a specific procedure be followed in
         order to recover State aid, but merely that national procedures be applied if they make possible the immediate and effective
         implementation of Decision 2005/919.
      
It was precisely to ensure the immediate and effective implementation of Decision 2005/that the Italian authorities considered
         it necessary to adopt Law No 29/2006. Indeed, in the Italian legal order, the legislative instrument is submitted to be the
         most appropriate means to satisfy the requirements arising from the principle of effectiveness.
      
The Italian Republic also notes that in the voluminous correspondence between the Commission and the Italian authorities,
         the latter reported, among other things, difficulties connected with the need to calculate the amounts due and to exclude
         from the recovery in question the small- and medium-sized enterprises for which the aid should be regarded as compatible with
         the common market.
      
As regards the Commission’s argument based on the ineffectiveness of the national judicial procedure, the Italian Republic
         draws attention to the efforts of the legislature and the national tax authority. In that context, that Member State also
         notes that it cannot be accused of having failed to recover the aid in question when its recovery depends on decisions of
         the national courts.
      
As regards the Commission’s plea in law alleging breach of the duty to inform, the Italian Republic submits that it informed
         that institution that the situation of potential beneficiaries of the aid in question is not governed by Law No 29/2006, but
         rather by the regime governing tax evasion. Furthermore, that Member State produced, in its defence, an additional account
         of the sums collected and of the litigation pending in this respect.
      
 Findings of the Court
It is settled case-law that the Member State to which a decision requiring recovery of unlawful aid is addressed is obliged
         under Article EC to take all measures necessary to ensure implementation of that decision (see Case C‑232/Commission v France [2006] ECR I‑10071, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
The Member State must actually recover the sums owed (see Commission v France, paragraph 42, and Case C-304/Commission v Italy [2010] ECR I-0000, paragraph 32). Recovery out of time, after the deadlines set, cannot satisfy the requirements of the Treaty
         (Commission v Italy, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Pursuant to the second subparagraph of Article 2(1) of Decision 2005/919, the Italian Republic was to recover the aid in question
         from the beneficiaries at the earliest opportunity. In particular, under Article 2(2), where the aid had already been made
         available by means of lower part-payments of taxes due for the current tax year, the Italian Republic had to recover the total
         amount of tax due with interest as part of the adjustment required for the tax year 2004. In all other cases, the tax due
         had to be recovered, together with interest, at the latest by the end of the tax year following the date of notification of
         the decision, which was December 2004.
      
In the present case, it is not disputed that, several years after Decision 2005/was notified to the Italian Republic and
         after the expiry of all the deadlines fixed by that decision, some of the unlawful aid has not yet been recovered by the Italian
         Republic. Such a situation is clearly irreconcilable with that Member State’s obligation actually to recover the sums owed
         and constitutes a breach of the duty to implement Decision 2005/immediately and effectively.
      
That finding is not affected by the fact that, as is clear from the documents in the court file, about 90% of the capital
         of the unlawful aid had been recovered up to the day of the hearing in the present case. In addition, it is not disputed that
         the aid in question had not been fully recovered on the date the present action was brought.
      
Moreover, it is not apparent from the documents in the court file that the Italian authorities complied with the time-limits
         laid down in Article of Decision 2005/for the recovery of the unlawful aid from its beneficiaries.
      
As regards the arguments submitted by the Italian Republic in its defence, it should be noted that, according to settled case-law,
         the only defence available to a Member State in infringement proceedings brought by the Commission under Article 88(2) EC
         is to plead that it was absolutely impossible for it properly to implement the decision at issue (see, in particular, Case
         C‑177/Commission v Spain [2007] ECR I-7689, paragraph 46; Case C‑214/Commission v France [2008] ECR I‑8357, paragraph 44; and Commission v Italy, paragraph 35).
      
The condition that it be absolutely impossible to implement a decision is not fulfilled where the defendant Member State merely
         informs the Commission of the legal, political or practical difficulties involved in implementing the decision, without taking
         any real steps to recover the aid from the undertakings concerned, and without proposing to the Commission any alternative
         arrangements for implementing the decision which could have enabled those difficulties to be overcome (see, in particular,
         Joined Cases C‑485/to C‑490/Commission v Spain [2006] ECR I‑11887, paragraph 74; Commission v France, paragraph 46; and Commission v Italy, paragraph 36).
      
The Court has also held that a Member State which, in giving effect to a Commission decision on State aid, encounters unforeseen
         and unforeseeable difficulties or becomes aware of consequences overlooked by the Commission must submit those problems to
         the Commission for consideration, together with proposals for suitable amendments to the decision at issue. In such a case,
         the Member State and the Commission must respect the principle underlying Article EC, which imposes a duty of genuine cooperation
         on the Member States and on the EU institutions, who must work together in good faith with a view to overcoming difficulties
         whilst fully observing the Treaty provisions and, in particular, the provisions on State aid (Commission v Italy, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In that respect, it should be noted that, in its contacts with the Commission as well as in the proceedings before the Court,
         the Italian Republic has not pleaded that it was absolutely impossible for it to implement Decision 2005/919. In addition,
         the record shows that that Member State has never proposed to the Commission any amendments to Decision 2005/to overcome
         the difficulties in implementing it effectively and immediately.
      
In this case, the Italian Republic merely informed the Commission of the legal, political or practical difficulties involved
         in giving effect to the decision.
      
In particular, the Italian Republic’s argument alleging difficulties connected with the need to calculate the amounts due
         and to exclude from the recovery in question small- and medium-sized enterprises for which the aid should be regarded as compatible
         with the common market cannot be accepted. The fact that the Member State in question finds it necessary to verify the individual
         situation of each company concerned, to conduct a screening to identify persons in receipt of benefits covered by the Commission’s
         decision, cannot justify non‑implementation of that decision (see Case C-99/Commission v Italy [2004] ECR I‑3353, paragraph 23, and Case C-207/Commission v Italy, paragraphs and 50).
      
It is true that, during the recovery process, the Italian legislature had taken serious action with a view to ensuring the
         effectiveness of that recovery by adopting, first of all, Law No 29/and, then, Decree-Law No 59/2008. In particular,
         the court file shows that that law provided for the cessation of the aid scheme and the procedures for identifying, determining
         and recovering the aid unlawfully received. However, to expedite the resolution of the litigation already pending, that decree-law
         was intended to resolve the procedural problem caused by the orders suspending recovery of the aid made by the national courts.
      
However, the adoption of the measures mentioned in the preceding paragraph failed to remedy the delay in the recovery of the
         aid covered by Decision 2005/919. Indeed, they entered into force after the time-limits laid down by that decision had expired
         and their operation was obviously ineffective, since several years after the notification of Decision 2005/919, up to the
         date the present action was brought, and after the expiry of all the time-limits prescribed by that decision, some of the
         unlawful aid had not been recovered by the Italian Republic.
      
It should be noted that, where legislative steps intended to ensure the implementation by national courts of a Commission
         decision requiring a Member State to recover unlawful aid are taken too late or prove ineffective, they do not meet the requirements
         under the case-law referred to in paragraphs and of the present judgment (Case C‑304/Commission v Italy, paragraph 42).
      
Also, the Italian Republic contends that the situation of some of the beneficiaries of the aid in question is not governed
         by Law No 29/2006, but rather by the regime governing tax evasion and that, in those circumstances, the obligation to recover
         the unlawful aid is not applicable.
      
In that regard, the reference, by the Italian Republic, to the scope of Law No 29/is irrelevant in this case. As is apparent
         from Article of Decision 2005/and from the first recital in the preamble thereto, the aid scheme in question was in
         fact implemented by Article 1(1)(b) of Decree-Law No 269/2003, which was converted into law by Law No 326/of November
         2003. However, the Italian Republic is obliged, under Article 2(1) of Decision 2005/to the recover the aid made available
         on the basis of Decree‑Law No 269/2003. In that perspective, the question of whether the benefit allowed to the undertakings
         concerned was in accordance with domestic law or, on the contrary, constituted tax avoidance or evasion cannot affect the
         obligation of the Member State in question to recover the aid within the prescribed time‑limits. Any possible difficulties
         connected with the need to check tax returns, under the appropriate national procedures, cannot justify, by themselves, as
         is clear from paragraphs and of the present judgment, the failure to implement Decision 2005/within the prescribed
         time-limits.
      
As regards, moreover, the Commission’s argument concerning the right to adopt, by the national courts, suspension measures
         in the course of the process of recovery of the aid, it should be borne in mind that such measures may be granted, provided
         that certain conditions stated in the case-law are met (see, in particular, Joined Cases C-143/and C‑92/Zuckerfabrik Süderdithmarschen and Zuckerfabrik Soest [1991] ECR I-and Case C-465/Atlanta Fruchthandelsgesellschaft and Others (I) [1995] ECR I-3761).
      
In particular, interim suspension measures may be ordered by a national court where it entertains serious doubts as to the
         validity of the EU measure and where, if the validity of the contested measure is not already in issue before the Court of
         Justice, the national court itself refers the question of such validity to this Court. However, in the present case, the Courts
         of the European Union have not been seised of any question on the legality of Decision 2005/919. In any event, the Italian
         Republic has not demonstrated, in the proceedings before the Court, that the other conditions laid down by the case-law cited
         in the preceding paragraph have been met.
      
In reality, the subject-matter of the only national decisions placed on the Court file by the parties to the present case
         concerning the recovery ordered by Decision 2005/919, namely the decision of the Commissione tributaria provinciale di Treviso
         (Provincial Tax Court, Treviso) of July and the decision of the Commissione tributaria regionale di Venezia-Mestre
         (Regional Tax Court, Venice-Mestre) of December 2008, was, as the Italian Republic admitted at the hearing, a review of
         the legality of the national measure intended to recover the unlawful aid made available to an undertaking which received
         that aid and the legality of Decision 2005/was not put in issue. Consequently, the judgments in Zuckerfabrik Süderdithmarschen and Zuckerfabrik Soest and Atlanta Fruchthandelsgesellschaft and Others (I), are not applicable as regards those national decisions.
      
In that regard, it is important to note that although the review by a national court of the formal legality of a national
         measure seeking the recovery of unlawful State aid must be viewed simply as an expression of the general principle of EU law
         of effective judicial protection, national courts are required, under Article 14(3) of Regulation No 659/1999, to ensure that
         the decision ordering the recovery of the unlawful aid is fully effective and achieves an outcome consistent with the objective
         pursued by that decision (see Case C‑210/Scott and Kimberly Clark [2010] ECR I–0000, paragraphs and 29).
      
In fact, annulment of a national measure implementing a Commission decision ordering recovery of unlawful aid, which impedes
         the immediate and effective implementation of that decision, is irreconcilable with the requirements arising from Article
         14(3) of Regulation No 659/(see, to that effect, Scott and Kimberly Clark, paragraph 30).
      
As regards the national decisions referred to in paragraph of the present judgment, it should be noted that, as is clear
         from the documents on the court file, the recipient of the unlawful aid, required to repay it under a national payment order
         which it had attacked, made the payment only after the appellate decision of December dismissing its action for annulment.
         The foregoing matters show therefore that the annulment, at first instance, of the national payment order caused considerable
         delay in the recovery of the unlawful aid. That situation is not suitable to ensure the immediate and effective implementation
         of Decision 2005/919.
      
It follows from the foregoing that the present action is well founded in so far as the Commission claims that the Italian
         Republic failed to adopt, within the prescribed time-limits, all necessary measures to recover all the aid granted under the
         aid scheme declared unlawful and incompatible with the common market by Decision 2005/919.
      
Given the finding set out in the preceding paragraph, there is no need to rule on the Commission’s claim that the Court should
         declare that the Italian Republic failed to inform the Commission of the measures referred to in that paragraph, since that
         Member State did not in fact implement Decision 2005/within the time-limits laid down (Case C-304/Commission v Italy, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
The Court therefore finds that, by failing to adopt, within the prescribed time‑limits, all necessary measures to recover
         from the beneficiaries all the aid granted under the aid scheme declared unlawful and incompatible with the common market
         by Decision 2005/919, the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of that decision.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has asked for the Italian Republic to be ordered to
         pay the costs, and the latter has been unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by failing to adopt, within the prescribed time-limits, all necessary measures to recover from the beneficiaries
            all the aid granted under the aid scheme declared unlawful and incompatible with the common market by Commission Decision
            2005/919/EC of December [on direct] tax incentives in favour of companies taking part in trade fairs abroad, the Italian
            Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of that decision;
2.      Orders the Italian Republic to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 