
Avis juridique important
|
61988JJudgment of the Court (Second Chamber) of November 1989.  -  Mathilde Becker and Josyane Starquit v European Parliament.  -  Officials - Reinstatement after secondment.  -  Joined cases C-41/and C-178/88.  
European Court reports Page Pub.RJ Page Pub somm 
Summary
Parties
Operative part
Keywords
++++1.Officials - Actions - Action against a decision rejecting a complaint - Admissibility  ( Staff Regulations, Arts and )  2.Officials - Actions - Purpose - Order directed to the administration - Inadmissible  ( EEC Treaty, Art . 176; Staff Regulations, Art . )  3.Officials - Staff Regulations - Mandatory provisions - Derogations - Prohibition  4.Officials - Recruitment - Vacant post - Candidates eligible for promotion - Right to promotion - None  ( Staff Regulations, Arts 29(1)(a ) and 45() )  5.Officials - Secondment in the interests of the service - Reinstatement - Right to maintenance of grade conferred in the post to which an official is seconded - None  ( Staff Regulations, Art . )  
Summary
1.An action, even if formally directed against the decision rejecting an official' s complaint, has the effect of bringing before the Court the act adversely affecting the official against which the complaint was submitted ( consistent case-law, see the judgment of January in Case 293/Vainker v Parliament (( )) ECR ).  2.In the context of judicial review based on Article of the Staff Regulations, the Court has no jurisdiction to issue orders to the administration so that an application seeking such an order must be declared inadmissible . Obligations may be imposed on the administration only as a result of the annulment of one of its acts in accordance with Article of the Treaty ( consistent case-law, see the judgments of January in Case 224/Koutchoumoff v Commission (( )) ECR and of April in Case 192/Turner v Commission (( )) ECR ).  3.The appointing authority may not, by means of an internal directive or other similar procedure, derogate from the mandatory provisions of the Staff Regulations ( see the judgment of December in Joined Cases to 184/Del Plato and Others v Commission (( )) ECR ) or create in favour of officials rights which might lead to their being classified in a manner contrary to the Staff Regulations .  4.Article 29(1)(a ) of the Staff Regulations, which requires the appointing authority to consider first, before filling a vacant post, whether the post can be filled by promotion or transfer within the institution, does not confer a right to automatic promotion on officials who meet the conditions for promotion .  5.Article of the Staff Regulations does not guarantee that, when an official seconded in the interests of the service is reinstated in the post formerly he occupied, he will maintain the grade and remuneration he enjoyed in the post to which he was seconded .  
Parties
In Joined Cases C-41/and C-178/Mathilde Becker, an official of the European Parliament, residing at Van-der-Heyder-strasse, Pruem zur Lay, Federal Republic of Germany, represented by Victor Biel and Aloyse May, of the Luxembourg Bar, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Chambers of Aloyse May, Grand-Rue,  applicant in Case C-41/88,  and  Josyane Starquit, an official of the European Parliament, residing in Luxembourg, represented by Alex Schmitt, of the Luxembourg Bar, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Chambers of Alex Schmitt, avenue Guillaume,  applicant in Case C-178/88,  v  European Parliament, represented by F . Pasetti Bombardella, Jurisconsult, M . Peter, Head of Division in the Legal Department, acting as Agent, and D . Petersheim, a member of the Parliament' s Legal Department, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the offices of the European Parliament, Kirchberg,  defendant,  APPLICATION for the annulment of the decisions of the European Parliament of November and March 1988, concerning the reconstruction of the applicants' careers following their reinstatement,  THE COURT ( Second Chamber )  composed of : O . Due, President, F . A . Schockweiler, President of the Chamber, and G . F . Mancini, Judge,  ( the grounds of the judgment are not reproduced )  hereby :  
Operative part
( ) Dismisses the applications;  ( ) Orders the parties to bear their own costs .  
Top  
 