
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-148/Carlos Garcia AvellovÉtat belge(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Conseil d'État (Belgium))
         
«(Citizenship of the European Union – Handing down of surnames – Children of nationals of Member States – Dual nationality)»
Opinion of Advocate General Jacobs delivered on May I - Judgment of the Court (Full Court), October I - Summary of the Judgment
1..
Citizenship of the European Union – Treaty provisions – Scope ratione personae – National of one Member State lawfully residing on the territory of another Member State – Whether included – Effect – Benefit of rights attaching to the status of citizen of the Union – Persons concerned also nationals of the State of residence – Not relevant – Discrimination on grounds of nationality in regard to the rules governing the surname – Not permissible  (Arts EC, EC and EC) 
2..
Community law – Principles – Equal treatment – Discrimination on grounds of nationality – Minor children resident in a Member State and having dual nationality of that State and of another Member State – Application for a change of surname to enable those minor children to bear the surname to which they are entitled in the second
                     Member State – Refusal of the administrative authority to grant that application – Not permissible  
                  (Arts EC and EC) 
1.
 Nationals of one Member State who are lawfully resident in the territory of another Member State may rely on the right set
         out in Article EC not to suffer discrimination on grounds of nationality in regard to the rules governing their surname.
         Citizenship of the Union is destined to be the fundamental status of nationals of the Member States, enabling those nationals
         who find themselves in the same situation to enjoy, within the scope  
          ratione materiae  of the EC Treaty, the same treatment in law irrespective of their nationality, subject to such exceptions as are expressly
         provided for. The situations falling within the scope  
          ratione materiae  of Community law include those involving the exercise of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty, in particular
         those involving the freedom to move and reside within the territory of the Member States, as conferred by Article EC. Although, as Community law stands at present, the rules governing a person's surname are matters coming within the competence
         of the Member States, the latter must none the less, when exercising that competence, comply with Community law, in particular
         with the Treaty provisions on the freedom of every citizen of the Union to move and reside in the territory of the Member
         States. Citizenship of the Union, established by Article EC, is not, however, intended to extend the scope  
          ratione materiae  of the Treaty also to internal situations which have no link with Community law. Such a link with Community law does, however,
         exist in regard to persons in a situation such as that of a national of one Member State who is lawfully resident in the territory
         of another Member State. That conclusion cannot be invalidated by the fact that the persons concerned also have the nationality
         of the Member State in which they have been resident since their birth and which, according to the authorities of that State,
         is by virtue of that fact the only nationality recognised by the latter. It is not permissible for a Member State to restrict
         the effects of the grant of the nationality of another Member State by imposing an additional condition for recognition of
         that nationality with a view to the exercise of the fundamental freedoms provided for in the Treaty. see paras 22-2.
 Articles EC and EC must be construed as precluding the administrative authority of a Member State from refusing to grant
         an application for a change of surname made on behalf of minor children resident in that State and having dual nationality
         of that State and of another Member State, in the case where the purpose of that application is to enable those children to
         bear the surname to which they are entitled according to the law and tradition of the second Member State. First, with regard to the principle of the immutability of surnames as a means designed to prevent risks of confusion as to
         identity or parentage of persons, although that principle undoubtedly helps to facilitate recognition of the identity of persons
         and their parentage, it is still not indispensable to the point that it could not adapt itself to a practice of allowing children
         who are nationals of one Member State and who also hold the nationality of another Member State to take a surname which is
         composed of elements other than those provided for by the law of the first Member State and which has, moreover, been entered
         in an official register of the second Member State. Furthermore, by reason in particular of the scale of migration within
         the Union, different national systems for the attribution of surnames coexist in the same Member State, with the result that
         parentage cannot necessarily be assessed within the social life of a Member State solely on the basis of the criterion of
         the system applicable to nationals of that latter State. In addition, far from creating confusion as to the parentage of the
         children, a system allowing elements of the surnames of the two parents to be handed down may, on the contrary, contribute
         to reinforcing recognition of that connection with the two parents. Second, with regard to the objective of integration pursued by the practice in issue, the practice in issue is, in view of
         the coexistence in the Member States of different systems for the attribution of surnames applicable to those there resident,
         neither necessary nor even appropriate for promoting the integration of the nationals of other Member States within their
         State of residence. see paras 42-43, 45, operative part
      
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURTOctober (1)
((Citizenship of the European Union – Handing down of surnames – Children of nationals of Member States – Dual nationality))
In Case C-148/02, 
            REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Conseil d'État (Belgium) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending
            before that court between 
            
 Carlos Garcia Avello
and
 État belge,
on the interpretation of Articles EC and EC,
THE COURT,,
composed of: G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias, President, M. Wathelet, R. Schintgen and C.W.A. Timmermans (Presidents of Chambers), D.A.O. Edward, A. La Pergola, P. Jann, V. Skouris, F. Macken, N. Colneric, S. von Bahr, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur) and A. Rosas, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs, Registrar: M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
Mr C. Garcia Avello, by P. Kileste, avocat, 
               
─
the Belgian State, by A. Snoecx, acting as Agent, assisted by J. Bourtembourg, avocat, 
               
─
the Danish Government, by J. Bering Liisberg, acting as Agent, 
               
─
the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster, acting as Agent, 
               
─
the Commission of the European Communities, by J.L. Iglesias Buhigues, C. O'Reilly and D. Martin, acting as Agents, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of Mr Garcia Avello, represented by P. Kileste; of the Belgian State, represented by C.
               Molitor, avocat; of the Danish Government, represented by J. Molde, acting as Agent; of the Netherlands Government, represented
               by N.A.J. Bel, acting as Agent; and of the Commission, represented by J.L. Iglesias Buhigues, C. O'Reilly and D. Martin, at
               the hearing on March 2003,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2003, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By judgment of December 2001, received at the Court on April 2002, the Conseil d'État (Council of State) referred for
         a preliminary ruling under Article EC a question on the interpretation of Articles EC and EC. 
         
            
That question has arisen in a dispute between Mr C. Garcia Avello, acting as the legal representative of his children, and
         the Belgian State concerning an application to change his children's surname. 
         
Legal framework
Community law
         
            
The first paragraph of Article EC provides as follows: Within the scope of application of this Treaty, and without prejudice to any special provisions contained therein, any discrimination
         on grounds of nationality shall be prohibited.
         
            
Article EC provides: 
         
1.
 Citizenship of the Union is hereby established.  Every person holding the nationality of a Member State shall be a citizen
         of the Union.  Citizenship of the Union shall complement and not replace national citizenship.
         
2.
 Citizens of the Union shall enjoy the rights conferred by this Treaty and shall be subject to the duties imposed thereby.
         
            
Article 18(1) EC is worded as follows: Every citizen of the Union shall have the right to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States, subject
         to the limitations and conditions laid down in this Treaty and by the measures adopted to give it effect.
         National law and practice
         Belgian private international law
         
            
The third paragraph of Article of the Belgian Civil Code provides: The laws governing personal status and capacity shall apply to Belgian nationals, even if they are resident outside Belgium.
         
            
That provision constitutes the basis on which Belgian courts apply the rule that personal status and capacity are determined
         by the national legislation governing such persons. 
         
            
According to the Belgian State, where a Belgian national has at the same time one or more other nationalities, the Belgian
         authorities will give precedence to Belgian nationality, in accordance with the customary rule of origin codified by Article
         of the Hague Convention of April on certain questions relating to the conflict of nationality laws (
          League of Nations Treaty Series , Vol. 179, p. 89) (
         the Hague Convention), under which  
         a person having two or more nationalities may be regarded as its national by each of the States whose nationality he possesses. 
         The Belgian Civil Code
         
            
Under Article of the Civil Code, which features in Chapter V, entitled  
         Effects of filiation, of Title VII (
         Filiation): 
         
1.
 A child whose paternal filiation alone is established or whose paternal and maternal filiation is established at the same
         time shall bear the surname of its father unless the father is married and recognises a child conceived during marriage by
         a woman other than his spouse. 
         ....
         
            
Article of Chapter II, entitled  
         Changing surnames and forenames, of the Law of May on surnames and forenames provides as follows: Any person who has cause to change his or her surname or forename shall submit a reasoned application to the Minister for
         Justice.Such application shall be submitted by the person concerned in person or by his or her legal representative.
         
            
Article 3, which comes under the same chapter of that Law, provides: The Minister for Justice may permit a change of forename on condition that the requested forenames will neither lead to confusion
         nor adversely affect the applicant or third parties.The King may, exceptionally, permit a change of surname if he considers that the application is based on serious grounds and
         that the requested surname will neither lead to confusion nor adversely affect the applicant or third parties.
         Administrative practice in regard to changes of surname
         
            
The Belgian State points out that, in order to reduce the difficulties associated with the possession of dual nationality,
         the Belgian authorities suggest, in situations such as that in the main proceedings, a change of surname such that children
         adopt only the first part of their father's surname.  Exceptionally, and in particular where there are few connecting factors
         to Belgium, a surname may be conferred in accordance with foreign law, in particular where the family has lived in a country
         other than Belgium in which the child has been registered under the double surname, in order not to affect adversely that
         child's integration.  In recent years, it claims, the administration has adopted a more flexible approach, particularly in
         the case where a first child born under Spanish jurisdiction has a double surname in accordance with Spanish law, whereas
         the second child, which has Belgian and Spanish nationality, bears the double surname of its father in accordance with Article
         335(1) of the Belgian Civil Code, in order to re-establish the same surname within the family. 
         The dispute in the main proceedings and the question submitted for preliminary ruling
            
Mr Garcia Avello, a Spanish national, and Ms I. Weber, a Belgian national, are resident in Belgium, where they married in
         1986.  The two children born from their marriage, Esmeralda and Diego, who were born in and respectively, have dual
         Belgian and Spanish nationality. 
         
            
In accordance with Belgian law, the Belgian Registrar of Births, Marriages and Deaths entered on the children's birth certificates
         the patronymic surname of their father, that is to say,  
         Garcia Avello, as their own surname. 
         
            
By reasoned application of November made to the Minister for Justice, Mr Garcia Avello and his spouse requested, in
         their capacity as the legal representatives of their two children, that their children's patronymic surname be changed to
          
         Garcia Weber, pointing out that, in accordance with well-established usage in Spanish law, the surname of children of a married couple
         consists of the first surname of the father followed by that of the mother. 
         
            
According to the documents on the case-file, the children in question have been registered under the family name  
         Garcia Weber with the consular section of the Spanish Embassy in Belgium. 
         
            
By letter of July the Belgian authorities suggested to the applicant in the main proceedings that he change the patronymic
         surname of his children to  
         Garcia in lieu of the change requested.  By letter of August 1997, the applicant in the main proceedings and his spouse rejected
         that suggestion. 
         
            
By letter of December the Minister for Justice informed Mr Garcia Avello in the following terms that his application
         had been rejected:  
         The Government takes the view that there are insufficient grounds to propose to His Majesty the King that he grant you the
         favour of changing your surname to  
         Garcia Weber.  Any request for the mother's surname to be added to the father's, for a child, is habitually rejected on the ground that,
         in Belgium, children bear their father's surname.
         
            
On January the applicant in the main proceedings, acting in his capacity as legal representative of his children Esmeralda
         and Diego, brought an application for annulment of that decision before the Conseil d'État, which, having regard to the parties'
         arguments and after setting Article EC aside as being irrelevant in so far as freedom of establishment is clearly not in
         issue with regard to the minor children referred to in the application in question, decided to stay the proceedings and to
         refer the following question to the Court for a preliminary ruling: Are the principles of Community law relating to European citizenship and to the freedom of movement of persons, enshrined
         particularly in Articles [EC] and [EC], to be interpreted as precluding the Belgian administrative authority, to which
         an application to change the surname of minor children residing in Belgium who have dual Belgian and Spanish nationality has
         been made on the ground, without other special circumstances, that those children should bear the surname to which they are
         entitled according to Spanish law and tradition, from refusing that change by stating that that type of application  
         is habitually rejected on the ground that, in Belgium, children bear their father's surname, particularly where the position usually adopted by the authority results from the fact that it considers that the grant
         of a different surname may, in the context of social life in Belgium, arouse questions as to the parentage of the child concerned,
         but that, in order to reduce the difficulties associated with dual nationality, it is suggested to applicants in that situation
         that they adopt only the father's first surname, and that, exceptionally, where there are few connecting factors to Belgium
         or it is appropriate to re-establish the same surname among siblings, a favourable decision may be taken?
         The question submitted
            
It is first of all necessary to examine whether, contrary to the view expressed by the Belgian State and by the Danish and
         Netherlands Governments, the situation in issue in the main proceedings comes within the scope of Community law and, in particular,
         of the Treaty provisions on citizenship of the Union. 
         
            
Article EC confers the status of citizen of the Union on every person holding the nationality of a Member State (see, in
         particular, Case C-224/D'Hoop  [2002] ECR I-6191, paragraph 27).  Since Mr Garcia Avello's children possess the nationality of two Member States, they also
         enjoy that status. 
         
            
As the Court has ruled on several occasions (see,  
          inter alia , Case C-413/Baumbast and R  [2002] ECR I-7091, paragraph 82), citizenship of the Union is destined to be the fundamental status of nationals of the Member
         States. 
         
            
That status enables nationals of the Member States who find themselves in the same situation to enjoy within the scope  
          ratione materiae  of the EC Treaty the same treatment in law irrespective of their nationality, subject to such exceptions as are expressly
         provided for (see, in particular, Case C-184/Grzelczyk  [2001] ECR I-6193, paragraph 31, and  
          D'Hoop , cited above, paragraph 28). 
         
            
The situations falling within the scope  
          ratione materiae  of Community law include those involving the exercise of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty, in particular
         those involving the freedom to move and reside within the territory of the Member States, as conferred by Article EC (Case
         C-274/Bickel and Franz  [1998] ECR I-7637, paragraphs and 16,  
          Grzelczyk , cited above, paragraph 33, and  
          D'Hoop , paragraph 29). 
         
            
Although, as Community law stands at present, the rules governing a person's surname are matters coming within the competence
         of the Member States, the latter must none the less, when exercising that competence, comply with Community law (see, by way
         of analogy, Case C-336/Dafeki  [1997] ECR I-6761, paragraphs to 20), in particular the Treaty provisions on the freedom of every citizen of the Union
         to move and reside in the territory of the Member States (see,  
          inter alia , Case C-135/Elsen  [2000] ECR I-10409, paragraph 33). 
         
            
Citizenship of the Union, established by Article EC, is not, however, intended to extend the scope  
          ratione materiae  of the Treaty also to internal situations which have no link with Community law (Joined Cases C-64/and C-65/Uecker and Jacquet  [1997] ECR I-3171, paragraph 23). 
         
            
Such a link with Community law does, however, exist in regard to persons in a situation such as that of the children of Mr
         Garcia Avello, who are nationals of one Member State lawfully resident in the territory of another Member State. 
         
            
That conclusion cannot be invalidated by the fact that the children involved in the main proceedings also have the nationality
         of the Member State in which they have been resident since their birth and which, according to the authorities of that State,
         is by virtue of that fact the only nationality recognised by the latter.  It is not permissible for a Member State to restrict
         the effects of the grant of the nationality of another Member State by imposing an additional condition for recognition of
         that nationality with a view to the exercise of the fundamental freedoms provided for in the Treaty (see in particular, to
         that effect, Case C-369/Micheletti and Others  [1992] ECR I-4239, paragraph 10).  Furthermore, Article of the Hague Convention, on which the Kingdom of Belgium relies
         in recognising only the nationality of the forum where there are several nationalities, one of which is Belgian, does not
         impose an obligation but simply provides an option for the contracting parties to give priority to that nationality over any
         other. 
         
            
That being so, the children of the applicant in the main proceedings may rely on the right set out in Article EC not to
         suffer discrimination on grounds of nationality in regard to the rules governing their surname. 
         
            
It is for that reason necessary to examine whether Articles EC and EC preclude the Belgian administrative authority
         from turning down an application for a change of surname in a situation such as that in the main proceedings. 
         
            
It is in this regard settled case-law that the principle of non-discrimination requires that comparable situations must not
         be treated differently and that different situations must not be treated in the same way (see,  
          inter alia , Case C-354/National Farmers' Union and Others  [1997] ECR I-4559, paragraph 61).  Such treatment may be justified only if it is based on objective considerations independent
         of the nationality of the persons concerned and is proportionate to the objective being legitimately pursued (see,  
          inter alia ,  
          D'Hoop , paragraph 36). 
         
            
In the present case, it is agreed that persons who have, in addition to Belgian nationality, the nationality of another Member
         State are, as a general rule, treated in the same way as persons who have only Belgian nationality on the ground that, in
         Belgium, persons having Belgian nationality are exclusively regarded as being Belgian.  In the same way as Belgian nationals,
         Spanish nationals who also happen to have Belgian nationality will normally be refused the right to change their surname on
         the ground that, in Belgium, children take the surname of their father. 
         
            
Belgian administrative practice, which, as is clear from paragraph of the present judgment and from the question submitted,
         allows derogations from this latter rule, refuses to countenance among such derogations the case of persons who are in a situation
         such as that here in the main proceedings and who seek to rectify the discrepancy in their surname resulting from the application
         of the legislation of two Member States. 
         
            
It is for that reason necessary to determine whether those two categories of persons are in an identical situation or whether,
         on the contrary, their situations are different, in which case the principle of non-discrimination would mean that Belgian
         nationals, such as the children of Mr Garcia Avello, who also have the nationality of another Member State may assert their
         right to be treated in a manner different to that in which persons having only Belgian nationality are treated, unless the
         treatment in issue can be justified on objective grounds. 
         
            
In contrast to persons having only Belgian nationality, Belgian nationals who also hold Spanish nationality have different
         surnames under the two legal systems concerned.  More specifically, in a situation such as that in issue in the main proceedings,
         the children concerned are refused the right to bear the surname which results from application of the legislation of the
         Member State which determined the surname of their father. 
         
            
As the Advocate General has pointed out in paragraph of his Opinion, it is common ground that such a discrepancy in surnames
         is liable to cause serious inconvenience for those concerned at both professional and private levels resulting from,  
          inter alia , difficulties in benefiting, in one Member State of which they are nationals, from the legal effects of diplomas or documents
         drawn up in the surname recognised in another Member State of which they are also nationals.  As has been established in paragraph
         of the present judgment, the solution proposed by the administrative authorities of allowing children to take only the
         first surname of their father does not resolve the situation of divergent surnames which those here involved are seeking to
         avoid. 
         
            
In those circumstances, Belgian nationals who have divergent surnames by reason of the different laws to which they are attached
         by nationality may plead difficulties specific to their situation which distinguish them from persons holding only Belgian
         nationality, who are identified by one surname alone. 
         
            
However, as has been pointed out in paragraph of the present judgment, the Belgian administrative authorities refuse to
         treat applications for a change of surname made by Belgian nationals in a situation such as that of the children of the applicant
         in the main proceedings with a view to avoiding a discrepancy in surnames as being based on  
         serious grounds, within the meaning of the second paragraph of Article of the abovementioned Law of May 1987, solely on the ground that,
         in Belgium, children who have Belgian nationality assume, in accordance with Belgian law, their father's surname. 
         
            
It is necessary to examine whether the practice in issue can be justified on the grounds submitted, by way of alternative
         argument, by the Belgian State and by the Danish and Netherlands Governments. 
         
            
The Belgian State submits that the principle of the immutability of surnames is a founding principle of social order, of which
         it continues to be an essential element, and that the King can authorise a change of surname only in quite exceptional circumstances,
         which do not obtain in the case in the main proceedings.  In the same way as the Belgian State, the Netherlands Government
         argues that the infringement of the rights of the children of the applicant in the main proceedings is reduced inasmuch as
         those children can in any event rely on their Spanish nationality and the surname conferred in accordance with Spanish law
         in every Member State other than Belgium.  The practice in issue makes it possible to avoid risks of confusion as to identity
         or parentage of those concerned.  According to the Danish Government, that practice, in so far as it applies the same rules
         to Belgian nationals who are also nationals of another Member State as it does to persons who are nationals of Belgium alone,
         contributes to facilitating integration of the former in Belgium and to attainment of the objective pursued by the principle
         of non-discrimination. 
         
            
None of those grounds can provide valid justification for the practice in issue. 
         
            
First, with regard to the principle of the immutability of surnames as a means designed to prevent risks of confusion as to
         identity or parentage of persons, although that principle undoubtedly helps to facilitate recognition of the identity of persons
         and their parentage, it is still not indispensable to the point that it could not adapt itself to a practice of allowing children
         who are nationals of one Member State and who also hold the nationality of another Member State to take a surname which is
         composed of elements other than those provided for by the law of the first Member State and which has, moreover, been entered
         in an official register of the second Member State.  Furthermore, it is common ground that, by reason in particular of the
         scale of migration within the Union, different national systems for the attribution of surnames coexist in the same Member
         State, with the result that parentage cannot necessarily be assessed within the social life of a Member State solely on the
         basis of the criterion of the system applicable to nationals of that latter State.  In addition, far from creating confusion
         as to the parentage of the children, a system allowing elements of the surnames of the two parents to be handed down may,
         on the contrary, contribute to reinforcing recognition of that connection with the two parents. 
         
            
Second, with regard to the objective of integration pursued by the practice in issue, suffice it to point out that, in view
         of the coexistence in the Member States of different systems for the attribution of surnames applicable to those there resident,
         a practice such as that in issue in the main proceedings is neither necessary nor even appropriate for promoting the integration
         within Belgium of the nationals of other Member States. 
         
            
The disproportionate nature of the refusal by the Belgian authorities to accede to requests such as that in issue in the main
         proceedings is all the more evident when account is taken of the fact that, as is clear from paragraph of the present judgment
         and from the question submitted, the practice in issue already allows derogations from application of the Belgian system of
         handing down surnames in situations similar to that of the children of the applicant in the main proceedings. 
         
            
Having regard to all of the foregoing, the answer to the question submitted must be that Articles EC and EC must be
         construed as precluding, in circumstances such as those of the case in the main proceedings, the administrative authority
         of a Member State from refusing to grant an application for a change of surname made on behalf of minor children resident
         in that State and having dual nationality of that State and of another Member State, in the case where the purpose of that
         application is to enable those children to bear the surname to which they are entitled according to the law and tradition
         of the second Member State. 
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the Danish and Netherlands Governments and by the Commission, which have submitted observations to the
         Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending
         before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT,
in answer to the question referred to it by the Conseil d'État by judgment of December 2001, hereby rules: 
         
Rodríguez Iglesias
Wathelet 
Schintgen 
Timmermans
Edward 
La Pergola 
Jann
Skouris 
Macken 
Colneric
von Bahr 
Cunha Rodrigues
Rosas 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on October 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: French.
Top  
 