
Case C-467/Criminal proceedings
against
Giovanni Dell’Orto
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the judge in charge of preliminary investigations at the Tribunale di Milano)
(Police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters – Framework Decision 2001/220/JHA – Directive 2004/80/EC – Concept of ‘victim’ in criminal proceedings – Legal person – Return of property seized in the course of criminal proceedings)
Opinion of Advocate General Kokott delivered on March Judgment of the Court (Third Chamber), June Summary of the Judgment
1.     Preliminary rulings – Question on the interpretation of a Framework Decision adopted under Title VI of the EU Treaty 
(Art. EC; Arts EU and 46(b) EU)
2.     Preliminary rulings – Jurisdiction of the Court – Police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters
(Art. EC; Arts EU and 46(b) EU)
3.     Acts of the institutions – Temporal application – Procedural rules 
4.     European Union – Police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters – Standing of victims in criminal proceedings – Framework
            Decision 2001/(Council Framework Decision 2001/220, Arts 1(a), 2(1) and 8(1))
1.     The fact that an order for reference concerning the interpretation of a Framework Decision adopted under Title VI of the EU
         Treaty does not mention Article EU, but refers to Article EC, cannot of itself make the reference for preliminary ruling
         inadmissible. That conclusion is reinforced by the fact that the EU Treaty neither expressly nor by implication lays down
         the form in which the national court must present its reference for a preliminary ruling.
      
(see para. 36)
2.     In accordance with Article 46(b) EU, the system under Article EC is capable of being applied to Article EU, subject
         to the conditions laid down by that provision. Like Article EC, Article EU makes reference to the Court of Justice
         for a preliminary ruling subject to the condition that the national court ‘considers that a decision on the question is necessary
         in order to enable it to give judgment’, meaning that the case-law of the Court of Justice on the admissibility of references
         under Article EC is, in principle, transposable to references for a preliminary ruling submitted to the Court of Justice
         under Article EU.
      
It follows that the presumption that questions referred by national courts for a preliminary ruling are relevant may be rebutted
         only in exceptional cases, where it is quite obvious that the interpretation which is sought of the provisions of Union law
         referred to in the questions bears no relation to the actual facts of the main action or to its purpose or where the problem
         is hypothetical or the Court does not have before it the factual or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the
         questions submitted to it. Save for such cases, the Court is, in principle, required to give a ruling on questions concerning
         the interpretation of the acts referred to in Article 35(1) EU.
      
(see paras 34, 39-40)
3.     Procedural rules are generally held to apply to all proceedings pending at the time when they enter into force, whereas substantive
         rules are usually interpreted as not applying to situations existing before their entry into force.
      
The question as to the power of the national court to take a decision concerning the return to the victim of property which
         has been seized in criminal proceedings relates to procedural rules, with the result that there is no obstacle deriving from
         the temporal application of the law which precludes the taking into account, in proceedings on that question, of the relevant
         provisions of Framework Decision 2001/on the standing of victims in criminal proceedings, with a view to the interpretation
         of the applicable national law in conformity with those provisions.
      
(see paras 48-49)
4.     Framework Decision 2001/on the standing of victims in criminal proceedings must be interpreted as meaning that, in criminal
         proceedings and, in particular, in enforcement proceedings following a judgment which resulted in a final criminal conviction,
         the concept of ‘victim’ for the purposes of the Framework Decision does not include legal persons who have suffered harm directly
         caused by acts or omissions that are in violation of the criminal law of a Member State.
      
To interpret the Framework Decision as also applying to ‘legal’ persons who maintain that they have suffered harm directly
         caused by a criminal act, would contradict the very letter of Article 1(a) of that Framework Decision, which applies only
         to natural persons who have suffered harm directly caused by conduct which infringes the criminal law of a Member State. In
         addition, there is no indication in any other provision of the Framework Decision that the European Union legislature intended
         to extend the concept of victim for the purposes of the application of the Framework Decision to legal persons. The converse
         is in fact the case, as several provisions of the Framework Decision, particularly Articles 2(1) and (2) and 8(1) confirm
         that the legislature’s objective was to limit its scope exclusively to natural persons who are victims of harm resulting from
         a criminal act.
      
That interpretation cannot be invalidated by Directive 2004/relating to compensation to crime victims. Even supposing that
         the provisions of a directive adopted on the basis of the EC Treaty were capable of having any effect on the interpretation
         of the provisions of a Framework Decision based on the Treaty on European Union and that the concept of victim for the purposes
         of the directive could be interpreted to include legal persons, the directive and the Framework Decision are not on any analysis
         linked in a manner which would call for a uniform interpretation of the concept in question.
      
(see paras 53-55, 57-58, 60, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
June (*)
      
(Police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters – Framework Decision 2001/220/JHA – Directive 2004/80/EC – Concept of ‘victim’ in criminal proceedings – Legal person – Return of property seized in the course of criminal proceedings)
In Case C-467/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the judge in charge of preliminary investigations at the Tribunale
         di Milano (Italy), made by decision of October 2005, received at the Court on December 2005, in the criminal proceedings
         against
      
Giovanni Dell’Orto,
joined party:
Saipem SpA,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of A. Rosas, President of the Chamber, J. Klučka, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur), A. Ó Caoimh and P. Lindh, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: C. Strömholm, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on February 2007,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Mr Dell’Orto, by M. Brusa, avvocato,
–       the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and D. Del Gaizo, avvocato dello Stato,
–       Ireland, by D. O’Hagan, acting as Agent, and N. Travers BL,
–       the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster, C. ten Dam and M. de Grave, acting as Agents,
–       the Austrian Government, by H. Dossi, acting as Agent,
–       the United Kingdom Government, by E. O’Neill, acting as Agent, and J. Turner, Barrister,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by M. Condou-Durande, E. Righini and L. Visaggio, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2007,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Council Framework Decision 2001/220/JHA of March
         on the standing of victims in criminal proceedings (OJ L 82, p. 1; ‘the Framework Decision’) and of Council Directive
         2004/80/EC of April relating to compensation to crime victims (OJ L 261, p. 15; ‘the Directive’). 
      
The reference was presented in criminal enforcement proceedings following a judgment which resulted in a final criminal conviction,
         brought before the judge in charge of preliminary investigations at the Tribunale di Milano (District Court, Milan), acting
         as the judge responsible for enforcement, and concerning the return of assets placed under sequestration. 
      
 Legal context
 European Union law
 The Framework Decision
Article of the Framework Decision provides:
‘For the purposes of this Framework Decision:
(a)      “victim” shall mean a natural person who has suffered harm, including physical or mental injury, emotional suffering or economic
         loss, directly caused by acts or omissions that are in violation of the criminal law of a Member State;
      
…
(c)      “criminal proceedings” shall be understood in accordance with the national law applicable;
(d)      “proceedings” shall be broadly construed to include, in addition to criminal proceedings, all contacts of victims as such
         with any authority, public service or victim support organisation in connection with their case, before, during, or after
         criminal process;
      
…’
Article of the Framework Decision provides:
‘1. Each Member State shall ensure that victims have a real and appropriate role in its criminal legal system. It shall continue
         to make every effort to ensure that victims are treated with due respect for the dignity of the individual during proceedings
         and shall recognise the rights and legitimate interests of victims with particular reference to criminal proceedings.
      
2. Each Member State shall ensure that victims who are particularly vulnerable can benefit from specific treatment best suited
         to their circumstances.’
      
In accordance with Article 8(1) of the Framework Decision:
‘Each Member State shall ensure a suitable level of protection for victims and, where appropriate, their families or persons
         in a similar position, particularly as regards their safety and protection of their privacy, where the competent authorities
         consider that there is a serious risk of reprisals or firm evidence of serious intent to intrude upon their privacy.’
      
Under Article of the Framework Decision:
‘1.      Each Member State shall ensure that victims of criminal acts are entitled to obtain a decision within reasonable time-limits
         on compensation by the offender in the course of criminal proceedings, except where, in certain cases, national law provides
         for compensation to be awarded in another manner.
      
…
3.      Unless urgently required for the purpose of criminal proceedings, recoverable property belonging to victims which is seized
         in the course of criminal proceedings shall be returned to them without delay.’
      
In accordance with the third indent of Article of the Framework Decision, each Member State shall bring into force the
         laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary for the purposes of the implementation of the articles cited in
         paragraphs to of this judgment by March at the latest.
      
 The Directive
Under Article of the Directive:
‘Member States shall ensure that where a violent intentional crime has been committed in a Member State other than the Member
         State where the applicant for compensation is habitually resident, the applicant shall have the right to submit the application
         to an authority or any other body in the latter Member State.’
      
Article of the Directive provides:
‘Compensation shall be paid by the competent authority of the Member State on whose territory the crime was committed.’
Article of the Directive is worded as follows:
‘1.      The rules on access to compensation in cross-border situations drawn up by this Directive shall operate on the basis of Member
         States’ schemes on compensation to victims of violent intentional crime committed in their respective territories.
      
2.      All Member States shall ensure that their national rules provide for the existence of a scheme on compensation to victims
         of violent intentional crimes committed in their respective territories, which guarantees fair and appropriate compensation
         to victims.’
      
Article of the Directive provides:
‘This Directive shall not prevent Member States, in so far as such provisions are compatible with this Directive, from:
(a)      introducing or maintaining more favourable provisions for the benefit of victims of crime or any other persons affected by
         crime;
      
(b)      introducing or retaining provisions for the purpose of compensating victims of crime committed outside their territory, or
         any other person affected by such a crime, subject to any conditions that Member States may specify for that purpose.’
      
Article 18(1) and (2) of the Directive provides:
‘1.      Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive
         by January at the latest, with the exception of Article 12(2), in which case the date of compliance shall be July
         2005. They shall forthwith inform the Commission thereof.
      
2.      Member States may provide that the measures necessary to comply with this Directive shall apply only to applicants whose injuries
         result from crimes committed after June 2005.’
      
 National legislation
In accordance with Article of the Italian Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended by Law No of June (‘CPP’):
‘1.      The return of property placed under sequestration shall be ordered by the judge provided that there remains no doubt as to
         its ownership.
      
…
3.      Where there is a dispute as to the ownership of property placed under sequestration, the judge shall refer the case, in so
         far as it concerns the return, to the civil court with territorial jurisdiction competent at first instance, while maintaining
         sequestration during this period.’
      
…
6.      Once the judgment is no longer subject to appeal, the judge responsible for enforcement shall take steps to return the property.’
Article CPP provides:
‘1.      The accused and the public prosecutor may request the court to apply an alternative sanction, of a kind and extent appropriate,
         or a financial penalty, reduced to a maximum of one third of the quantum, or a sentence of imprisonment which, taking into
         account the circumstances and reduced to a maximum of one third of the quantum, does not exceed five years, alone or accompanied
         by a financial penalty.
      
2.      If there is an agreement, even of the party who did not make the request, and provided there has been no acquittal …, the
         court, on the basis of the documents before it, assuming that the characterisation of the facts and the application and comparison
         of the circumstances of the case made by the parties are correct and that the sanction indicated is adequate, shall by judgment
         impose that sanction, mentioning in the operative part that it was requested by the parties. In cases where a civil party
         joins the proceedings, the court shall not give judgment on that claim; …
      
…’
Article 665(1) CPP provides:
‘Unless provided otherwise by law, only the judge who took the decision in the case is competent to enforce that decision.’
 The main action and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
It is apparent from the order for reference that criminal proceedings were brought before the Tribunale di Milano against
         Mr Dell’Orto and other accused persons in respect of the offence of giving false information about companies (false accounting),
         with the further intention of committing the offences of aggravated embezzlement and of unlawful financing of political parties.
         Several companies belonging to the Italian group ENI were among the persons affected by those crimes, including Saipem SpA
         (‘Saipem’), which joined those criminal proceedings as a civil party.
      
According to the order for reference, Mr Dell’Orto and the other accused persons embezzled large sums of money belonging to
         those companies by obtaining remuneration for fictional consultancy activities provided to offshore companies with which one
         of the accomplices was institutionally linked, appropriating part of those sums for themselves. In particular, Mr Dell’Orto
         appropriated for himself a sum of EUR 069.which belonged to Saipem, a sum which was placed under sequestration by
         the Italian courts in the course of the criminal proceedings. Such a protective measure had, in particular, the main and specific
         goal of guaranteeing that the civil obligations arising from the crime would be met.
      
The criminal proceedings resulted in the issue of a judgment by the judge in charge of the preliminary investigations at the
         Tribunale di Milano on May 1999, which became res judicata on June 1999, applying a penalty on the basis of Article CPP, that is by a means known as ‘by settlement’. Mr Dell’Orto was sentenced by this judgment to a term of imprisonment and
         a fine, the sentence being suspended. No decision was taken as to the fate of the sum placed under sequestration. 
      
Saipem obtained the return of the above sum following an order of that judge made on December 1999. That order was set aside
         by a judgment of the Corte suprema di cassazione (Supreme Court of Cassation) of November 2001. That judgment pointed out
         in particular that, as the judgment of May made no decision on the sum placed under sequestration, the criminal court
         lacked the power to order its return to Saipem.
      
Following the judgment of November 2001, Mr Dell’Orto requested the judge in charge of preliminary investigations to order
         Saipem in turn to return the sum in question, given that it might again be placed under sequestration in anticipation of a
         decision on its possible return. According to Mr Dell’Orto, it is for the civil court to take that decision pursuant to Article
         263(3) CPP, on the ground that there is a dispute as to the ownership of that sum.
      
By order of July 2003, the judge in charge of preliminary investigations at the Tribunale di Milano ordered the transfer
         of the case-file to the civil court, rejecting Mr Dell’Orto’s request as to the remainder.
      
That order was annulled by a judgment of April of the Corte suprema di cassazione, which sent the case back to the
         same judge. According to that judgment, if, pursuant to Article 263(3) CPP, the dispute as to the ownership of the seized
         property is decided by the civil court judge in interim proceedings, that does not thereby deprive the criminal court judge
         of the power to take measures regarding the safe keeping of the property pending resolution of the dispute as to its ownership,
         with the result that it is for the judge in charge of preliminary investigations at the Tribunale di Milano to ‘adopt the
         appropriate measures for the purposes of actually placing under sequestration the sum which has in the meantime been returned
         to Saipem’.
      
The proceedings before the court making the reference were therefore reopened in order to ensure the enforcement of the second
         judgment of the Corte suprema di cassazione.
      
According to the court making the reference, there cannot in the main action be any remaining ‘dispute as to ownership’ of
         the sums placed under sequestration, of such a kind as to justify the opening of interim proceedings before the civil court
         judge. The assets placed under sequestration are not owed to a third party and should be returned to Saipem pursuant to Article
         of the Italian Civil Code, and it follows from the examination of the documents in the case-file that Mr Dell’Orto has
         never questioned that the sums in question are the property of that company.
      
The court making the reference considers that, in reality, a purely procedural obstacle precludes it from itself ordering
         the return of the sums in question to Saipem, the question being one as to the power of the judge responsible for enforcement
         to take a decision on the return of the sums placed under sequestration following a judgment on application of the penalty
         imposed under Article CPP. According to the case-law of the Corte suprema di cassazione, in particular the abovementioned
         judgment of November 2001, the judge with responsibility for enforcement does not have the power to take a decision concerning
         return to the victim of the property seized following a judgment issued under Article 444, which makes no provision in that
         regard.
      
In that context, the court making the reference raises the question of the applicability of the principles set out in Articles
         and of the Framework Decision.
      
It asks, in particular, whether those articles of the Framework Decision are applicable from the point of view of their personal
         scope, as the victim is not a natural person but a legal person.
      
Article 1(a) of the Framework Decision provides that it applies to a ‘natural person’ who has suffered harm. The court making
         the reference nevertheless asks whether it is possible to interpret the Framework Decision, when read in the light of Articles
         and of the Directive, to mean that it also applies to any other person who is the victim of a crime, and, in particular,
         to legal persons. If this is the case, the principle referred to in Article 9(3) of the Framework Decision, according to which
         property seized in the course of criminal proceedings which belongs to victims shall be returned to them without delay, is
         applicable in the main action. In accordance with the case-law of the Court (Case C-105/Pupino [2005] ECR I-5285), the national judge is obliged, in so far as possible, to interpret the provisions of the CPP concerning
         the extent of the decision-making powers of the judge responsible for enforcement, with regard to the return of property seized
         in the course of criminal proceedings, in conformity with Article 9(3) of the Framework Decision, which sanctions a simplified
         procedure in order to obtain the objectives established by the legislation relating to the compensation of victims.
      
The court making the reference comments moreover that the Court has held with regard to certain forms of procedure which bar
         further prosecution and are analogous to that resulting from a judgment reached by ‘settlement’ for the purposes of Article
         CPP, that they are to be considered as equivalent to a judgment which finally disposes of a case and closes the criminal
         proceedings (Joined Cases C-187/and C-385/Gözütok and Brügge [2003] ECR I-1345).
      
Since, in the main action, the dispute as to the return of sums placed under sequestration arises following the closure of
         criminal proceedings by the judgment of May 1999, the national court making the reference also raises the question of the
         applicability of the principles referred to in Articles and of the Framework Decision in the specific context of criminal
         enforcement proceedings which follow the closure of the criminal proceedings proper.
      
In those circumstances, the judge in charge of preliminary investigations at the Tribunale di Milano decided to stay the proceedings
         and to refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Can the rules referred to in Articles and of the Framework Decision … apply in criminal proceedings, in general, to any party affected by a crime, by virtue of Article et seq. of the Directive … or of other provisions of Community law?
      
(2)      Can the rules referred to in Articles and of the Framework Decision … apply in criminal proceedings for enforcement following
         a judgment which resulted in a final criminal conviction (and thus also following a judgment applying a penalty as provided
         for in Article of the Code of Criminal Procedure) to any party affected by a crime, by virtue of Article et seq. of the Directive … or of other provisions of Community law?’
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 Admissibility
Several governments which have submitted observations in the course of these proceedings have cast doubt upon the admissibility
         of the reference for a preliminary ruling.
      
The United Kingdom Government submits that the reference for a preliminary ruling is inadmissible because it is based on Article
         EC whereas the interpretation sought concerns the Framework Decision, that is an act adopted under Title VI of the Treaty
         on European Union. In such a case, the reference should be based exclusively on Article 35(1) EU, whereas Article EC is
         not applicable. Ireland maintains that, since the conditions for application of Article EU are met in this case, the mistaken
         reliance on Article EC as the basis for the reference should not preclude the Court from giving a reply to the questions
         referred by the court making the reference. 
      
First of all, it should be noted that, in accordance with Article 46(b) EU, the provisions of the EC and EAEC Treaties concerning
         the powers of the Court of Justice and the exercise of those powers, including the provisions of Article EC, apply to
         the provisions of Title VI of the Treaty on European Union under the conditions laid down by Article EU. Contrary to what
         is argued by the United Kingdom Government, it therefore follows that the system under Article EC is capable of being
         applied to the Court’s jurisdiction to give preliminary rulings by virtue of Article EU, subject to the conditions laid
         down by that provision (see, to that effect, Pupino, paragraphs and 28).
      
It is established that the Italian Republic indicated, by a declaration which took effect on May 1999, the date on which
         the Treaty of Amsterdam came into force, that it accepts the jurisdiction of the Court to rule on the validity and interpretation
         of the acts referred to in Article EU in accordance with the rules laid down in paragraph 3(b) of that article. It is also
         undisputed that the Framework Decision, based on Articles EU and EU, is one of the acts referred to in Article 35(1)
         EU on which the Court may rule in a reference for a preliminary ruling (Pupino, paragraphs and 22) and it is accepted that the judge in charge of preliminary investigations at the Tribunale di Milano,
         acting in proceedings such as those in the main action, must be considered as a court or tribunal of a Member State for the
         purposes of Article EU.
      
In those circumstances, and regardless of the fact that the questions referred for a preliminary ruling also concern the interpretation
         of a directive adopted under the EC Treaty, the fact that the order for reference does not mention Article EU, but refers
         to Article EC, cannot of itself make the reference for a preliminary ruling inadmissible. This conclusion is reinforced
         by the fact that the Treaty on European Union neither expressly nor by implication lays down the form in which the national
         court must present its reference for a preliminary ruling (see, by analogy, with regard to Article EC, Case 13/De Geus [1962] ECR 45, 50).
      
The Netherlands Government questions the admissibility of the reference for a preliminary ruling on the ground that the factual
         and legislative context is not defined sufficiently in the order for reference. According to that government, the relevance
         of the questions asked does not emerge from it sufficiently clearly, since, in the absence of further clarification of the
         applicable national law, it is impossible to confirm whether, as submitted by the court making the reference, a question is
         raised concerning the interpretation of that law in conformity with the Framework Decision, which in any event lacks direct
         effect. 
      
The Austrian Government submits that Italian law prevents the court making the reference from taking a decision in the main
         action on questions of a civil law nature, with the consequence that the questions referred for a preliminary ruling are hypothetical.
      
The Court observes that, like Article EC, Article EU makes reference to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling
         subject to the condition that the national court ‘considers that a decision on the question is necessary in order to enable
         it to give judgment’, meaning that the case-law of the Court of Justice on the admissibility of references under Article EC is, in principle, transposable to references for a preliminary ruling submitted to the Court of Justice under Article EU (Pupino, paragraph 29).
      
It follows that the presumption that questions referred by national courts for a preliminary ruling are relevant may be rebutted
         only in exceptional cases, where it is quite obvious that the interpretation which is sought of the provisions of Union law
         referred to in the questions bears no relation to the actual facts of the main action or to its purpose or where the problem
         is hypothetical or the Court does not have before it the factual or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the
         questions submitted to it. Save for such cases, the Court is, in principle, required to give a ruling on questions concerning
         the interpretation of the acts referred to in Article 35(1) EU (Pupino, paragraph 30).
      
Furthermore, the need to provide an interpretation of Community law which will be of use to the national court presupposes
         that the latter sets out the factual and legislative context of the questions it is asking or, at the very least, explains
         the factual circumstances on which those questions are based. In that regard, it is essential that the national court should
         give at the very least some explanation of the reasons for the choice of the provisions of Union law which it requires to
         be interpreted and on the link it establishes between those provisions and the national legislation applicable to the dispute
         (see, inter alia, with regard to Article EC, Case C-295/Asemfo [2007] ECR I-0000, paragraphs and 33).
      
The information provided in orders for reference must not only be such as to enable the Court to reply usefully but must also
         enable the governments of the Member States and other interested parties to submit observations pursuant to Article of
         the Statute of the Court of Justice (see, inter alia, Case C-303/Advocaten voor de Wereld [2007] ECR I-0000, paragraph 20).
      
As is evident from paragraphs to of this judgment, the order for reference sets out the underlying facts of the main
         action and the provisions of applicable national law which are directly relevant and it explains the reasons why the court
         making the reference is seeking an interpretation of the Framework Decision, and also the link between the latter and the
         national legislation applicable in the matter.
      
Contrary to the argument submitted by the Austrian Government, it is not obvious that an interpretation of national law in
         conformity with the Framework Decision in the main action is impossible, this being a matter for the national court to determine
         (see, to that effect, Pupino, paragraph 48).
      
In those circumstances, it is not obvious that the interpretation which is sought of the provisions of the Framework Decision
         referred to in the questions raised bears no relation to the actual facts of the main action or to its purpose or that the
         problem is hypothetical or that the Court lacks the factual or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to those questions.
      
Finally, the information contained in the order for reference is also sufficient to ensure that the parties to the main action,
         the Member States, the Council of the European Union and the Commission of the European Communities are able to submit their
         observations pursuant to Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, as is, moreover, indicated by the observations
         lodged by the parties who have intervened in these proceedings.
      
During the written procedure before the Court, the question was raised whether the Framework Decision can be considered as
         applicable from a temporal perspective to a set of facts which, as in the main action, occurred well before adoption of the
         Framework Decision on March 2001, let alone the period prescribed for its implementation, which expired on March with regard inter alia to Article of the Framework Decision.
      
In that regard, it must be recalled that, according to settled case-law, procedural rules are generally held to apply to all
         proceedings pending at the time when they enter into force, whereas substantive rules are usually interpreted as not applying
         to situations existing before their entry into force (see, inter alia, Case C-293/Beemsterboer Coldstore Services [2006] ECR I-2263, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
The question which is at the centre of the main proceedings, that is the power of the national court to take a decision concerning
         the return to the victim of property which has been seized in criminal proceedings, relates to procedural rules, with the
         result that there is no obstacle deriving from the temporal application of the law which precludes the taking into account,
         in those proceedings, of the relevant provisions of the Framework Decision with a view to the interpretation of the applicable
         national law in conformity with those provisions.
      
The reference for a preliminary ruling is therefore admissible.
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
By its two questions, which it is appropriate to examine together, the court making the reference asks essentially whether
         the Framework Decision must be interpreted as meaning that, in criminal proceedings, and, more specifically, in enforcement
         proceedings following a judgment resulting in a final criminal conviction, such as that at issue in the main proceedings,
         the concept of ‘victim’ for the purposes of the Framework Decision includes legal persons who have suffered harm directly
         caused by acts or omissions that are in violation of the criminal law of a Member State. 
      
Article 1(a) of the Framework Decision defines ‘victim’, for the purposes of the Framework Decision, as a ‘natural’ person
         who has suffered harm, including physical or mental injury, emotional suffering or economic loss, directly caused by acts
         or omissions that are in violation of the criminal law of a Member State.
      
It follows from the wording of this provision that the Framework Decision applies only to natural persons who have suffered
         harm directly caused by conduct which infringes the criminal law of a Member State.
      
To interpret the Framework Decision to mean that it would also apply to ‘legal’ persons who, like the civil party to the main
         action, maintain that they have suffered harm directly caused by a criminal act, would contradict the very letter of Article
         1(a) of the Framework Decision.
      
In addition, there is no indication in any other provision of the Framework Decision that the European Union legislature intended
         to extend the concept of victim for the purposes of the application of the Framework Decision to legal persons. The converse
         is in fact the case, as several provisions of the Framework Decision confirm that the legislature’s objective was to limit
         its scope exclusively to natural persons who are victims of harm resulting from a criminal act.
      
In that regard, apart from Article 1(a) of the Framework Decision, which refers, so far as the principal categories of harm
         are concerned, to physical or mental injury and to emotional suffering, reference should also be made to Article 2(1) of the
         Framework Decision, which obliges each Member State to make every effort to ensure that victims are treated with due respect
         for the dignity of the individual, Article 2(2), which refers to the specific treatment from which victims who are particularly
         vulnerable can benefit, and also Article 8(1) of the Framework Decision, which obliges the Member States to ensure a suitable
         level of protection to the family of the victim or to persons in a similar position. 
      
The Directive is not of such a kind as to invalidate this interpretation. The Framework Decision and the Directive govern
         different matters. The Directive sets up a system of cooperation to facilitate access to compensation to victims of crimes
         in cross-border situations. It seeks to ensure that where a violent intentional crime has been committed in a Member State
         other than that in which the victim is habitually resident, the victim shall receive compensation from the former Member State.
         The Framework Decision, on the other hand, aims to approximate the legislation of the Member States concerning the protection
         of the interests of the victim in criminal proceedings. It seeks to ensure that the offender makes reparation for the harm
         suffered by the victim.
      
Even supposing that the provisions of a directive adopted on the basis of the EC Treaty were capable of having any effect
         on the interpretation of the provisions of a framework decision based on the Treaty on European Union and that the concept
         of victim for the purposes of the directive could be interpreted to include legal persons, the directive and the framework
         decision are not on any analysis linked in a manner which would call for a uniform interpretation of the concept in question.
         
      
Moreover, a situation such as that in the main action does not fall within the scope of the Directive. As is evident from
         paragraph of this judgment, the Directive provides for compensation only where a violent intentional crime has been committed
         in a Member State other than that in which the victim is habitually resident, whereas the main action relates to offences
         of false accounting, aggravated embezzlement and unlawful financing of political parties committed substantially on the territory
         of the Member State in which the victim resides.
      
The answer to the questions referred is therefore that the Framework Decision must be interpreted as meaning that, in criminal
         proceedings and, in particular, in enforcement proceedings following a judgment which resulted in a final criminal conviction,
         such as those in the main action, the concept of ‘victim’ for the purposes of the Framework Decision does not include legal
         persons who have suffered harm directly caused by acts or omissions that are in violation of the criminal law of a Member
         State.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main action, a step in the action pending before the national court, the
         decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
Council Framework Decision 2001/220/JHA of March on the standing of victims in criminal proceedings must be interpreted
            as meaning that, in criminal proceedings and, in particular, in enforcement proceedings following a judgment which resulted
            in a final criminal conviction, such as those in the main action, the concept of ‘victim’ for the purposes of the Framework
            Decision does not include legal persons who have suffered harm directly caused by acts or omissions that are in violation
            of the criminal law of a Member State. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 