
Case C-45/Maatschap Schonewille-Prins
v
Minister van Landbouw, Natuur en Voedselkwaliteit
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
College van Beroep voor het bedrijfsleven)
(Agricultural structures – Community aid schemes – Beef and veal sector – Identification and registration of bovine animals – Slaughter premium – Exclusion and reduction)
Opinion of Advocate General Léger delivered on July Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), May Summary of the Judgment
1.     Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Beef and veal – Slaughter premium – Conditions for granting 
(European Parliament and Council Directive No 1760/2000, Recitals to and Art. 7(1), second indent; Council Regulation
            No 1254/1999, Art. 21)
2.     Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Beef and veal – Slaughter premium – Conditions for granting 
(European Parliament and Council Directive No 1760/2000, Art. 7(1), second indent; Council Regulation No 1254/1999, Art. 21)
3.     Agriculture – Common agricultural policy – Integrated administration and control system for certain aid schemes
(European Parliament and Council Directive No 1760/2000, Art. 7(1), second indent; Commission Regulation No 2419/2001, Arts
            and 45)
4.     Agriculture – Common agricultural policy – Integrated administration and control system for certain aid schemes 
(European Parliament and Council Directive No 1760/2000, Art. 22; Commission Regulation No 3887/92, Art. 11)
1.     Article of Council Regulation No 1254/on the common organisation of the market in beef and veal must be interpreted as meaning that the failure to comply with
         the period for notification to the computerised database of the movement of a bovine animal to or from a holding, laid down
         in the second indent of Article 7(1) of Regulation No 1760/establishing a system for the identification and registration
         of bovine animals and regarding the labelling of beef and beef products and repealing Regulation No 820/97, renders that bovine
         animal ineligible for a slaughter premium and, consequently, results in the exclusion of that premium for that animal. The
         wording of Article of Regulation No 1254/clearly shows, as recital in the preamble thereto indicates, that the
         grant of a slaughter premium is subject to compliance by the keepers of the animals concerned with the relevant Community
         rules on identification and registration of bovine animals.
      
Such an interpretation is borne out by the objectives pursued by Regulation No 1760/2000, which, as recitals to in the
         preamble thereto indicate, are to improve consumer confidence in the quality of beef and beef products, to preserve the protection
         of public health and to reinforce the lasting stability of the beef market. 
      
(see paras 32, 40, 43, operative part 1)
2.     There is nothing capable of casting doubt on the validity of Article of Regulation No 1254/on the common organisation
         of the market in beef and veal in the light of the principle of proportionality, in so far as that article renders a bovine
         animal in respect of which there has been a failure to comply with the notification period set out in Article 7(1), second
         indent, of Regulation No 1760/establishing a system for the identification and registration of bovine animals and regarding
         the labelling of beef and beef products and repealing Regulation No 820/97, ineligible for the slaughter premium and consequently
         results in the exclusion of that premium for that animal.
      
The obligation to comply with the notification period, which allows the competent authorities to pinpoint rapidly the origin
         of an animal in the event of epizootic disease and to take the necessary measures for the purpose of avoiding any risk to
         public health, is part of the objectives of the system for the identification and registration of bovine animals, and, inter
         alia, of the system seeking to ensure efficient tracing in real time of those animals, which is essential for public health
         reasons. Accordingly, that obligation cannot be regarded as a manifestly inappropriate means of achieving those objectives.
      
(see paras 50, 52, operative part 2)
3.     Articles and of Commission Regulation No 2419/laying down detailed rules for applying the integrated administration
         and control system for certain Community aid schemes established by Council Regulation No 3508/do not apply to the exclusion
         of a slaughter premium for a bovine animal in respect of which the information regarding its movement to or from a holding
         was not notified to the computerised database within the period laid down in Article 7(1), second indent, of Regulation No
         1760/establishing a system for the identification and registration of bovine animals and regarding the labelling of beef
         and beef products and repealing Regulation No 820/97, so as to render that bovine animal eligible for a slaughter premium,
         even in the case where that information sent to the database in question after the expiry of the prescribed period was correct.
      
The exceptions laid down in Articles and can only cover penalties. The exclusion of the slaughter premium for a bovine
         animal in respect of which the information regarding its movement to or from the holding was not notified to the computerised
         database within the period laid down in Article 7(1), second indent, of Regulation No 1760/2000, is not a penalty but the
         consequence of failure to fulfil those conditions for eligibility in respect of the award of that premium.
      
(see paras 57-58, 60, operative part 3)
4.     Article of Regulation No 3887/laying down detailed rules for applying the integrated administration and control system for certain Community aid schemes
         and/or Article of Regulation No 1760/establishing a system for the identification and registration of bovine animals and regarding the labelling of beef and beef
         products and repealing Regulation No 820/97, must be interpreted as meaning that a Member State cannot lay down national penalties
         consisting in reductions and exclusions from the total amount of Community aid which can be claimed by a farmer who has applied
         for a slaughter premium, since penalties of that type are already set out in detail in Regulation No 3887/That interpretation is not at variance with the articles referred to above, in so far as it does not preclude Member States
         from adopting national penalties of a different type to the reductions or exclusions referred to in Regulation No 3887/92.
         
      
(see paras 65, 67-68, operative part 4)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Agricultural structures – Community aid schemes – Beef and veal sector – Identification and registration of bovine animals – Slaughter premium – Exclusion and reduction)
In Case C‑45/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the College van Beroep voor het bedrijfsleven (Netherlands),
         made by decision of February 2005, received at the Court on February 2005, in the proceedings
      
Maatschap Schonewille-Prins
v
Minister van Landbouw, Natuur en Voedselkwaliteit,
 
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, R. Schintgen, R. Silva de Lapuerta, G. Arestis (Rapporteur) and L.
         Bay Larsen, Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Léger,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on April 2006,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Maatschap Schonewille-Prins, by E. Buys, director of Denkavit Nederland BV,
–       the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster and M. de Grave, acting as Agents,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by T. van Rijn, F. Erlbacher and M. van Heezik, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on July 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Council Regulation (EC) No 1254/of May on the common organisation of the market in beef and veal (OJ L 160, p. 21), Regulation (EC) No 1760/of the European
         Parliament and of the Council of July establishing a system for the identification and registration of bovine animals
         and regarding the labelling of beef and beef products and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 820/(OJ L 204, p. 1),
         Commission Regulation (EEC) No 3887/of December laying down detailed rules for applying the integrated administration
         and control system for certain Community aid schemes (OJ L 391, p. 36) and Commission Regulation (EC) No 2419/of
         December laying down detailed rules for applying the integrated administration and control system for certain Community
         aid schemes established by Council Regulation (EEC) No 3508/(OJ L 327, p. 11). As regards Regulation No 1254/1999,
         the reference also concerns the validity of Article thereof.
      
The reference was submitted in the course of proceedings between the Maatschap Schonewille-Prins (‘Schonewille’), a partnership
         consisting of farmers specialising in the rearing of bovine animals, and the Minister van Landbouw, Natuur en Voedselkwaliteit
         (Minister for Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality, ‘the Minister’) concerning the latter’s refusal to grant Schonewille the
         slaughter premium for bovine animals for which it had previously applied.
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
Under Article of Regulation No 1254/1999, a producer keeping bovine animals may qualify for a slaughter premium granted
         on slaughter of eligible animals or on their export to a non-member country.
      
In this connection, Article of that regulation states: 
‘To qualify for direct payments under this chapter, an animal shall be identified and registered in accordance with Regulation
         (EC) No 820/97.’
      
Recital (18) in the preamble to Regulation No 1254/provides:
‘… direct payments should be subject to compliance by the keepers of the animals concerned with the relevant Community rules
         on identification and registration of bovine animals; …’
      
Council Regulation (EC) No 820/of April establishing a system for the identification and registration of bovine
         animals and regarding the labelling of beef and beef products (OJ L 117, p. 1) was repealed, with effect from September
         2000, by Regulation No 1760/2000.
      
Recitals (4) to (7) in the preamble to Regulation No 1760/state:
‘Following the instability in the market in beef and beef products caused by the bovine spongiform encephalopathy crisis,
         the improvement in the transparency of the conditions for the production and marketing of the products concerned, particularly
         as regards traceability, has exerted a positive influence on consumption of beef. In order to maintain and strengthen the
         confidence of consumers in beef and to avoid misleading them, it is necessary to develop the framework in which the information
         is made available to consumers by sufficient and clear labelling of the product. 
      
To that end it is essential to establish, on the one hand, an efficient system for the identification and registration of
         bovine animals at the production stage ...
      
By virtue of the guarantees provided through this improvement, certain public interest requirements will also be attained,
         in particular the protection of human and animal health. 
      
As a result, consumer confidence in the quality of beef and beef products will be improved, a higher level of protection of
         public health preserved and the lasting stability of the beef market will be reinforced.’
      
Article 7(1) of Regulation No 1760/specifies: 
‘With the exception of transporters, each keeper of animals shall: 
–       keep an up-to-date register,
–       once the computerised database is fully operational, report to the competent authority all movements to and from the holding
         and all births and deaths of animals on the holding, along with the dates of these events, within a period fixed by the Member
         State of between three and seven days of the event occurring. However, at the request of a Member State and in accordance
         with the procedure referred to in Article 23(2), the Commission may determine the circumstances in which Member States may
         extend the maximum period and provide for special rules applicable to movements of bovine animals when put out to summer grazing
         in different mountain areas.’
      
Article 22(1) of that regulation provides:
‘Member States shall take all the necessary measures to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Regulation. ... 
Any sanctions imposed by the Member State on a holder shall be proportionate to the gravity of the breach. ...’ 
Article 11(1) of Regulation No 3887/provides:
‘The penalties laid down in this Regulation shall be without prejudice to additional penalties laid down at national level.’
Regulation No 3887/was repealed, with effect from January 2002, by Regulation No 2419/2001.
Article of Regulation No 2419/states:
‘1.      The reductions and exclusions provided for in this Title shall not apply where the farmer submitted factually correct information
         or where he can show otherwise that he is not at fault. 
      
2.      The reductions and exclusions provided for in this Title shall not apply with regard to those parts of the aid application
         as to which the farmer informs the competent authority in writing that the aid application is incorrect or has become incorrect
         since it was lodged, provided that the farmer has not been informed of the competent authority’s intention to carry out an
         on-the-spot check and that the authority has not already informed the farmer of any irregularity in the application.
      
The information given by the farmer as referred to in the first subparagraph shall have the effect that the aid application
         is adjusted to the actual situation.’
      
Article of that regulation provides:
‘1.      In respect of claimed bovine animals, Article shall apply from the time the aid application is submitted to errors and
         omissions in relation to entries in the computerised database. 
      
2.      In respect of unclaimed bovine animals the reductions and exclusions provided for in Article shall not apply if the farmer
         communicates amendments and adjustments of entries in the computerised database to the competent authority provided that the
         farmer has not been informed of the competent authority’s intention to carry out an on-the-spot check.’
      
Article 47(2) of Regulation No 2419/specifies: 
‘Subject to Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 2988/95, the reductions and exclusions under this Regulation shall be
         without prejudice to additional sanctions pursuant to any other provisions under Community or national law.’
      
 National legislation
The Bovine Animals Identification and Registration Regulations issued by the Livestock and Meat Board (Verordening identificatie
         en registratie runderen van het Productschap Vee en Vlees, ‘the PVV regulations’) provide as follows:
      
‘Article ‘1.      A keeper, with the exception of a transporter, shall be obliged to record the information referred to in Article 4(3) and
         Article 7(1), second indent, of Regulation No 820/in the register accurately and completely.
      
…
Article 1.      A keeper, with the exception of a transporter, shall be obliged to notify the information referred to in Article 12(1) of
         these Regulations ... to the service within a period of working days.’
      
Entitlement to a slaughter premium is provided for in the Netherlands EC Animal Premiums Order (Regeling dierlijke EG-premies,
         Staatscourant 1996, No 80, hereinafter the ‘Regeling’).
      
Article 2.3(2) of the Regeling provides:
‘On application, a premium shall be granted to producers in accordance with the provisions of this Regeling and Regulation
         No 1254/and Regulation No 2342/in respect of the slaughter or export to a non-member country of a bovine animal
         which, on the date of slaughter or export to a non-member country, is at least eight months old according to entries in the
         identification and registration register.’
      
Article 2.4b(2) of the Regeling specifies:
 ‘Applications for premiums in respect of the slaughter of bovine animals in an abattoir situated in the Netherlands shall
         be submitted through notification of the slaughter to the identification and registration register by the abattoir in question
         in accordance with the provisions of the PVV regulations’.
      
Article 4.of the Regeling provides:
‘1.      No premium shall be granted for bovine animals in respect of which the producer has not complied within days with the provisions
         incumbent on him under the PVV regulations regarding notification to the identification and registration register of the date
         of birth, the date of delivery to or removal from his holding or the date of slaughter or export to a non-member country,
         where the notification obligation in question arose on or after January 2000. 
      
2.      The premium shall be reduced by 25% for bovine animals in respect of which the producer has not complied punctually, but has
         done so within days of the event concerned, with the provisions incumbent on him under the PVV regulations regarding notification
         to the identification and registration register of the date of birth, the date of delivery to or removal from his holding
         or the date of slaughter or export to a non-member country, where the notification obligation in question arose on or after
         January 2000.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
On February 2001, Schonewille applied to the Minister for a slaughter premium pursuant to the Regeling in respect of bovine animals.
      
By decision of June 2002, the Minister stated that, of the bovine animals in respect of which Schonewille had applied for
         a slaughter premium for 2001, only were wholly or partially eligible for that premium.
      
By letter of July 2002, Schonewille lodged a complaint against that decision. On August 2002, the Minister made an amendment
         by which he considered more bovine animals to be fully eligible for that premium and another animal not to be fully eligible
         for it.
      
After various exchanges between the parties to the main proceedings, with Schonewille maintaining its complaint, the Minister
         took a fresh decision on June 2003. He held the complaint to be inadmissible in so far as it concerned the slaughter premium
         relating to the supplementary animals which were eventually considered to be eligible, and unfounded as regards the remainder
         of the animals. 
      
Furthermore, in that decision the Minister rejected in its entirety the application for a premium for one bovine animal on
         the ground that notification to the identification and registration register had not been made within the period laid down
         in Article 4.9(1) of the Regeling. He also reduced by 25%, on the basis of Article 4.9(2) of the Regeling, the premium claimed
         in respect of a group of bovine animals. 
      
On September 2003, Schonewille appealed against the decision of June to the College van Beroep voor het bedrifjsleven.
In the main proceedings, Schonewille maintains that the Minister was wrong to hold that late notification to the identification
         and registration register of the date of delivery of a bovine animal to a holding could justify a rejection or reduction of
         the slaughter premium. According to Schonewille, eligibility of bovine animals to the premium must be assessed solely on the
         basis of Article of Regulation No 1254/1999. Since that article requires only that the animal be identified and registered
         in accordance with Regulation No 1760/2000, Schonewille takes the view that the Minister may not lay down, in the context
         of the identification and registration of bovine animals, additional conditions governing that eligibility, such as the requirements
         relating to the date of notification to that register as set out in Article 4.of the Regeling. 
      
According to the referring court, the issue raised in the present case is in essence whether, having regard to the irregularities
         established in the notifications made by Schonewille to the keeper of the identification and registration register of the
         dates of delivery of bovine animals to the holding, the Minister was justified in excluding wholly or partially the claim
         to a slaughter premium made under Regulation No 1254/1999. 
      
Against that background, the College van Beroep voor het bedrijfsleven (Administrative Court for Trade and Industry) (Netherlands)
         has decided to order a stay in proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘() Is Article of Regulation (EC) No 1254/to be interpreted as meaning that any irregularity in complying with Regulation
         (EC) No 1760/in respect of an animal results in the complete exclusion of a slaughter premium for that animal?
      
(2)      If Question is to be answered in the affirmative, is Article of Regulation (EC) No 1254/then binding, in particular
         regarding the resulting consequences?
      
(3)      Are Articles and of Regulation (EC) No 2419/applicable to irregularities in complying with Regulation (EC) No 1760/2000?
         
      
(4)      If Question is to be answered in the affirmative, does the correct application of Article of Regulation (EC) No 2419/in conjunction with Article mean that the exclusion of a slaughter premium is not applicable to an omission relating to
         the notification of information to the keeper of the computerised database if the information provided, such as in this case
         the dates of delivery, is factually entirely accurate (and was also correct from the very beginning and therefore did not
         need to be amended)? If this does not apply to every omission, does it apply in the situation at issue in this dispute, where
         the omission has consisted of the late provision of information (by a few days or a few weeks), with slaughter taking place
         some considerable time later?
      
(5)      Is Article of Regulation (EC) No 3887/and/or Article of Regulation (EC) No 1760/and/or Article 47(2) of Regulation
         (EC) No 2419/to be interpreted as meaning that a Member State is authorised to exclude the Community right to a slaughter
         premium or apply reductions to it by means of a national sanction to ensure compliance with the provisions of the Regulation?
      
(6)      If Question is to be answered wholly or partially in the affirmative, do the exceptions from Community reductions and exclusions
         laid down at Community level, in particular Articles and of Regulation (EC) No 2419/2001, apply by analogy to national
         reductions and exclusions?
      
(7)      If Question is to be answered in the affirmative, does a correct application of Article of Regulation (EC) No 2419/in conjunction with Article mean that omissions relating to the notification of information to the computerised database,
         in particular the late provision of information, cannot result in the exclusion of slaughter premium if the information in
         the register, such as in this case the date of delivery, is factually entirely accurate?’
      
 The questions referred
 The first question
By this question, the national court seeks to ascertain, in essence, whether Article of Regulation No 1254/is to be
         interpreted as meaning that any failure to comply with the time-limit for notification to the computerised database of the
         movement of a bovine animal to or from a holding, set out in the second indent of Article 7(1) of Regulation No 1760/2000,
         results in the exclusion of slaughter premium for that animal. 
      
It is settled case-law that, in interpreting a provision of Community law, it is necessary to consider not only its wording,
         but also the context in which it occurs and the objectives pursued by the rules of which it is part (see, inter alia, Case
         C‑294/Granarolo [2003] ECR I-13429, paragraph 34, and Case C-306/SGAE [2006] ECR I-0000, paragraph 34).
      
Pursuant to Article of Regulation No 1254/1999, in order to be eligible for a slaughter premium, a bovine animal ‘shall
         be identified and registered in accordance with Regulation [No 1760/2000]’.
      
The wording of that article clearly shows, as recital (18) in the preamble to Regulation No 1254/indicates, that the
         grant of a slaughter premium is subject to compliance by the keepers of the animals concerned with the relevant Community
         rules on identification and registration of bovine animals.
      
In addition, it should be observed that recital (28) in the preamble to Regulation No 2419/expressly mentions that ‘the
         proper identification and registration of bovine animals is an eligibility condition [for the slaughter premium] pursuant
         to Article of Regulation … No 1254/1999’. 
      
Further, as recital (8) in the preamble to Regulation No 1760/points out, ‘animals for intra-Community trade must be
         identified in accordance with the requirements of Community rules and be registered in such a way that the original or transit
         holding, centre or organisation can be traced, and ..., before January these identification and registration systems
         are to be extended to the movements of animals within the territory of each Member State’.
      
In this connection, concerning specifically the registration of bovine animals, the second indent of Article 7(1) of Regulation
         No 1760/provides that each keeper of animals shall ‘report to the competent authority all movements to and from the holding
         and all births and deaths of animals on the holding, along with the dates of these events, within a period fixed by the Member
         State of between three and seven days of the event occurring. However, at the request of a Member State and in accordance
         with the procedure referred to in Article 23(2), the Commission may determine the circumstances in which Member States may
         extend the maximum period and provide for special rules applicable to movements of bovine animals when put out to summer grazing
         in different mountain areas’. 
      
That provision is drafted in mandatory terms which describe in detail the scope of the notification obligation imposed on
         keepers of animals and delimit precisely the period within which those keepers must perform that obligation.
      
In the same way, it should be observed that that provision, at the end, sets out exactly what the procedure is for extending
         that period. The precise specification of that procedure would serve no purpose if keepers of animals were free not to comply
         with that period.
      
It follows that that provision must be interpreted as meaning that each keeper of animals is required to comply with the prescribed
         period when he notifies the computerised database of the movement of a bovine animal to or from his holding.
      
Such an interpretation is also consistent with the express wording of Article of Commission Regulation (EC) No 911/of April implementing Regulation No 1760/as regards eartags, passports and holding registers (OJ L 163,
         p. 65), which provides that the keeper of animals must make that notification within the period of between three and seven
         days.
      
That interpretation is also borne out by the objectives pursued by Regulation No 1760/2000, which, as recitals (4) to (7)
         in the preamble thereto indicate, are to improve consumer confidence in the quality of beef and beef products, to preserve
         the protection of public health and to reinforce the lasting stability of the beef market. 
      
In order to meet those objectives, the system of identification and registration of bovine animals must be fully effective
         and reliable at all times so as, in particular, to enable the competent authorities, in the event of epizootic disease, to
         pinpoint as soon as possible the origin of an animal and immediately to take the necessary measures for the purpose of avoiding
         any risk to public health. That cannot occur where the keeper of animals fails to notify movements of his bovine animals to
         the computerised database within the period prescribed in Article 7(1), second indent, of Regulation No 1760/2000.
      
Furthermore, it must be stated that, other than the derogation mentioned in Article 7(1) itself, there is no derogation allowed
         to the obligation to notify within the period prescribed in that article laid down by Community law, even by Regulation No
         1254/1999, which makes the grant of the slaughter premium subject to compliance with the relevant Community rules on the identification
         and registration of bovine animals, rules of which the provisions of Article 7(1), second indent, form an integral part.
      
In the light of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the first question is that Article of Regulation No 1254/must be interpreted as meaning that the failure to comply with the period for notification to the computerised database of
         the movement of a bovine animal to or from a holding, laid down in the second indent of Article 7(1) of Regulation No 1760/2000,
         renders that bovine animal ineligible for a slaughter premium and, consequently, results in the exclusion of that premium
         for that animal.
      
 The second question
By its second question, the referring court seeks to ascertain, in essence, whether the effects of Article of Regulation
         No 1254/1999, as described in the answer to the first question, are not so disproportionate as to render that provision invalid.
      
In that regard, it should be remembered that the principle of proportionality, which is one of the general principles of Community
         law, requires that measures adopted by Community institutions do not exceed the limits of what is appropriate and necessary
         in order to attain the objectives legitimately pursued by the legislation in question; when there is a choice between several
         appropriate measures, recourse must be had to the least onerous, and the disadvantages caused must not be disproportionate
         to the aims pursued (see, for example, Joined Cases C‑133/93, C‑300/and C-362/Crispoltoni and Others [1994] ECR I‑4863, paragraph 41, and Case C-157/National Farmers’ Union and Others [1998] ECR I-2211, paragraph 60).
      
With regard to judicial review of compliance with the abovementioned conditions, in matters concerning the common agricultural
         policy the Community legislature has a discretionary power which corresponds to the political responsibilities given to it
         by Articles EC to EC. Consequently, the legality of a measure adopted in that sphere can be affected only if the measure
         is manifestly inappropriate having regard to the objective which the competent institution is seeking to pursue (see Crispoltoni and Others, paragraph 42, and National Farmers’ Union, paragraph 61).
      
It should also be stated that, when the Community legislature fixes conditions for eligibility in respect of the award of
         aid, the exclusion entailed by the failure to observe one of those conditions is not a penalty, but merely the consequence
         of failure to fulfil those conditions laid down by the law (see, to that effect, Case C‑171/Toeters and Verberk [2004] ECR I-10945, paragraph 47).
      
Article of Regulation No 1254/makes the award of a slaughter premium subject to compliance with the relevant Community
         rules on identification and registration of bovine animals included in the provisions of Regulation No 1760/2000. One of those
         rules, Article 7(1), second indent, requires compliance with the period for notification to the computerised database of the
         movement of a bovine animal to or from a holding. Consequently, a failure to comply with that period results in the exclusion
         of a slaughter premium for the bovine animal concerned, that exclusion being merely the consequence of failure to fulfil one
         of the conditions for eligibility in respect of the grant of that premium. 
      
As is apparent from paragraphs and of this judgment, the obligation to comply with the period for notification laid
         down in Article 7(1), second indent, of Regulation No 1760/is of particular importance in the context of the Community
         rules that apply to the identification and registration of bovine animals.
      
That obligation, which allows the competent authorities to pinpoint rapidly the origin of an animal in the event of epizootic
         disease and to take the necessary measures for the purpose of avoiding any risk to public health, is part of the objectives
         of the system for the identification and registration of bovine animals set out in those paragraphs, and, inter alia, of the
         system seeking to ensure efficient tracing in real time of those animals, which is essential for public health reasons. Accordingly,
         that obligation cannot be regarded as a manifestly inappropriate means of achieving those objectives. 
      
Furthermore, the exclusion of the slaughter premium in the event of failure to comply with the period for notification to
         the computerised database relates only to bovine animals in respect of which the registration obligation prescribed in Article
         7(1), second indent, of Regulation No 1760/has not been complied with.
      
The answer to the second question is therefore that consideration of it has revealed nothing capable of casting doubt on the
         validity of Article of Regulation No 1254/in the light of the principle of proportionality, in so far as that article
         renders a bovine animal in respect of which there has been a failure to comply with the notification period set out in Article
         7(1), second indent, of Regulation No 1760/ineligible for the slaughter premium and consequently results in the exclusion
         of that premium for that animal.
      
 The third and fourth questions
By its third and fourth questions, which should be examined together, the referring court seeks to ascertain, in essence,
         whether Articles and of Regulation No 2419/apply to an exclusion of slaughter premium for a bovine animal in respect
         of which the information regarding its movement to or from the holding was not notified to the computerised database within
         the period laid down in Article 7(1), second indent, of Regulation No 1760/2000, in the case where that information, sent
         to that database after the expiry of the prescribed period, is correct.
      
First of all, it should be noted that, as the Advocate General observed in point of his Opinion, Regulation No 2419/is not, in principle, applicable to the facts of the main action, since these are covered ratione temporis by Regulation No
         3887/92.
      
However, the Court held, in paragraph of its judgment in Case C‑295/Gerken [2004] ECR I-6369, that Article 2(2) of Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 2988/of December on the protection
         of the European Communities’ financial interests is to be interpreted as meaning that where, in an application for ‘livestock’
         aid covered ratione temporis by Regulation No 3887/92, there is an irregularity giving rise to a penalty under Article 10(2)(a)
         of that regulation (now Article 10b(2), first and second subparagraphs, following the amendments made by Commission Regulation
         (EC) No 2801/of December (OJ L 340, p. 29)), the competent authorities must apply the provisions of Article
         44(1) of Regulation No 2419/retroactively on the ground that those provisions are less severe as regards the conduct
         in question (see also Case C-45/Campina [2007] ECR I-0000, paragraphs and 33). 
      
It follows that the exceptions set out in Articles and of Regulation No 2419/apply retroactively to the penalties
         imposed with regard to the aid applications falling within the scope ratione temporis of Regulation No 3887/92, in so far
         as the application of those articles leads to penalties which are less severe than those applicable under the latter regulation,
         which does not provide for any such exceptions.
      
As regards the scope ratione materiae of Articles and of Regulation No 2419/2001, Article 44(1) restricts the application
         of the exceptions laid down in those articles to the reductions and exclusions set out in the provisions of Title IV of that
         regulation. It follows that, in the light of the findings arrived at in Gerken, those exceptions, under Regulation No 3887/92, can only cover penalties such as those referred to in that Article 10b. That
         article, which sets out penalties consisting in reductions in and exclusions of the total amount of the aid which the farmer
         may claim, is, as the Advocate General stated in point of his Opinion, designed to impose a financial penalty on the farmer
         based on the difference between the number of animals declared in the aid application and the number of eligible animals found.
      
As is apparent from paragraph of this judgment, the exclusion of the slaughter premium for a bovine animal in respect of
         which the information regarding its movement to or from the holding was not notified to the computerised database within the
         period laid down in Article 7(1), second indent, of Regulation No 1760/2000, is not a penalty but the consequence of failure
         to fulfil those conditions for eligibility in respect of the award of that premium.
      
Consequently, the exceptions laid down in Article and Article of Regulation No 2419/do not apply to such an exclusion
         so as to render eligible for a slaughter premium a bovine animal in respect of which the conditions for eligibility for award
         of that premium have not been fulfilled. 
      
Having regard to the foregoing considerations, the answer to the third and fourth questions is that Article and Article
         of Regulation No 2419/do not apply to the exclusion of a slaughter premium for a bovine animal in respect of which
         the information regarding its movement to or from a holding was not notified to the computerised database within the period
         laid down in Article 7(1), second indent, of Regulation No 1760/2000, so as to render that bovine animal eligible for a slaughter
         premium, even in the case where that information sent to the database in question after the expiry of the prescribed period
         was correct. 
      
 The fifth question
By its fifth question, the referring court seeks to ascertain, in essence, whether Article of Regulation No 3887/and/or
         Article of Regulation No 1760/and/or Article 47(2) of Regulation No 2419/are to be interpreted as meaning that
         a Member State can reduce or exclude the right to a slaughter premium by means of a national penalty in order to ensure compliance
         with Community legislation.
      
It must first of all be stated that, as paragraphs and of this judgment indicate, since Regulation No 2419/is not,
         in principle, applicable to the facts of the main action and the findings in Gerken do not allow for retroactive application of the penalties set out in that regulation unless they are less severe as regards
         the conduct in question, Article 47(2) of that regulation, which allows both national and Community penalties to be applied
         concurrently, cannot be applied retroactively and consequently cannot apply in the case in the main proceedings.
      
Next, it must be pointed out that the aims of Regulation No 3887/are, as set out in the seventh and ninth recitals in its
         preamble, to monitor effectively compliance with the provisions on Community aid and to adopt provisions which prevent and
         penalise irregularities and fraud effectively (see Case C-63/SchillingandNehring [2002] ECR I-4483, paragraph 25, and Gerken, paragraph 41).
      
In this respect, as regards the applications for slaughter premiums, that regulation specifically provides for penalties consisting
         in reductions and exclusions from the total amount of Community aid to be applied in the event of any irregularity. It thus
         establishes a system of common rules designed to safeguard the financial interests of the European Community. 
      
Member States therefore cannot lay down national penalties consisting in reductions and exclusions from the total amount of
         Community aid which can be claimed by a farmer who has applied for a slaughter premium, since penalties of that type are already
         set out in detail in Regulation No 3887/92.
      
Such an interpretation is consistent with the express wording of Article of Regulation No 2419/and Article of Commission
         Regulation (EC) No 796/of April laying down detailed rules for the implementation of cross-compliance, modulation
         and the integrated administration and control system provided for in Council Regulation (EC) No 1782/establishing common
         rules for direct support schemes under the common agricultural policy and establishing certain support schemes for farmers
         (OJ L 141, p. 18), which replaced Regulations No 3887/and No 2419/2001, under which the Member States can impose appropriate
         national penalties on producers or other operators involved in the procedure for granting aid only where the reductions or
         exclusions in question are not provided for in those regulations.
      
Lastly, it should be mentioned that that interpretation is not at variance with Article of Regulation No 3887/and/or
         Article of Regulation No 1760/2000, in so far as it does not preclude Member States from adopting national penalties of
         a different type to the reductions or exclusions referred to in Regulation No 3887/92.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the fifth question is that Article of Regulation No 3887/and/or Article
         of Regulation No 1760/must be interpreted as meaning that a Member State cannot lay down national penalties consisting
         in reductions and exclusions from the total amount of Community aid which can be claimed by a farmer who has applied for a
         slaughter premium, since penalties of that type are already set out in detail in Regulation No 3887/92.
      
 The sixth and seventh questions
Having regard to the answer to the fifth question, there is no need to answer the sixth and seventh questions.
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 1254/of May on the common organisation of the market in beef and veal
            must be interpreted as meaning that the failure to comply with the period for notification to the computerised database of
            the movement of a bovine animal to or from a holding, laid down in the second indent of Article 7(1) of Regulation (EC) No
            1760/of the European Parliament and of the Council of July establishing a system for the identification and registration
            of bovine animals and regarding the labelling of beef and beef products and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 820/97, renders
            that bovine animal ineligible for a slaughter premium and, consequently, results in the exclusion of that premium for that
            animal.
2.      Consideration of the second question referred has revealed nothing capable of casting doubt on the validity of Article of Regulation No 1254/in the light of the principle of proportionality, in so far as that article renders a bovine animal
            in respect of which there has been a failure to comply with the notification period set out in Article 7(1), second indent,
            of Regulation No 1760/ineligible for a slaughter premium and consequently results in the exclusion of that premium for
            that animal. 
3.      Articles and of Commission Regulation (EC) No 2419/of December laying down detailed rules for applying
            the integrated administration and control system for certain Community aid schemes established by Council Regulation (EEC)
            No 3508/do not apply to the exclusion of a slaughter premium for a bovine animal in respect of which the information regarding
            its movement to or from a holding was not notified to the computerised database within the period laid down in Article 7(1),
            second indent, of Regulation No 1760/2000, so as to render that bovine animal eligible for a slaughter premium, even in the
            case where that information sent to the database in question after the expiry of the prescribed period was correct. 
4.      Article of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 3887/of December laying down detailed rules for applying the integrated
            administration and control system for certain Community aid schemes and/or Article of Regulation No 1760/must be interpreted
            as meaning that a Member State cannot lay down national penalties consisting in reductions and exclusions from the total amount
            of Community aid which can be claimed by a farmer who has applied for a slaughter premium, since penalties of that type are
            already set out in detail in Regulation No 3887/92.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 