
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-429/Commission of the European CommunitiesvFrench Republic
«(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Failure to transpose Directive 90/219/EEC – Genetically modified organisms – Contained use)»
Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), November Summary of the Judgment
1..
Acts of the institutions – Directives – Implementation by the Member States – Need for precise transposition – Directive 90/– Obligation of Member States to assess specifically whether there is a need to establish an emergency plan for the contained
                     use of genetically modified micro-organisms  
                  (Art. 249, third para., EC; Council Directive 90/219, Art. 14(a)) 
2..
Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Infringement terminated before the expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion – Inadmissibility  (Art. EC) 
3..
Acts of the institutions – Directives – Implementation by the Member States – Need for full transposition – Provision concerning only the relations between the Member States and the Commission –   Provision not necessarily entailing specific transposing measures – Possibility for the Commission to demonstrate the need to adopt specific transposing measures  
4..
Acts of the institutions – Directives – Implementation by the Member States – Need for clear and precise transposition  (Art. 249, third para., EC) 
1.
 Member States must, in order to secure the full implementation of directives in law and not only in fact, establish a specific
         legal framework in the area in question. In that regard Directive 90/on the contained use of genetically modified micro-organisms which provides that, before an
         operation covered by it commences, the competent authorities are to ensure that, where necessary, an emergency plan is drawn
         up, requires that national legislation imposes on those authorities the obligation to assess specifically, on a case-by-case
         basis and in the light of the risks posed, whether it is necessary to draw up an emergency plan, where, with regard to certain
         types of facility, there is no requirement that such a plan be drawn up as a matter of course. see paras 40-2.
 The existence of a failure to fulfil obligations must be examined in the light of the position in which the Member State found
         itself at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion. Directive 98/amending Directive 90/on the contained use of genetically modified micro-organisms was to be transposed
         by June at the latest and, therefore, before expiry of the time-limit laid down in the reasoned opinion sent to the
         French Republic by the Commission. From that date at least that Member State was no longer under an obligation to transpose
         the first sentence of the first subparagraph of Article 14(b) of the Directive. Accordingly, the action must be dismissed as inadmissible in so far as it relates to that provision of the directive. see paras 56-3.
 A provision of a directive which concerns only relations between Member States and the Commission need not, in principle,
         be transposed. Nevertheless, given that the Member States are under an obligation to ensure full compliance with Community
         law, the Commission may show that compliance with the provision of a directive governing such relations requires the adoption
         of specific measures transposing that provision into the national legal order. Where a Member State has elected not to lay down expressly the legal framework within which the national authorities are to
         maintain such relations, it is responsible for any infringement of the relevant obligations under Community law. see paras 68-4.
 For the transposition of a directive into the legal order of a Member State, it is essential that the national legislation
         in question effectively ensures that the directive is fully applied, that the legal position under national law is sufficiently
         precise and clear and that individuals are made fully aware of their rights and obligations. see para. JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)November (1)
((Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Failure to transpose Directive 90/219/EEC – Genetically modified organisms – Contained use))
In Case C-429/01, 
 Commission of the European Communities,  represented by G. zur Hausen, acting as Agent, assisted by M. van der Woude and V. Landes, avocats, with an address for service
            in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, 
v
 French Republic,  represented initially by G. de Bergues and D. Colas, and, subsequently, G. de Bergues and C. Isidoro, acting as Agents, with
            an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
defendant, 
 APPLICATION for a declaration that, by failing to transpose correctly and in full Articles 14(a) and (b), 15(1) and (2), 16(1)
            and 19(2) to (4) of Council Directive 90/219/EEC of April on the contained use of genetically modified micro-organisms
            (OJ L 117, p. 1), as amended by Commission Directive 94/51/EC of November adapting to technical progress Directive
            90/(OJ L 297, p. 29), and by failing to transpose the provisions of that directive in respect of certain contained
            use by the Ministry of Defence, the French Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive and Article
            EC,
            
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
 composed of: V. Skouris, acting for the President of the Sixth Chamber, C. Gulmann, J.-P. Puissochet, F. Macken and N. Colneric (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By application lodged at the Registry of the Court on November 2001, the Commission of the European Communities brought
         an action under Article EC for a declaration that, by failing to transpose correctly and in full Articles 14(a) and (b),
         15(1) and (2), 16(1) and 19(2) to (4) of Council Directive 90/219/EEC of April on the contained use of genetically
         modified micro-organisms (OJ L 117, p. 1), as amended by Commission Directive 94/51/EC of November adapting to
         technical progress Directive 90/(OJ L 297, p. 29), (
         the Directive) and by failing to transpose the provisions of that directive in respect of certain contained use by the Ministry of Defence,
         the French Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive and Article EC. 
         
Legal background
 Community legislation
         
            
 The Directive lays down rules on the contained use of genetically modified micro-organisms (
         GMMs). 
         
            
 Contained use is defined in Article 2(c) of the Directive as  
         any operation in which micro-organisms are genetically modified or in which such [GMMs] are cultured, stored, used, transported,
         destroyed or disposed of and for which physical barriers, or a combination of physical barriers together with chemical and/or
         biological barriers, are used to limit their contact with the general population and the environment. 
         
            
 Its purpose being to protect human health and the environment, the Directive, inter alia, classifies GMMs and lays down the
         principles of occupational safety and hygiene and of containment applicable to them. 
         
            
 Article of the Directive thus classifies GMMs in two groups according to the risks which they present. The first group (
         Group I) covers those GMMs which satisfy the criteria of Annex II to the Directive. Other GMMs are classed under the second group
         (
         Group II). 
         
            
 Moreover, in Article 2(d) and (e) of the Directive, a distinction is drawn according to the purpose for which the GMMs are
         used. Thus,  
         Type A operations are those operations which are used for teaching, research, development, or non-industrial or non-commercial purposes
         and which are of a small scale. Other operations are called  
         Type B. 
         
            
 The Directive lays down specific notification procedures for each group of GMMs (Group I or II) and type of operation (Type
         A or B). It further distinguishes between two bodies of rules: the rules on authorisation, applicable to high-risk operations
         which may not be carried out until they have been authorised by the national competent authority, and the rules on declaration,
         which apply to operations presenting less serious risks. The Directive specifies,  
          inter alia , the required content of the notification file, the procedure which must be followed in the cases of authorisation or declaration
         and the duties to provide information which are incumbent on the Commission and the other Member States. 
         
            
 Article of the Directive provides: The competent authorities shall ensure that, where necessary, before an operation commences:
         
(a)
 an emergency plan is drawn up for the protection of human health and the environment outside the installation in the event
         of an accident and the emergency services are aware of the hazards and informed thereof in writing; 
         
(b)
 information on safety measures and on the correct behaviour to adopt in the case of an accident is supplied in an appropriate
         manner, and without their having to request it, to persons liable to be affected by the accident. The information shall be
         repeated and updated at appropriate intervals. It shall also be made publicly available. The Member States concerned shall at the same time make available to other Member States concerned, as a basis for all necessary
         consultation within the framework of their bilateral relations, the same information as that which is disseminated to their
         nationals.
         
            
 The Directive was amended by Council Directive 98/81/EC of October (OJ L 330, p. 13). Under the amended version
         of Article of the Directive: The competent authorities shall ensure that before a contained use commences:
         
(a)
 an emergency plan is drawn up for contained uses where failure of the containment measures could lead to serious danger, whether
         immediate or delayed, to humans outside the premises and/or to the environment, except where such an emergency plan has been
         drawn up under other Community legislation; 
         
(b)
 information on such emergency plans, including the relevant safety measures to be applied, is supplied in an appropriate manner,
         and without their having to request it, to bodies and authorities liable to be affected by the accident. The information shall
         be updated at appropriate intervals. It shall also be made publicly available. 
          The Member States concerned shall at the same time make available to other Member States concerned, as a basis for all necessary
         consultation within the framework of their bilateral relations, the same information as that which is disseminated to their
         nationals.
         
            
 According to Article of the Directive: 
         
1.
 Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that, in the event of an accident, the user shall be required immediately
         to inform the competent authority specified in Article and provide the following information: 
         
─
 the circumstances of the accident, 
         
─
 the identity and quantities of the genetically modified micro-organisms released, 
         
─
 any information necessary to assess the effects of the accident on the health of the general population and the environment,
         
         
─
 the emergency measures taken. 
         
2.
 Where information is given under paragraph 1, the Member States shall be required to: 
         
─
 ensure that any emergency, medium and long-term measures necessary are taken, and immediately alert any Member State which
         could be affected by the accident; 
         
─
 collect, where possible, the information necessary for a full analysis of the accident and, where appropriate, make recommendations
         to avoid similar accidents in the future and to limit the effects thereof.
         
            
 Article 16(1) of the Directive provides: 
         
1.
 Member States shall be required to: 
         
(a)
 consult with other Member States liable to be affected in the event of an accident in the drawing up and implementation of
         emergency plans; 
         
(b)
 inform the Commission as soon as possible of any accident within the scope of this Directive, giving details of the circumstances
         of the accident, the identity and quantities of the genetically modified micro-organisms released, the emergency response
         measures employed and their effectiveness, and an analysis of the accident including recommendations to limit its effects
         and avoid similar accidents in the future.
         
            
 Under Article of the Directive: 
         
1.
 The Commission and the competent authorities shall not divulge to third parties any confidential information notified or otherwise
         provided under this Directive and shall protect intellectual property rights relating to the data received. 
         
2.
 The notifier may indicate the information in the notifications submitted under this Directive, the disclosure of which might
         harm his competitive position, that should be treated as confidential. Verifiable justification must be given in such cases.
         
         
3.
 The competent authority shall decide, after consultation with the notifier, which information will be kept confidential and
         shall inform the notifier of its decision. 
         
4.
 In no case may the following information, when submitted according to Articles 8, or 10, be kept confidential: 
         
─
 description of the genetically modified micro-organisms, name and address of the notifier, purpose of the contained use, and
         location of use; 
         
─
 methods and plans for monitoring of the genetically modified micro-organisms and for emergency response; 
         
─
 the evaluation of foreseeable effects, in particular any pathogenic and/or ecologically disruptive effects. 
         
5.
 If, for whatever reasons, the notifier withdraws the notification, the competent authority must respect the confidentiality
         of the information supplied.
         
            
 Article of the Directive provides that the Member States are to bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions necessary to comply with that directive not later than October 1991. The amendments resulting from Directive
         94/concern only Annex II to Directive 90/and must have taken effect in national law by April 1995. Directive 98/entered into force on December 1998. The period granted to the Member States for compliance with that directive expired,
         in accordance with the first subparagraph of Article 2(1), months after the date of its entry into force, namely on June
         2000. 
          National legislation
         
            
 Article L. 511-of the Code de l'environnement (Environment Code) (JORF of September 2000, Annex p. 38203) states: The provisions of this Title shall apply to factories, workshops, storage facilities, construction sites and, generally, facilities
         used or owned by any natural or legal person, whether governed by public or private law, which may constitute a risk to or
         have an adverse effect on local amenity, public health, safety and hygiene, agriculture, the protection of nature and the
         environment or the conservation of sites and monuments ....
         
            
 The first paragraph of Article L. 512-of the Environment Code states: Facilities which constitute a serious risk to or have a seriously adverse effect on the interests referred to in Article L.
         511-shall be subject to authorisation by the Prefect.
         
            
 Under Article L. 512-of that code: Facilities which do not constitute a serious risk to or have a seriously adverse effect on the interests referred to in Article
         L. 511-but which nevertheless must comply with the general requirements laid down by the Prefect in order to ensure that
         the interests referred to in Article L. 511-are protected in the  
          département  shall be subject to declaration.
         
            
 Article L. 512-of the Environment Code provides: Where the interests referred to in Article L. 511-are not guaranteed by implementation of the general provisions on the
         prevention of adverse effects inherent in the use of a facility subject to declaration, the Prefect may, where appropriate
         upon application by interested third parties and following delivery of an opinion by the competent consultative committee
         for the  
          département , impose any necessary specific requirements by way of decree.In order to protect the interests referred to in Article L. 511-1, the Prefect may order that the assessments be carried out
         and remedies applied which are necessary as a result either of an accident or incident in the facility or of a failure to
         comply with the conditions imposed under this Chapter. Those measures shall be laid down in a decree adopted, save in the
         case of an emergency, after an opinion has been delivered by the competent consultative committee for the  
          département .
         
            
 Under Article of Décret  n
          o  77-1133, du septembre 1977, pris pour l'application de la loi n
          o  76-relative aux facilities classées pour la protection de l'environnement of July (JORF of October 1977, p.
         4897, Decree No 77-of September adopted to apply the Law on facilities classified for the purpose of environmental
         protection), as amended by Decree No 2000-of March (JORF of March 2000, p. 4417), (
         Decree No 77-1133): The conditions of development and use must satisfy the requirements imposed in the authorisation order and, where appropriate,
         any ancillary orders....Following consultation of the fire and emergency services responsible for the  
          département , provision may be made in the order for an obligation to draw up an internal plan of action to be taken in the case of an
         accident. The internal plan of action shall lay down the organisational measures, the methods of intervention and the necessary
         means which the operator must implement in order to protect his staff, the public and the environment....The order shall also lay down the emergency measures to be taken by the operator under the supervision of the police authority
         and the obligations of the operator with respect to informing and alerting the persons liable to be affected by an accident
         as to the risks involved, the safety measures to be taken and the course of conduct to be followed.
         
            
 Article of Decree No 77-specifies the required content of the application for authorisation. Point of the second
         paragraph of that article states: ... Where appropriate, the applicant may submit, in a single copy and under separate cover, information the dissemination
         of which, in his view, may entail the disclosure of production secrets....
         
            
 Article of that decree provides for a public inquiry procedure. The last paragraph of that article states: At the request of the applicant, or on his own initiative, the Prefect may remove from the file submitted for the purposes
         of the inquiry and of the consultation provided for below any information which may entail, in particular, the disclosure
         of production secrets or facilitate measures which might adversely affect public health, safety and hygiene.
         
            
 Article of Decree No 77-provides: The Prefect shall acknowledge the declaration and provide the person making the declaration with a copy of the general requirements
         applying to the facility.The mayor of the local authority area in which the facility is to be used (in Paris, the Chief of Police) shall receive a
         copy of the declaration and the document containing the general requirements. A copy of the notification shall be posted for
         at least one month in the town hall (in Paris, the police headquarters) and shall state that third parties may have access
         to the document containing the general requirements there. The mayor (in Paris, the Chief of Police) shall arrange for minutes
         to be drawn up to record the fulfilment of this formality.At the operator's request, certain provisions may be excluded from such publication where it might lead to the disclosure
         of production secrets.
         
            
 Décret n
          o  93-774, du mars 1993, fixant la liste des techniques de modification génétique et les critères de classement des organismes
         génétiquement modifiés (Decree No 93-of March laying down the list of genetic modification techniques and the
         criteria for classifying genetically modified organisms) (JORF of March 1993, p. 5714) reproduces the classification in
         two groups (Groups I and II) established by the Directive. In addition, Article of that decree breaks GMMs down into four
         classes (Classes to 4) on the basis of the classification criteria in Annex II to Directive 90/219. The French Genetic Engineering
         Commission has classified the use of GMOs and GMMs in research, development and teaching laboratories according to the required
         level of containment. It has thus defined four containment levels, Lto L4, entailing an increasing level of safety restrictions.
         
         
            
 The second paragraph of Article of Décret n
          o  93-773, du mars 1993, pris pour l'application, s'agissant des utilisations civiles, de l'article de la loi n
          o  92-654, du juillet 1992, relative au contrôle de l'utilisation et de la dissemination des organismes génétiquement modifiés
         et modifiant la loi n
          o  76-(Decree No 93-of March applying Article of Law No 92-of July on supervision of the use and
         dissemination of genetically modified organisms to civilian uses and amending Law No 76-663) (JORF of March 1993, p. 5712)
         provides, in the last sentence, that the applicant is to indicate in the application for approval the information which, in
         his view, must remain confidential. 
         
            
 Part I of Article of that decree provides: Where the application relates to first use in a laboratory of genetically modified organisms falling within Classes and
         of Group II ... the approval shall refer to that fact and state that the applicant is to make an information file available
         to the public....That file shall contain, to the exclusion of any information covered by industrial or trade secrets, protected by law or disclosure
         of which could prejudice the interests of the laboratory operator or any other persons making using of the genetically modified
         organisms:
         
─
... 
         
─
 any information relevant to the classification of the genetically modified organisms which may be used in the facility and
            to the confinement measures, the action to be taken in the case of an accident and the technical specifications to which approval
            is made subject; 
         
─
 where appropriate, the summary of the opinion given on the application for approval by the Genetic Engineering Commission;
            
         
....
         The pre-litigation procedure
            
 The French Government notified the Commission of the measures transposing the Directive in various letters sent between March
         and June 1998. 
         
            
 On March 1998, the Commission addressed to the French Republic a letter giving that Member State notice to submit its observations
         on the complaint that the Directive had not been transposed correctly and in full. 
         
            
 Taking the view that the replies given by the French authorities were unsatisfactory, the Commission delivered to the French
         Republic a reasoned opinion by letter of May 2000. In that opinion, the Commission called upon that Member State to take
         the measures necessary to comply with the reasoned opinion within two months of its notification. 
         
            
 The French Government subsequently addressed to the Commission, on and July 2000, two notes concerning the transposition
         of the Directive. 
         The procedure before the Court
            
 Having withdrawn, in its reply, the complaint alleging incomplete transposition of Article 15(1) of the Directive, the Commission
         now claims that the Court should: 
         
─
 declare that, by failing to transpose correctly and in full Articles 14(a) and (b), 15(2), 16(1) and 19(2) to (4) of the Directive
            and by failing to transpose the provisions of that directive in respect of certain contained use by the Ministry of Defence,
            the French Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive and Article EC, 
         
─
 order the French Republic to pay the costs. 
         
            
 The French Republic contends that the Court should: 
         
─
 dismiss the application, with the exception of the complaint alleging failure to transpose the Directive in respect of certain
            facilities falling under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Defence, and 
         
─
 order the Commission to pay the costs. 
         
The action The complaint relating to Article 14(a) of the Directive
          Arguments of the parties
         
            
 According to the Commission, Article of the Directive is broad in scope since it applies to any use of GMMs. However, that
         article has not been transposed with respect to: 
         
─
 uses of GMMs in Groups I or II for the purposes of teaching, research or development; 
         
─
 uses for industrial or commercial purposes by facilities other than those subject to authorisation, that is to say, those
            which must be declared. 
         
            
 The Directive requires that an emergency plan be drawn up and that the emergency services be informed  
         where necessary, which suggests an assessment on a case-by-case basis. The Directive cannot be transposed correctly where the obligation
         to adopt those measures is simply excluded in respect of certain uses or types of facility. 
         
            
 The French Government submits, first of all, that it is unclear from the wording of Article 14(a) of the Directive whether
         there is an obligation to draw up emergency plans as a matter of course. Article 14(a) merely provides that the competent
         authorities of a Member State are to require that an emergency plan be drawn up  
         where necessary. That phrase suggests that emergency plans are not drawn up automatically. To accept an interpretation precluding a distinction
         from being drawn according to the risk posed by the facility would simply mean that the definition of the scope of the obligation
         provided by the phrase  
         where necessary would be removed. The wording of Article of the Directive as amended by Directive 98/confirms that the competent authorities
         are under an obligation solely to determine whether an emergency plan is necessary and, if so, to ensure that such a plan
         is drawn up. 
         
            
 As regards uses for industrial or commercial purposes by facilities which have been classified for the purposes of environmental
         protection and are subject to authorisation, the French Government relies on Article of Decree No 77-1133, which provides
         that the authorisation order may impose an obligation to draw up an internal plan of action (IPA) to be taken in the case
         of an accident. 
         
            
 With respect to facilities classed as subject to declaration, the French Government submits that prefects must lay down general
         requirements for all the categories of such facility in their  
          département . The obligation to draw up an emergency plan is one of the measures which may be imposed in that connection. The French Government
         adds that, where the general requirements applicable to a category of facility do not provide for an obligation to draw up
         such a plan even though it is necessary in respect of a particular facility falling within that category, the Prefect may,
         under Article L. 512-of the Environment Code, adopt the necessary measures in the form of specific requirements. 
         
            
 According to the French Government, it makes no difference that the fact that an obligation to draw up an emergency plan may
         be imposed is explicitly stated with regard to facilities subject to authorisation whereas it is in the competent authority's
         discretion to lay down general or specific requirements for facilities subject to declaration. Since the risks posed by the
         latter facilities are less serious, the possibility of imposing an obligation to draw up an emergency plan need not be provided
         for expressly. 
         
            
 The competent administrative authority is therefore in a position to impose on the operator of any facility subject to the
         scheme of classified facilities an obligation to draw up an emergency plan. The French Government concludes that, where it
         is necessary that such a plan be drawn up for a particular facility, the administrative authority will be obliged to impose
         such a requirement. 
         
            
 The French Government adds that teaching and research facilities are subject to a similar obligation. Such facilities may
         operate only by virtue of approval granted on a case-by-case basis. That approval entails an obligation to comply with various
         requirements, for example those contained in the guide issued by the Genetic Engineering Commission but also those laid down
         in the joint orders of the Minister for the Environment and the Minister for Research. 
         
            
 Although that guide is not, in itself, legally binding, approvals impose on operators of teaching or research facilities an
         obligation to comply with the requirements laid down in it. Accordingly, an obligation to draw up an emergency plan is imposed
         on all research and teaching facilities which must comply with containment level Lor L4. As regards those research or teaching
         facilities which must comply with containment level Lor L2, the French Government maintains that, since those levels reflect
         the lesser seriousness of the risk posed, the obligation to draw up an emergency plan cannot be automatic. Such an obligation
         may be imposed, if it appears necessary, on those facilities by way of specific requirements included in the approval decision.
         
          Findings of the Court
         
            
 As the Court has consistently held (see, in particular, Case C-360/Commission  v  
          Italy  [1991] ECR I-791, paragraph 13), Member States must, in order to secure the full implementation of directives in law and
         not only in fact, establish a specific legal framework in the area in question. 
         
            
 It is clear from the wording of Article 14(a) of the Directive that, before an operation covered by it commences, the competent
         authorities are to ensure that, where necessary, an emergency plan is drawn up. The Community legislature did not exclude
         generally certain types of facility from the obligation to draw up such a plan. It follows that the competent authorities
         must assess, on a case-by-case basis and in the light of the risks posed, whether it is necessary for an emergency plan to
         be drawn up. Effective transposition of Article 14(a) requires that the national rules impose on those authorities a specific
         obligation to carry out such an assessment where, with regard to certain types of facility, there is no requirement that an
         emergency plan be drawn up as a matter of course. 
         
            
 The French legislation does not satisfy that requirement. 
         
            
 It is true that, with respect to facilities classed as subject to declaration, the Prefect may impose an obligation to draw
         up an emergency plan by either general or specific requirements. However, there is no provision clearly imposing on him an
         obligation to assess, on a case-by-case basis and in the light of the risks posed, the need to draw up an emergency plan.
         
         
            
 The same reasoning applies in relation to teaching or research facilities which must comply with containment level Lor L2.
         The mere possibility of imposing on those facilities, by way of specific requirements, an obligation to draw up an emergency
         plan cannot be regarded as an effective transposition of Article 14(a) of the Directive. 
         
            
 The French Government submits that approvals impose an obligation to comply with the requirements contained in the guide issued
         by the Genetic Engineering Commission and that those requirements call for the drawing up of an emergency plan in respect
         of teaching or research facilities which must comply with containment level Lor L4. However, even if that is the case in
         fact, the French Government has failed to show that the competent authorities are legally bound to provide for such an obligation
         in the approvals in question. In addition, only research laboratories are covered and not all teaching and research facilities
         which must comply with those containment levels. 
         
            
 Consequently, the action must be regarded as being well founded in so far as it relates to Article 14(a) of the Directive.
         
          The complaint relating to the first subparagraph of Article 14(b) of the Directive
          Arguments of the parties
         
            
 The Commission points out that, as far as it as aware, the only provision transposing Article 14(b) into French law is Article
         of Decree No 77-1133, which relates to the use of GMMs for industrial or commercial purposes. Article provides that
         the authorisation order may lay down the emergency measures to be taken by the operator and the operator's obligations with
         regard to informing and alerting the persons liable to be affected by an accident as to the risks involved, the safety measures
         to be taken and the course of conduct to be followed. However, that provision concerns only facilities subject to authorisation
         and not all facilities. It also appears that Article 14(b) of the Directive has not been transposed with respect to use for
         teaching, research or development purposes. 
         
            
 As regards informing the public, the Commission submits that, even assuming that safety measures are provided for in the general
         and specific requirements to which those facilities may be subject, the fact that the public may have access to those requirements
         ─ which, as far as the public is aware, may or may not contain safety measures ─ is insufficient to fulfil the obligation
         to make those requirements available to the public directly and automatically. 
         
            
 The French Government observes that, as worded, the obligation laid down in Article 14(b) of the Directive is distinct from
         that which is the subject of the complaint relating to Article 14(a). The passage in the latter provision concerns the obligation
         to draw up an emergency plan while the passage in Article 14(b) concerns the obligation to inform the public of  
         safety measures and of the  
         correct behaviour to adopt in the case of an accident. 
         
            
 It is, however, difficult to distinguish an emergency plan from safety measures and rules on the conduct to be adopted in
         the case of an accident. The two obligations therefore appear to be closely linked. That interpretation is confirmed by the
         amendment made to Article of the Directive by Directive 98/81. The effect of that amendment was, first, to move the phrase
         concerning the obligation to supply the emergency plans to the emergency services to the passage in point (b) of that article
         and, second, to limit the scope of the duty to inform so that it no longer applies in respect of any person liable to be affected
         but solely in respect of bodies and authorities liable to be affected. The provision in question therefore lays down an obligation
         to supply the emergency plans to the emergency services, to inform the bodies and authorities liable to be affected of the
         main provisions of those plans, to update them and to make them available to the public. 
         
            
 Given that it takes the view that an emergency plan need only be drawn up where it is necessary, the French Government did
         not provide for an obligation to communicate as a matter of course the measures provided for in such a plan to the authorities
         and bodies responsible for implementing it. 
         
            
 With respect to facilities classed as subject to authorisation, the obligation laid down in Article 14(b) of the Directive
         is expressly reproduced in Article of Decree No 77-1133. With respect to facilities classed as subject to declaration,
         Article of that decree provides that a copy of the notification of the general requirements applying to the facility is
         to be posted in the town hall for at least one month and must state that third parties may have access to those requirements
         there. 
         
            
 The French Government points out that, where they submit an application for approval, certain teaching and research facilities
         are also subject to an obligation to lodge an information file with the town hall. Under Part I of Article of Decree No
         93-773, that file is to contain  
         any information relevant to the classification of the genetically modified organisms which may be used in the facility and
         to the confinement measures, the action to be taken in the case of an accident and the technical specifications to which approval
         is made subject. With respect to other teaching and research facilities, the administrative authority may, where an emergency plan is necessary,
         also lay down the procedures to be followed in informing the public. 
          Findings of the Court
         
            
 First of all, the first subparagraph of Article 14(b) of the Directive refers, in the first sentence, to the persons liable
         to be affected by an accident and, in the third sentence, to the public and therefore to a larger collective which encompasses
         the first group. The first sentence lays down an obligation to inform the persons concerned without their having to request
         it. Under the third sentence, the information in question is also to be made available to the public, which must therefore
         be granted access to it. 
         
            
 Directive 98/amended the first sentence of the first subparagraph of Article 14(b) of the Directive to the effect that
         the new provision no longer refers to the persons but to the bodies and authorities liable to be affected by an accident.
         
         
            
 It is settled case-law that the question whether there has been a failure to fulfil obligations must be examined in the light
         of the position in which the Member State found itself at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion (see, inter
         alia, Case C-362/Commission  v  
          Italy  [1992] ECR I-2353, paragraph 10). 
         
            
 Directive 98/was to be transposed by June at the latest and, therefore, before expiry of the time-limit laid down
         in the reasoned opinion sent to the French Republic by the Commission. From that date at least, that Member State was no longer
         under an obligation to transpose the first sentence of the first subparagraph of Article 14(b) of the Directive. 
         
            
 Accordingly, the action must be dismissed as inadmissible in so far as it relates to that provision of the Directive (see,
         to that effect,  
          Commission  v  
          Italy , cited above, paragraph 13). 
         
            
 With respect to the complaint relating to the obligation to make available to the public the information on safety measures
         and the conduct to be adopted in the case of an accident, as laid down in the third sentence of the first subparagraph of
         Article 14(b), that obligation was reproduced in Directive 98/to the extent that that directive imposes an obligation to
         make emergency plans, including the relevant safety measures to be adopted, available to the public. The Commission rightly
         submits that those plans are not necessarily available to the public in all cases, as is apparent from the observations of
         the French Government itself. Moreover, in order to transpose the provision in question effectively, emergency plans must
         be made available to the public as such. Therefore, the fact that the public has access to documents which contain various
         types of information and thus make it necessary to search for the emergency plans, such as the requirements to which the facilities
         may be subject, cannot be regarded as ensuring effective transposition of that provision. 
         
            
 Consequently, the action must be regarded as being well founded in so far as it relates to the third sentence of the first
         subparagraph of Article 14(b) of the Directive. 
          The complaint relating to  the second subparagraph of Article 14(b), Article 15(2) and Article 16(1) of the Directive
          Arguments of the parties
         
            
 The Commission submits that the direct nature of the obligations imposed on the French authorities under the second subparagraph
         of Article 14(b), Article 15(2) and Article 16(1) of the Directive does not discharge those authorities from having to establish
         a minimum framework for application at a national level. That framework must, in particular, identify the competent authorities
         authorised to provide information to the other Member States or lay down the procedure to be followed in doing so. This is
         all the more necessary because those obligations are intended indirectly to protect the public interest in the other Member
         States. 
         
            
 The Commission claims that the second subparagraph of Article 14(b), Article 15(2) and Article 16(1) of the Directive cannot
         be regarded as having been transposed in the absence of such a minimum framework. 
         
            
 According to the French Government, the provisions can be distinguished by the fact that they have no effect in the internal
         legal order of the Member States. They merely govern the procedure for consultation between the Member States or between a
         Member State and the Community institutions. That is particularly apparent from the second subparagraph of Article 14(b) of
         the Directive, which refers to  
         bilateral relations between the Member States. 
         
            
 In order to substantiate the present complaint, the Commission must show that the Directive cannot be guaranteed full effect
         unless the rules are applicable in the French internal legal order. However, it merely asserts that it is necessary to adopt
         a minimum framework for application which, in particular, identifies the competent authorities and lays down certain rules
         on implementation. 
         
            
 The French Government takes the view that it is unnecessary to adopt any measure in French law to ensure that the provisions
         in question are fully effective. 
         
            
 The obligations imposed by those provisions are to be fulfilled within the framework of bilateral relations with the neighbouring
         Member States and with the Community institutions. Those relations are governed by a body of provisions entrusting the conduct
         of relations with foreign States to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and that of relations with the Community institutions
         to an inter-ministerial body answering to the Prime Minister, namely the Secretariat-General for inter-ministerial coordination
         of matters relating to European economic cooperation. Those general provisions identify the authorities responsible, where
         appropriate, for providing the information in question. Since the provisions at issue govern neither relations between the
         State and individuals nor relations between individuals, specific legislation in French domestic law would serve no purpose.
         
         
            
 Moreover, identical provisions could have been laid down in a Community regulation or decision and not in a directive. Had
         that been the case, no measure would have been necessary in domestic law in order to guarantee their full effect. 
          Findings of the Court
         
            
 It is clear from the Court's case-law that a provision which concerns only relations between Member States and the Commission
         need not, in principle, be transposed. Nevertheless, given that the Member States are under an obligation to ensure full compliance
         with Community law, the Commission may show that compliance with the provision of a directive governing such relations requires
         the adoption of specific measures transposing that provision into the national legal order (see, to that effect, Case C-72/Commission  v  
          Portugal  [2003] ECR I-6597, paragraphs and 20). 
         
            
 Where a Member State has elected not to lay down expressly the legal framework within which the national authorities are to
         maintain such relations, it is responsible for any infringement of the relevant obligations under Community law. 
         
            
 In the present case, the second subparagraph of Article 14(b), Article 15(2) and Article 16(1) of the Directive all concern
         solely relations between a Member State and the Commission or the other Member States. 
         
            
 As regards the Commission's argument that a minimum framework for application of the provisions must be laid down in the internal
         legal order, it should be noted that the Commission has not claimed that the French competent authorities are prevented from
         applying those provisions and guaranteeing that they take full effect. 
         
            
 Moreover, the Commission has not established that compliance with those provisions requires the adoption of specific measures
         of transposition in national law. It maintains its complaint even in the case that Article 15(2) of the Directive is complied
         with in practice. The Commission has also failed to put forward arguments showing that the practice followed by the French
         authorities runs counter to the obligations laid down in the second subparagraph of Article 14(b) and Article 16(1) of the
         Directive. 
         
            
 Consequently, the action must be dismissed in so far as it relates to the second subparagraph of Article 14(b), Article 15(2)
         and Article 16(1) of the Directive. 
          The complaint relating to Article 19(2) and (3) of the Directive
          Arguments of the parties
         
            
 According to the Commission, the French legislation does not state that, where the notifier wishes certain information contained
         in the application for authorisation to be treated as confidential, he must provide verifiable justification. 
         
            
 Article of the Directive, the purpose of which is clearly to impose obligations on notifiers and to confer on the public
         a right of access to information on the uses of GMMs, cannot be regarded as having been transposed by general provisions which
         do not lay down in detail the scheme provided for by the Community provision. 
         
            
 Similarly, none of the evidence available states that the competent authority is under an obligation to consult the notifier
         before making its decision and that it is to inform the notifier of that decision. 
         
            
 According to the French Government, Article of Decree No 77-specifies the required content of applications for authorisation
         which, with respect to facilities classed as being subject to authorisation, serve as notification for the purposes of the
         Directive. It states, with regard to the production processes which the applicant wishes to carry out, that,  
         where appropriate, the applicant may submit, in a single copy and under separate cover, information the dissemination of which,
         in his view, may entail the disclosure of production secrets. No other provision of Article or Article of that decree provides for such an option. 
         
            
 The French Government adds that Article of Decree No 77-governs the procedure for publication of the declaration which,
         with respect to facilities classed as subject to declaration, serves as notification for the purposes of the Directive. It
         refers, in particular, to the last paragraph of that article. 
         
            
 With respect to teaching and research facilities, the second paragraph of Article of Decree No 93-provides, in the last
         sentence, that the applicant is to indicate in the application for approval the information which, in his view, must remain
         confidential. 
         
            
 Therefore, in the case of all three categories of facility concerned by the implementation of the Directive, the notifier
         has the option of requesting that certain information provided by him together with the application for authorisation, declaration
         or approval remain confidential. 
         
            
 The competent administrative authority is under no obligation to treat information as confidential simply because the notifier
         has requested such treatment. The fact that the application does not bind that authority is apparent from the wording of the
         national provisions in question, for example the use of the conditional tense in the legislation relating to classified facilities
         or the addition of the clarification  
         in [the applicant's] view in the legislation governing teaching and research facilities. It would therefore be superfluous to state that the competent
         authority is to decide which information is in fact to be regarded as confidential since that is sufficiently clear from the
         fact that the notifier's right is limited to indicating the information which, in his view, must remain confidential. 
         
            
 For the same reason, it would serve no purpose to state that those requests for confidential treatment are to be accompanied
         by justification. Since it is not sufficient to request that the information be treated as confidential in order for that
         request to be granted, the notifier must necessarily attach justification in order for it to be granted. According to the
         French Government, since confidential treatment is the exception, it is self-evident that a request for confidential treatment
         must be justified. 
          Findings of the Court
         
            
 It is settled case-law that for the transposition of a directive into the legal order of a Member State it is essential that
         the national legislation in question effectively ensures that the directive is fully applied, that the legal position under
         national law is sufficiently precise and clear and that individuals are made fully aware of their rights and obligations (see
         Case C-365/Commission  v  
          Greece  [1995] ECR I-499, paragraph 9, and Case C-97/Commission  v  
          Luxembourg  [2003] ECR I-5797, paragraph 32). 
         
            
 There is no clear and unequivocal statement in Article of Decree No 77-concerning facilities classed as subject to
         authorisation, Article of that decree concerning facilities classed as subject to declaration or the last sentence of the
         second paragraph of Article of Decree No 93-concerning teaching and research facilities that the applicant must provide
         verifiable justification, as is required by the second sentence of Article 19(2) of the Directive. 
         
            
 The argument that a request for confidential treatment must be justified because such treatment is the exception cannot be
         accepted. While the transposition of a directive by specific laws or administrative measures may be superfluous given the
         existence of general principles of constitutional or administrative law, recourse to a principle such as that relied on in
         the present case by the French Government does not ensure, in a sufficiently clear and precise manner, that the second sentence
         of Article 19(2) of the Directive is applied in full. The notifier must be able to identify from the wording of the national
         legislation the conditions to which confidential treatment is made subject, including that of verifiable justification. 
         
            
 The French Government has failed to put forward any arguments refuting the complaint relating to the obligation under Article
         19(3) of the Directive to consult the notifier. 
         
            
 With respect to the obligation, provided for in the same provision, to inform the notifier of the decision adopted by the
         competent authority as to which information is to remain confidential, the French Government has failed to rely on any provision
         of French administrative law expressly imposing on the administrative authorities an obligation to notify such a decision.
         
         
            
 Consequently, the action must be regarded as well founded in so far as it relates to Article 19(2) and (3) of the Directive.
         
          The complaint relating to Article 19(4) of the Directive
          Arguments of the parties
         
            
 According to the Commission, there is no provision in the French legislation enabling it to take the view that Article 19(4)
         of the Directive has been transposed correctly. 
         
            
 With respect to facilities classed as subject to authorisation, the French Government submits that all of the information
         listed in Article 19(4) of the Directive must be included in the application for authorisation, with the result that it is
         made public in the course of the public inquiry and, therefore, can in no case remain confidential. 
         
            
 Teaching and research facilities manipulating GMMs in Classes and of Group II are required, under Part I of Article of Decree No 93-773, to make available to the public a file of information containing  
         any information relevant to the classification of the genetically modified organisms which may be used in the facility and  
         the opinion given on the application for authorisation by the Genetic Engineering Commission, which guarantees transposition of the obligation to ensure that the evaluation of foreseeable effects of the proposed research
         cannot remain confidential. 
         
            
 The French Government concedes that some marginal adjustments to the French legislation may be necessary to ensure that Article
         19(4) of the Directive is fully effective as regards facilities classed as subject to declaration or teaching and research
         facilities having to comply with the containment level required for Class of Group I or Class of Group II. 
          Findings of the Court
         
            
 It is sufficient to state that the French Government has acknowledged that, as regards facilities classed as subject to declaration
         and certain teaching and research facilities, the French legislation must be adjusted to ensure that Article 19(4) of the
         Directive is fully effective. The transposition of that provision must therefore be regarded as incomplete. 
         
            
 Consequently, the action must be regarded as being well founded in so far as it relates to Article 19(4) of the Directive.
         
          The complaint of failure to transpose the Directive in respect of certain contained use by the Ministry of Defence
         
            
 In its defence, the French Government admits that certain facilities used by the Ministry of Defence are not covered by any
         measure transposing the Directive. 
         
            
 Accordingly, the action must be regarded as well founded in so far as it relates to transposition of the Directive in respect
         of certain contained use by the Ministry of Defence. 
         
            
 In light of all the above findings, it must be declared that, by failing to transpose correctly and in full Article 14(a)
         and (b), first subparagraph, third sentence, and Article 19(2) to (4) of the Directive and by failing to transpose the provisions
         of that directive in respect of certain contained use by the Ministry of Defence, the French Republic has failed to fulfil
         its obligations under that directive. 
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party's pleadings. However, under Article 69(3) of those Rules, the Court may order that the
         costs be shared or that the parties bear their own costs where each party succeeds on some and fails on other heads. In this
         case, since the parties have each been partially unsuccessful, each must be ordered to bear its own costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
 hereby: 
         
1.
 Declares that, by failing to transpose correctly and in full Article 14(a) and (b), first subparagraph, third sentence, and
            Article 19(2) to (4) of Council Directive 90/219/EEC of April on the contained use of genetically modified micro-organisms,
            as amended by Commission Directive 94/51/EC of November adapting to technical progress Directive 90/219, and by failing to transpose the provisions of that directive in respect of
               certain contained use by the Ministry of Defence, the French Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive;
               
2.
 Dismisses the remainder of the action; 
3.
 Orders each party to bear its own costs. 
Skouris
Gulmann 
Puissochet 
Macken
Colneric 
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on November 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
V. Skouris  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: French.
Top  
 