
Case C-126/Foggia – Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais SA
v
Secretário de Estado dos Assuntos Fiscais
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Supremo Tribunal Administrativo)
(Approximation of laws – Directive 90/434/EEC – Common system of taxation applicable to mergers, divisions, transfers of assets and exchanges of shares concerning companies
         of different Member States – Article 11(1)(a) – Valid commercial reasons – Restructuring or rationalisation of the activities of companies participating in operations – Definition)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Questions referred for a preliminary ruling – Jurisdiction of the Court – Limits – Interpretation sought owing to the applicability,
            to purely internal situations, of provisions of a directive transposed into national law after the treatment of internal situations
            has been aligned with European Union law
(Art. TFEU)
2.        Approximation of laws – Common system of taxation applicable to mergers, divisions, transfers of assets and exchanges of shares
            concerning companies of different Member States – Directive 90/– Operations having as their purpose tax evasion or tax
            avoidance 
(Council Directive 90/434, Art. 11(1)(a))
1.        Where, in regulating purely internal situations, domestic legislation adopts the same solutions as those adopted in EU law
         in order, in particular, to avoid discrimination against nationals of the Member State in question or any distortion of competition,
         it is clearly in the European Union’s interest that, in order to forestall future differences of interpretation, provisions
         or concepts taken from EU law should be interpreted uniformly, irrespective of the circumstances in which they are to apply.
      
Accordingly, where a national regulation provides that the national and cross-border restructuring operations are subject
         to the same merger taxation system and that the rule that enables the benefit of that taxation system to be refused when there
         are no valid commercial reasons, set out in Article 11(1)(a) of Directive 90/on the common system of taxation applicable
         to mergers, divisions, transfers of assets and exchanges of shares concerning companies of different Member States, is to
         be applied in purely internal situations too, the Court has jurisdiction to answer the questions referred by the national
         court relating to the interpretation of the provisions of Directive 90/434, even though they do not directly govern the situation
         at issue in the main proceedings.
      
(see paras 20-21, 23)
2.        Article 11(1)(a) of Directive 90/on the common system of taxation applicable to mergers, divisions, transfers of assets
         and exchanges of shares concerning companies of different Member States, is to be interpreted as meaning that, in the case
         of a merger operation between two companies of the same group, the fact that, on the date of the merger operation, the acquired
         company does not carry out any activity, does not have any financial holdings and transfers to the acquiring company only
         substantial tax losses of undetermined origin, even though that operation has a positive effect in terms of cost structure
         savings for that group, may constitute a presumption that the operation has not been carried out for ‘valid commercial reasons’
         within the meaning of Article 11(1)(a). It is incumbent on the national court to verify, in the light of all the circumstances
         of the dispute on which it is required to rule, whether the constituent elements of the presumption of tax evasion or avoidance,
         within the meaning of that provision, are present in the context of that dispute. 
      
In that regard, the concepts of restructuring and rationalisation referred to in Article 11(1)(a) of Directive 90/must
         be understood as involving more than the attainment of a purely fiscal advantage and any operation of restructuring and rationalisation
         having only such an aim cannot constitute a valid commercial reason within the meaning of that provision. Therefore, in principle,
         there is nothing to prevent a merger operation from having valid commercial reasons where it carries out restructuring or
         rationalisation of a group that allows its administrative and management costs to be reduced. However, this would not be the
         case for an acquisition operation, where it seems clear that, having regard to the magnitude of the anticipated tax benefit,
         the saving made by the group concerned in terms of cost structure is quite marginal.
      
Furthermore, by automatically accepting that the saving in the cost structure resulting from the reduction of the administrative
         and management costs constitutes a valid commercial reason, without taking account of the other objectives of the proposed
         operation, and particularly the tax advantages, the rule set out in Article 11(1)(a) of Directive 90/would be entirely
         deprived of its purpose, which consists of safeguarding the financial interests of the Member States by providing, in accordance
         with the ninth recital in the preamble to that directive, the option for those Member States to refuse the benefit of the
         provisions laid down by the directive in the event of tax evasion or avoidance.
      
(see paras 46-47, 49, 52, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Approximation of laws – Directive 90/434/EEC – Common system of taxation applicable to mergers, divisions, transfers of assets and exchanges of shares concerning companies
         of different Member States – Article 11(1)(a) – Valid commercial reasons – Restructuring or rationalisation of the activities of companies participating in operations – Definition)
      
In Case C‑126/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Supremo Tribunal Administrativo (Portugal), made by decision
         of February 2010, received at the Court on March 2010, in the proceedings
      
Foggia – Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais SA
v
Secretário de Estado dos Assuntos Fiscais,
intervening party:
Ministério Público,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
composed of M. Safjan, President of the Chamber, J.-J. Kasel (Rapporteur) and M. Berger, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on July 2011,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Foggia – Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais SA, by F. Castro Silva, advogado,
–        the Portuguese Government, by L. Inez Fernandes and J. Menezes Leitão, acting as Agents,
–        the Spanish Government, by M. Muñoz Pérez, acting as Agent,
–        the Netherlands Government, by C. Wissels and M. de Ree, acting as Agents,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by F. Penlington, acting as Agent,
–        the European Commission, by R. Lyal and M. Afonso, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 11(1)(a) of Council Directive 90/434/EEC of
         July on the common system of taxation applicable to mergers, divisions, transfers of assets and exchanges of shares
         concerning companies of different Member States (OJ L 225, p. 1).
      
The reference has been made in the course of a dispute between Foggia – Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais SA (‘Foggia
         – SGPS’) and the Secretário de Estado dos Assuntos Fiscais (‘the Ministry of Finance’) concerning the refusal by the latter
         to authorise a transfer of tax losses following an operation to merge companies belonging to the same group.
      
 Legal context
 European Union (‘EU’) law
According to the ninth recital in the preamble to Directive 90/434, ‘it is necessary to allow Member States the possibility
         of refusing to apply this Directive where the merger, division, transfer of assets or exchange of shares operation has as
         its objective tax evasion or avoidance …’.
      
Article of Directive 90/434, which forms part of Title II thereof concerning rules applicable to mergers, divisions and
         exchanges of shares, provides:
      
‘To the extent that, if the operations referred to in Article were effected between companies from the Member State of the
         transferring company, the Member State would apply provisions allowing the receiving company to take over the losses of the
         transferring company which had not yet been exhausted for tax purposes, it shall extend those provisions to cover the take-over
         of such losses by the receiving company’s permanent establishments situated within its territory.’
      
Article 11(1) of Directive 90/434, which appears under Title V, entitled ‘Final provisions’, provides:
      
‘A Member State may refuse to apply or withdraw the benefit of all or any part of the provisions of Titles II, III and IV
         where it appears that the merger, division, transfer of assets or exchange of shares: 
      
(a)      has as its principal objective or as one of its principal objectives tax evasion or avoidance; the fact that one of the operations
         referred to in Article is not carried out for valid commercial reasons such as the restructuring or rationalisation of the
         activities of the companies participating in the operation may constitute a presumption that the operation has tax evasion
         or avoidance as its principal objective or as one of its principal objectives;
      
…’
 National legislation
The Corporation Tax Code (Código do Imposto sobre o Rendimento das Pessoas Colectivas, ‘the CIRC’), in the version applicable
         to the main proceedings, includes an Article relating to the transferability of tax losses, subparagraphs 6, and of
         which read as follows:
      
‘6.      For the purposes of Articles and [of the CIRC], in relation to mergers and de-mergers of companies from different European
         Union Member States, the term “company” shall have the meaning given to it in the Annex to Directive No 90/434.
      
7.      The special scheme provided for in this subsection shall apply to mergers and de-mergers of companies and transfer of assets,
         as defined in paragraphs to 3, involving:
      
(a)      companies having their head office or place of effective management in Portugal subject to and not exempt from IRC, for which
         the taxable profit is not determined by the simplified scheme;
      
(b)      a company or companies from other European Union Member States, provided that all companies are in compliance with the conditions
         set out in Article of Directive 90/434;
      
…
10.      The special scheme shall not apply either in whole or in part, when it is determined that the transactions covered by it have
         as their main objective or as one of the main objectives tax avoidance, which may be considered to exist, in particular, where
         the companies involved are not all subject to the same system of corporation tax on all their income or where transactions
         have not been entered into for valid commercial reasons, such as restructuring or rationalisation of the activities of companies
         that participate in them, making then, if appropriate, the corresponding additional tax assessments.’
      
Article (1) and (2) of the CIRC provides:
      
‘1.      The tax losses of merged companies may be offset against the taxable profits of the new company or the acquiring company until
         the end of the period set out in Article 47(1), counting from the accounting period in which they arose, provided that authorisation
         has been granted by the Minister of Finance, upon request of interested parties delivered at the Directorate-General of Taxation
         by the end of the month following the submission of the merger for registration in the Commercial Registry.
      
2.      Authorisation shall be granted only where it is demonstrated that the merger is carried out for valid commercial reasons,
         such as restructuring or rationalisation of activities of the companies involved, and is part of a strategy of reorganisation
         and business development for the medium or long term, with positive effects on the productive structure. All information necessary
         or convenient for a complete understanding of the legal and economic aspects of the proposed transaction should be provided
         for this purpose.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
By merger operation of September 2003, Foggia – SGPS, a Portuguese holding company, acquired three other holding companies
         belonging to the same group.
      
By application to the Ministry of Finance submitted on November 2003, Foggia – SGPS sought authorisation, under Article
         69(1) of the CIRC, to deduct from its taxable profits, if any, the tax losses incurred by the holding companies acquired and
         yet to be used, for the financial years to inclusive.
      
The Ministry of Finance granted that application in relation to two of the three companies but, by a decision of October
         2004, refused the transfer of tax losses from Riguadiana – SGPS SA (‘Riguadiana’) on the ground that, for Foggia – SGPS, there
         was no commercial interest in acquiring Riguadiana.
      
In that regard, the services of the Ministry of Finance stated that, for the years under consideration, Riguadiana had ceased
         to have a portfolio of holdings, that it had practically no revenue from its activity and that it had invested only in securities.
         Moreover, the origin of that company’s tax losses in the income tax return for 2002, in the amount of around EUR million,
         is unclear. Although the removal of Riguadiana from the structure of the group may clearly lead to a reduction in administrative
         and management costs, that positive effect in terms of the cost structure of the group cannot, according to the Ministry of
         Finance, be considered as being of commercial interest for Foggia – SGPS.
      
On January 2005, Foggia – SGPS brought a special administrative action before the Tribunal Central Administrativo Sul for
         annulment of the abovementioned refusal and for adoption of an administrative measure authorising the transfer of the tax
         losses in question; this action was dismissed by that court.
      
On December 2008, Foggia – SGPS appealed to the Supremo Tribunal Administrativo, the court of final instance.
      
In its order for reference, that court notes that the existence of ‘valid commercial reasons’ constitutes one of the two cumulative
         conditions set out in Article 69(2) of the CIRC and that it is within the discretionary powers of the Ministry of Finance
         to determine whether that condition is satisfied. The national court expresses doubts, however, as to the compatibility of
         the interpretation made by the Ministry of Finance of the terms ‘valid commercial reasons’, having regard to the same concept
         referred to in Article 11(1)(a) of Directive 90/434.
      
It was in those circumstances that the Supremo Tribunal Administrativo decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following
         questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      What are the meaning and effect of Article 11(1)(a) of Directive [90/434] and, in particular, what is the meaning of “valid
         commercial reasons” and “restructuring or rationalisation of the activities” of companies participating in operations covered
         by Directive [90/434]?
      
(2)      Is the view taken by the tax authorities, that there are no serious commercial reasons for the acquiring company’s request
         to transfer tax losses, leading them to conclude that, from the acquiring company’s point of view, there was no apparent commercial
         interest in acquisition, since the acquired company had developed no activity as a holding company and had no financial holdings,
         and would consequently transfer only substantial losses, although the merger might represent a positive effect in terms of
         the cost structure of the group, compatible with that provision of Community law?’
      
 The jurisdiction of the Court and the admissibility of the reference for a preliminary ruling
In its written observations, the Portuguese Government first claims that the Court has no jurisdiction to give a preliminary
         ruling and, second, submits that the reference for a preliminary ruling is inadmissible, disputing the relevance of the questions
         referred by the national court.
      
First, that government argues that the context of the main proceedings is purely national. There is reason to doubt that this
         dispute falls within the scope of Directive 90/and, consequently, within the jurisdiction of the Court since EU law does
         not govern, either directly or indirectly, the situation at issue before the national court.
      
In that connection, it must be borne in mind that, under the first paragraph of Article TFEU, the Court has jurisdiction,
         inter alia, to give preliminary rulings concerning ‘the interpretation of the Treaties’ and the ‘… interpretation of acts
         of the institutions … of the Union’.
      
It is, admittedly, common ground that the dispute in the main proceedings concerns a provision of national law that applies
         within a purely internal context.
      
However, it is apparent from the documents before the Court that the national and cross-border restructuring operations are
         subject, under Article of the CIRC, to the same merger taxation system and that the rule that enables the benefit of that
         taxation system to be refused when there are no valid commercial reasons, set out in Article 11(1)(a) of Directive 90/434,
         is to be applied also in purely internal situations.
      
According to the Court’s settled case-law, where, in regulating purely internal situations, domestic legislation adopts the
         same solutions as those adopted in EU law in order, in particular, to avoid discrimination against nationals of the Member
         State in question or any distortion of competition, it is clearly in the European Union’s interest that, in order to forestall
         future differences of interpretation, provisions or concepts taken from EU law should be interpreted uniformly, irrespective
         of the circumstances in which they are to apply (Case C‑28/Leur-Bloem [1997] ECR I‑4161, paragraph 32; Case C‑43/Andersen og Jensen [2002] ECR I‑379, paragraph 18; and Case C‑352/Modehuis A. Zwijnenburg [2010] ECR I‑4303, paragraph 33).
      
Moreover, it is for the national court alone to assess the precise scope of that reference to EU law, the jurisdiction of
         the Court being confined to considering and interpreting provisions of that law only (Leur-Bloem, paragraph 33, and Modehuis A. Zwijnenburg, paragraph 34).
      
It follows from the foregoing that the Court has jurisdiction to answer the questions referred by the Supremo Tribunal Administrativo
         relating to the interpretation of the provisions of Directive 90/434, even though they do not directly govern the situation
         at issue in the main proceedings.
      
In the second place, the Portuguese Government claims that the reference for a preliminary ruling is inadmissible because
         there is no connection between the interpretation requested of Article 11(1)(a) of Directive 90/434, the wording of which
         is reproduced in Article 67(10) of the CIRC, and the subject-matter of the main proceedings, which concerns Article 69(2)
         of that code, relating to the transferability of the tax losses referred to in Article of that directive.
      
In accordance with the Court’s settled case-law, in the context of the cooperation between the Court of Justice and the national
         courts established by Article TFEU, it is solely for the national court before which the dispute has been brought, and
         which must assume responsibility for the subsequent judicial decision, to determine in the light of the particular circumstances
         of the case, both the need of a preliminary ruling in order to enable it to deliver judgment and the relevance of the questions
         which it submits to the Court. Consequently, where the questions submitted concern the interpretation of EU law, the Court
         is in principle bound to give a ruling (see, inter alia, Leur-Bloem, paragraph 24, Case C‑48/Les Vergers du Vieux Tauves [2008] ECR I‑10627, paragraph 16, and Joined Cases C‑78/to C‑80/Paint Graphos and Others [2011] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 30).
      
As a matter of fact, questions on the interpretation of EU law referred by a national court in the factual and legislative
         context which that court is responsible for defining and the accuracy of which is not a matter for the Court to determine,
         enjoy a presumption of relevance. The Court may refuse to rule on a question referred for a preliminary ruling from a national
         court only where it is quite obvious that the interpretation of EU law that is sought bears no relation to the actual facts
         of the main action or its purpose, where the problem is hypothetical, or where the Court does not have before it the factual
         or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions submitted to it (see Joined Cases C‑222/to C‑225/van der Weerd and Others [2007] ECR I‑4233, paragraph 22; Les Vergers du Vieux Tauves, paragraph 17; and Paint Graphos and Others, paragraph 31).
      
In the present case it cannot validly be claimed that the interpretation of Directive 90/has no connection with the facts
         or subject-matter of the dispute in the main proceedings or that the problem is hypothetical, since the national court’s reference
         is intended precisely to permit that court to answer a question concerning the compatibility of the Ministry of Finance’s
         position regarding the concept of ‘valid commercial reasons’ with the same concept referred to in Article 11(1)(a) of that
         directive.
      
It follows that, contrary to what the Portuguese Government maintains, the reference for a preliminary ruling must be declared
         admissible.
      
However, with regard to the wording of the second question, it should be noted that it is settled case-law that, although
         the Court may not, in proceedings under Article TFEU, rule upon the compatibility of a provision of domestic law with
         EU law or interpret domestic legislation or regulations, it may nevertheless provide the national court with an interpretation
         of EU law on all such points as may enable that court to determine the issue of compatibility for the purposes of the case
         before it (see, inter alia, Case C‑292/Hünermund and Others [1993] ECR I‑6787, paragraph 8, and Joined Cases C‑338/04, C‑359/and C‑360/Placanica and Others [2007] ECR I‑1891, paragraph 36).
      
In light of the foregoing, it must be held that, by its two questions, which should be examined together, the national court
         essentially asks whether Article 11(1)(a) of Directive 90/is to be interpreted as meaning that a merger operation between
         two companies of the same group can be considered to be carried out for ‘valid commercial reasons’, within the meaning of
         that provision, where it has a positive effect in terms of the cost structure of that group, even where the acquired company
         does not pursue any activity, has no financial holdings and transfers only substantial losses to the acquiring company.
      
 The questions referred to the Court
It must be emphasised at the outset that the common tax rules laid down by Directive 90/cover different tax advantages
         and apply without distinction to all mergers, divisions, transfers of assets or exchanges of shares irrespective of the reasons,
         whether financial, economic or simply fiscal, for those operations (see Leur-Bloem, paragraph 36, and Case C‑321/Kofoed [2007] ECR I‑5795, paragraph 30).
      
The reasons for the proposed transaction are important, however, in giving effect to the option given to Member States, under
         Article 11(1) of that directive, not to grant the benefit of the provisions of that directive (Modehuis A. Zwijnenburg, paragraph 42).
      
In particular, under Article 11(1)(a) of Directive 90/434, as an exception and in specific cases Member States may refuse
         to apply, or may withdraw the benefit of, all or any part of the provisions of that directive, inter alia, where the exchange
         of shares has tax evasion or avoidance as its principal objective or as one of its principal objectives. That same provision
         also provides that the fact that the operation is not carried out for valid commercial reasons, such as the restructuring
         or rationalisation of the activities of the companies participating in the operation, may constitute a presumption that the
         operation has such an objective (see, to that effect, Leur-Bloem, paragraphs and 39, and Kofoed, paragraph 37).
      
With regard to ‘valid commercial reasons’ within the meaning of that Article 11(1)(a), the Court has already had occasion
         to state that it is clear from the wording and aims of Article 11, as it is from those of Directive 90/in general, that
         the concept involves more than the attainment of a purely fiscal advantage. A merger by way of exchange of shares having only
         such an aim cannot therefore constitute a valid commercial reason within the meaning of that provision (Leur-Bloem, paragraph 47).
      
Consequently, a merger operation based on several objectives, which may also include tax considerations, can constitute a
         valid commercial reason provided, however, that those considerations are not predominant in the context of the proposed transaction.
      
Accordingly, under Article 11(1)(a) of Directive 90/434, where the merger operation has the sole aim of obtaining a tax advantage
         and is not carried out for valid commercial reasons, such a finding may constitute a presumption that the operation has tax
         evasion or avoidance as one of its principal objectives.
      
It follows from the case-law of the Court that, in order to determine whether the planned operation has such an objective,
         the competent national authorities may not confine themselves to applying predetermined general criteria but must subject
         each particular case to a general examination of the operation in question. Indeed, the laying down of a general rule automatically
         excluding certain categories of operations from the tax advantage, without account being taken of whether or not there is
         actually tax evasion or avoidance, would go further than is necessary for preventing such tax evasion or avoidance and would
         undermine the aim pursued by Directive 90/(Leur-Bloem, paragraphs and 44).
      
It is in the context of this general examination that consideration must be given to the aspects mentioned by the national
         court, namely, the fact that on the date of the merger operation, the acquired company was no longer carrying out any management
         activity, that it no longer had any financial holdings and that the acquiring company intended to take over the acquired company’s
         losses which had not yet been exhausted for tax purposes.
      
However, none of those aspects can, as such, be considered decisive.
      
Indeed, a merger or restructuring carried out in the form of the acquisition of a company that does not carry on activity
         and that does not contribute assets to the acquiring company may, nevertheless, be considered by the latter to have been carried
         out for valid commercial reasons.
      
Likewise, it cannot be ruled out that a merger by acquisition of a company holding such losses may have valid commercial reasons
         since Article of Directive 90/makes express reference to the legislative provisions that authorise taking over an acquired
         company’s losses which have not yet been exhausted for tax purposes.
      
However, the fact that those tax losses are very substantial and that their origin has not been clearly determined may constitute
         an indicator of tax evasion or avoidance, where the operation of merger by acquisition of a company without contribution of
         assets is aimed only at obtaining a purely tax advantage.
      
Accordingly, the national court asks, drawing on the terms ‘restructuring’ and ‘rationalisation’ used in Article 11(1)(a)
         of Directive 90/434, whether the positive effect in terms of cost structure, resulting from reduction of the administrative
         and management costs of the group following the merger by acquisition, could constitute a valid commercial reason within the
         meaning of that article.
      
For the purpose of answering that question, it should be stated that Article 11(1)(a) of Directive 90/434, as it constitutes
         an exception to the tax rules established by Directive 90/434, must be subject to strict interpretation, regard being had
         to its wording, purpose and context (Modehuis A. Zwijnenburg, paragraph 46).
      
It is clear from the wording of Article 11(1)(a), and more specifically from the expression ‘such as restructuring or rationalisation’,
         that the operations referred to constitute examples of valid commercial reasons and that they must be interpreted in accordance
         with that latter concept.
      
As the Court has already held in paragraph of Leur-Bloem, the concepts of restructuring and rationalisation must therefore be understood as involving more than the attainment of
         a purely fiscal advantage and any operation of restructuring and rationalisation having only such an aim cannot therefore
         constitute a valid commercial reason within the meaning of that provision.
      
Therefore, in principle, there is nothing to prevent a merger operation from having valid commercial reasons where it carries
         out restructuring or rationalisation of a group that allows its administrative and management costs to be reduced. However,
         this would not be the case for an acquisition operation, such as the one at issue in the main proceedings, where it seems
         clear that, having regard to the magnitude of the anticipated tax benefit, that is, more than EUR million, the saving made
         by the group concerned in terms of cost structure is quite marginal.
      
In that regard, it should be added that the cost savings resulting from the reduction of administrative and management costs,
         when the acquired company disappears, is inherent in any operation of merger by acquisition as this implies, by definition,
         a simplification of the structure of the group.
      
By automatically accepting that the saving in the cost structure resulting from the reduction of the administrative and management
         costs constitutes a valid commercial reason, without taking account of the other objectives of the proposed operation, and
         particularly the tax advantages, the rule set out in Article 11(1)(a) of Directive 90/would be entirely deprived of its
         purpose, which consists of safeguarding the financial interests of the Member States by providing, in accordance with the
         ninth recital in the preamble to that directive, the option for those Member States to refuse the benefit of the provisions
         laid down by the directive in the event of tax evasion or avoidance.
      
Furthermore, it should be noted that Article 11(1)(a) of Directive 90/reflects the general principle of EU law that abuse
         of rights is prohibited. The application of EU legislation may not be extended to cover abusive practices, that is to say,
         transactions carried out not in the context of normal commercial operations, but solely for the purpose of wrongfully obtaining
         advantages provided for by that law (see, to that effect, Case C‑212/Centros [1999] ECR I‑1459, paragraph 24; Case C‑255/Halifax and Others [2006] ECR I‑1609, paragraphs and 69; and Kofoed, paragraph 38).
      
In that regard, it is for the referring court to determine, in the light of all the circumstances of the dispute on which
         it is required to rule, whether, on the basis of the criteria set out at paragraphs to above, the constituent elements
         of the presumption of tax evasion or avoidance, within the meaning of Article 11(1)(a) of Directive 90/434, are present in
         the context of that dispute.
      
The answer to be given to the questions submitted, as reformulated in paragraph of this judgment, must therefore be that
         Article 11(1)(a) of Directive 90/is to be interpreted as meaning that, in the case of a merger operation between two companies
         of the same group, the fact that, on the date of the merger operation, the acquired company does not carry out any activity,
         does not have any financial holdings and transfers to the acquiring company only substantial tax losses of undetermined origin,
         even though that operation has a positive effect in terms of cost structure savings for that group, may constitute a presumption
         that the operation has not been be carried out for ‘valid commercial reasons’ within the meaning of Article 11(1)(a). It is
         incumbent on the national court to verify, in the light of all the circumstances of the dispute on which it is required to
         rule, whether the constituent elements of the presumption of tax evasion or avoidance, within the meaning of that provision,
         are present in the context of that dispute.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fifth Chamber) hereby rules:
Article 11(1)(a) of Council Directive 90/434/EEC of July on the common system of taxation applicable to mergers, divisions,
            transfers of assets and exchanges of shares concerning companies of different Member States, is to be interpreted as meaning
            that, in the case of a merger operation between two companies of the same group, the fact that, on the date of the merger
            operation, the acquired company does not carry out any activity, does not have any financial holdings and transfers to the
            acquiring company only substantial tax losses of undetermined origin, even though that operation has a positive effect in
            terms of cost structure savings for that group, may constitute a presumption that the operation has not been carried out for
            ‘valid commercial reasons’ within the meaning of Article 11(1)(a). It is incumbent on the national court to verify, in the
            light of all the circumstances of the dispute on which it is required to rule, whether the constituent elements of the presumption
            of tax evasion or avoidance, within the meaning of that provision, are present in the context of that dispute.
[Signatures]
*  Language of the case: Portuguese.
      
Top  
 