
Case C-398/Lady & Kid A/S and Others 
v
Skatteministeriet
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Østre Landsret)
(Refusal to reimburse a tax paid in error – Unjust enrichment arising from the link between the introduction of that tax and the abolition of other taxes)
Summary of the Judgment
Union law – Direct effect – National taxes incompatible with Union law – Repayment – Refusal – Condition – Unjust enrichment
            – Definition – Passing on directly to the purchaser of amounts wrongly paid by the taxpayer
The rules of Union law on recovery of sums wrongly paid must be interpreted to the effect that recovery of sums wrongly paid
         can give rise to unjust enrichment only when the amounts wrongly paid by a taxpayer under a tax levied in a Member State in
         breach of Union law have been passed on direct to the purchaser. Consequently, Union law precludes a Member State from refusing
         reimbursement of a tax wrongfully levied on the ground that the amounts wrongly paid by the taxpayer have been set off by
         a saving made as a result of the concomitant abolition of other levies, for such a set-off cannot be regarded, from the point
         of view of Union law, as unjust enrichment in relation to that tax.
      
The direct passing on to the purchaser of the tax unduly paid being the sole exception to the right to reimbursement of tax
         levied in breach of Union law, the national court, applying its domestic law, may not take account of possible means of refusing
         reimbursement of an unlawful tax other than its setting off. 
      
(see paras 25-26, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
September (*)
      
(Refusal to reimburse a tax paid in error – Unjust enrichment arising from the link between the introduction of that tax and the abolition of other taxes)
In Case C‑398/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Østre Landsret (Denmark), made by decision of October
         2009, received at the Court on October 2009, in the proceedings
      
Lady & Kid A/S,
Direct Nyt ApS,
A/S Harald Nyborg Isenkram- og Sportsforretning,
KID-Holding A/S
v
Skatteministeriet,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, A. Tizzano, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, K. Lenaerts, J.-C. Bonichot, K. Schiemann and D. Šváby,
         Presidents of Chambers, A. Rosas, R. Silva de Lapuerta, E. Juhász, M. Safjan (Rapporteur), M. Berger and A. Prechal, Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Cruz Villalón,
Registrar: R. Şereş, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Lady & Kid A/S and Others, by H. Peytz, advokat,
–        the Danish Government, by T. Winkler, acting as Agent, assisted by S. Fugleholm, advokat,
–        the European Commission, by R. Lyal and N. Fenger, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on December 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling relates to the interpretation of Community law on recovery of amounts wrongly paid.
      
The reference has been made in the course of proceedings between Lady & Kid A/S (‘Lady & Kid’), Direct Nyt ApS (‘Direct Nyt’),
         A/S Harald Nyborg Isenkram- og Sportsforretning (‘Harald Nyborg’) and KID-Holding A/S (‘KID-Holding’) and Skatteministeriet
         (the Danish Ministry of Fiscal Affairs) concerning the repayment of a tax levied in breach of Community law (‘the unlawful
         tax’).
      
 Legal context
By Law No of December 1987, the Kingdom of Denmark introduced, with effect from January 1988, a business tax known
         as the employment market contribution (arbejdsmarkedsbidrag; ‘the Ambi’). The Ambi, the rate of which was fixed at 2.5%, was,
         in principle, calculated on the same basis as value added tax (‘VAT’). However, it was not payable upon import of goods into
         Danish territory, but was charged on the imported goods’ full sale price upon first sale in Denmark.
      
In return for the introduction of the Ambi, a number of social charges of employers, which had to be paid by Danish undertakings
         in the sum of around DKK per full-time employee, had been abolished.
      
The purpose of the fiscal reform was to eliminate the link between the contributions to be paid and the number of employees,
         in order to stimulate growth and develop employment, while retaining neutrality as regards public finances.
      
The Ambi was levied on Danish undertakings between January and December inclusive, Law No of December
         having been repealed by a law of December having effect from January 1992.
      
During 1989, the lawfulness of the Ambi was contested by importing undertakings before the Østre Landsret (Eastern Regional
         Court) (Denmark), which considered it necessary to refer to the Court of Justice the question of the compatibility of the
         Ambi with Community law. In reply, by the judgment in Case C‑200/Dansk Denkavit and Poulsen Trading [1992] ECR I‑2217, the Court held that Article of Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC of May on the harmonisation
         of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax: uniform basis of assessment
         (OJ L 145, p. 1) precludes a tax such as the Ambi, since such a tax:
      
–        is paid both on activities subject to VAT and on other industrial or commercial activities which consist in the supply of
         services for consideration;
      
–        is charged, in the case of undertakings which were taxable persons for VAT purposes, on the same basis of assessment as that
         used for VAT, in other words as a percentage of the volume of sales after deduction of purchases;
      
–        unlike VAT, is not paid upon import, but is charged on the full sale price of imported goods upon the first sale in the Member
         State concerned;
      
–        unlike VAT, does not have to be indicated separately on invoices; and
–        is charged alongside VAT.
Following that judgment, Law No of May 1992, which entered into force on May 1992, laid down the arrangements for
         reimbursement of the Ambi unlawfully levied. It contains, inter alia, the following provisions:
      
‘Article It shall be decided according to the general rules of Danish law whether, and in the particular case, to what extent there
         is a claim for reimbursement or compensation in connection with amounts which have been paid into the State Treasury pursuant
         to Law No of December on the employment market contribution, as amended.
      
Article …      
(2) The amount claimed shall be specified and reasons shall be given therefor, and it shall be accompanied by documentation
         which makes it possible to assess in detail whether the party subject to the contribution has suffered a loss.
      
…’
Law No of May has been supplemented by Bulletin No of July which, for the purposes of administrative
         treatment of reimbursement cases, laid down the conditions to be met by the importing undertaking, namely: 
      
–        the undertaking must have been in genuine competition with Danish producers of equivalent goods;
–        the undertaking must have saved less in employer social security contributions, etc., than it has paid by way of the Ambi;
–        the undertaking’s competitive position must be worsened as a result of the restructuring, that is to say labour-intensive
         Danish products must be involved, so that the Danish undertaking saved more in employer social security contributions than
         the importer did on competing products;
      
–        the Danish competitors must have saved substantially more in employer social security contributions than they have paid by
         way of the Ambi;
      
–        the loss of competitiveness must be significant; and
–        the Ambi must not have been passed on through price increases.
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
The applicants in the main proceedings, which were all active in retail trade, lodged, in and 1998, complaints before
         the Københavns Byret (District Court, Copenhagen) (Denmark) against the Skatteministeriet seeking the annulment of the decisions
         rejecting their applications for reimbursement of the Ambi wrongly levied. The ground given for the refusal was that the undertakings’
         savings during the period when they were liable to pay the Ambi as a result of the abolished employer social security contributions
         exceeded the Ambi paid in that period, which meant that the undertaking had received full coverage for the Ambi paid.
      
In its judgment of December 2002, the Københavns Byret found in favour of the Skatteministeriet in all four cases. On January appeals were lodged against those judgments with the Østre Landsret.
      
It is apparent from the decision for reference that:
      
–        KID-Holding operated, under the trade name Daells Varehus, a large department store with many different products, including
         imported textile goods. That undertaking paid a total of DKK in Ambi and saved a total of DKK in employer
         social security contributions.
      
–        Lady & Kid operated, under the names Daells Discount A/S and Madeleine, a number of discount shops with a limited selection
         of Daells Varehus product ranges, largely textile goods. That undertaking paid DKK in Ambi and saved a total of DKK in employer social security contributions in the same period.
      
–        Harald Nyborg operated a number of department stores, selling inter alia hardware, sports equipment, automobile accessories
         and agricultural implements. That undertaking paid DKK in Ambi and saved DKK in employer social security
         contributions.
      
–        Direct Nyt operated solely a mail order business for imported goods. The undertaking paid DKK in Ambi and, not having
         any employees, did not save any employer social security contributions.
      
During the proceedings before the Østre Landsret, the Skatteministeriet recognised that Harald Nyborg and Direct Nyt had,
         to a certain extent, sold products competing with equivalent, labour-intensive Danish goods, that the abolition of the employer
         social security contributions had not had an effect on prices of the labour-intensive Danish goods and that the two undertakings,
         for reasons of competition, were not in a position to raise their prices by the amount of the increased costs in the form
         of the Ambi. Accordingly, taking the view that the Ambi had not been passed on in other forms, the Skatteministeriet decided
         to reimburse the Ambi to those undertakings in the amounts, respectively, of DKK 349, together with the interest applicable,
         and DKK 469, also with the interest applicable.
      
During those proceedings, the parties to the main proceedings also agreed that 35% of Harald Nyborg’s purchases were imported
         goods and that 84% of the Ambi paid by that undertaking related to those goods, and that 40% of Daells Varehus’s purchases
         were imported goods, and that 94% of the Ambi paid by that undertaking related to those goods. Similarly, the parties have
         accepted that the previous employer social security contributions had affected the trade in imported goods as much, in proportion,
         as the trade in Danish goods.
      
The applicants in the main proceedings having called into question the compatibility of national law and the rejection decisions
         of the Skatteministeriet with Community law, the Østre Landsret found it necessary to request a ruling from the Court on the
         interpretation of Community law on recovery of amounts wrongly paid. Accordingly, it decided to stay the proceedings and to
         refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Is the Court’s judgment of January in Joined Cases C‑192/to C‑218/Comateb and Others [[ECR I‑165]] to be interpreted as meaning that the passing on of an unlawful levy on a product presupposes that the levy
         is passed on to the buyer of the product in the individual transaction, or may the passing-on in the prices also take place
         in the prices of other products in completely different transactions, either before or after the relevant sale of products,
         for example, with the result that an overall assessment is made of the passing-on over a four-year period involving a large
         number of product groups, including both imported and non-imported products?
      
2.      Is the Community law concept of “passing-on” to be understood as meaning that an unlawful levy on a sale of products may be
         regarded as passed on only if the price of the product is higher than that price which applied immediately before the levy
         was introduced, or may the levy also be regarded as passed on where the undertaking subject to the levy, at the same time
         as the introduction of the unlawful levy, saved on other levies charged on other bases, and the undertaking therefore maintained
         its prices unchanged?
      
3.      Is the Community law concept of “unjust enrichment” to be understood as meaning that the reimbursement of an unlawful levy
         on a sale of goods may be regarded as giving rise to unjust enrichment, where the undertaking, before or after the sale of
         the taxable product, has made a saving as a result of the abolition of other levies charged on other bases, if it is assumed
         that that abolition of other levies also benefits other undertakings, including undertakings which did not pay the unlawful
         levy or only paid it to a lesser extent?
      
4.      If it is assumed that an unlawful levy, as a result of its structure, has had the effect that proportionately more has been
         paid in levies by undertakings which imported goods than by undertakings which to a greater extent purchased domestic goods,
         and, at the same time as the unlawful levy was introduced, another lawful levy was charged on another basis which proportionately
         affected both undertakings to the same extent, irrespective of the composition of the undertaking’s purchases, then guidance
         is sought on the following:
      
(a)      whether Community law allows for whole or partial refusal to reimburse the unlawful levy to an undertaking which imports goods
         on grounds of passing-on and unjust enrichment, in so far as the refusal leads to a situation in which the undertaking, as
         a result of having paid relatively more of the unlawful levy than a corresponding undertaking which purchased equivalent goods
         domestically, will thereby, all other things being equal, be placed in a worse position as a result of the tax restructuring
         and the refusal to reimburse than corresponding undertakings which to a greater extent purchased domestic goods;
      
(b)      whether the reimbursement of the unlawful levy in the relevant situation may conceptually give rise to “unjust enrichment”
         and may therefore be refused, if the reimbursement – even if the levy is regarded as having been passed on – is necessary
         in order to achieve a situation in which the effect of the tax restructuring, after any reimbursement, all other things being
         equal, remains the same for undertakings which imported products as for undertakings which purchased domestic products;
      
(c)      whether refusal to reimburse in such a situation, which leads to undertakings which to a greater extent purchased domestic
         products and thus obtained an advantage in relation to undertakings which to a greater extent imported products, is otherwise
         contrary to Community law, including the principle of equal treatment; and
      
(d)      whether the answer to question means that it is not justified to refuse reimbursement of an unlawfully charged levy on grounds
         of unjust enrichment, to the extent that such reimbursement merely cancels out the advantage for those undertakings which
         purchased domestic products in relation to undertakings which to a greater extent imported products.’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred
 The second and third questions
The second and third questions, which it is appropriate to consider first and together, must be understood as asking whether
         the mere passing on of an unlawfully charged levy by an increase in the sale price of goods on which that levy was made can,
         in the event of recovery of amounts wrongly paid, give rise to unjust enrichment of the taxpayer of whether unjust enrichment
         can also follow from a saving made as a result of the concomitant abolition of other levies charged on a different basis,
         even where the taxpayer has not altered its sale prices.
      
In that regard, it must be borne in mind that the right to a refund of charges levied in a Member State in breach of the rules
         of European Union law is the consequence and complement of the rights conferred on individuals by provisions of European Union
         law prohibiting such charges. The Member State is therefore required in principle to repay charges levied in breach of European
         Union law (see Case 199/San Giorgio [1983] ECR 3595, paragraph 12; Joined Cases C‑441/and C‑442/Michaïlidis [2000] ECR I‑7145, paragraph 30; Case C‑309/Marks & Spencer [2008] ECR I‑2283, paragraph 35; and Case C‑264/Direct Parcel Distribution Belgium [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 45).
      
However, by way of exception to the principle of reimbursement of taxes incompatible with European Union law, repayment of
         a tax wrongly paid can be refused where it would entail unjust enrichment of the persons concerned. The protection of the
         rights so guaranteed by the legal order of the European Union does not require repayment of taxes, charges and duties levied
         in breach of European Union law where it is established that the person required to pay such charges has actually passed them
         on to other persons (see Comateb and Others, paragraph 21).
      
In such circumstances, the burden of the charge levied but not due has been borne not by the trader, but by the purchaser
         to whom the cost has been passed on. Therefore, to repay the trader the amount of the charge already received from the purchaser
         would be tantamount to paying him twice over, which may be described as unjust enrichment, whilst in no way remedying the
         consequences for the purchaser of the illegality of the charge (Comateb and Others, paragraph 22). 
      
None the less, since such a refusal of reimbursement of a tax levied on the sale of goods is a limitation of a subjective
         right derived from the legal order of the European Union, it must be interpreted narrowly. Accordingly, the direct passing
         on to the purchaser of the tax wrongly levied constitutes the sole exception to the right to reimbursement of tax levied in
         breach of European Union law. 
      
The Court has also held that, even where it is established that the burden of the charge levied though not due has been passed
         on to third parties, repayment to the trader of the amount thus passed on does not necessarily entail his unjust enrichment,
         since even where the charge is wholly incorporated in the price, the taxable person may suffer as a result of a fall in the
         volume of his sales (see Comateb and Others, paragraphs to 32; Michaïlidis, paragraphs and 35; and Weber’s Wine World and Others, paragraph and 99). 
      
Similarly, the Member State may not reject an application for reimbursement of an unlawful tax on the ground that the amount
         of that tax has been set off by the abolition of a lawful levy of an equivalent amount.
      
Although reimbursement of an unlawful levy to a trader who has passed on the amount to his customers can, in the conditions
         set out above, lead to unjust enrichment, that is not so in the case of an alleged abolition of other taxes in relation to
         the introduction of a tax contrary to European Union law.
      
That abolition falls within the ambit of choices made by the State in the field of taxation which express its general policy
         in economic and social matters. Such a choice can easily have the most diverse of consequences which, disregarding the potential
         difficulties in ascertaining whether and, if so, to what extent one tax has, in reality, purely and simply replaced another,
         preclude the reimbursement of an unlawful tax in such a context’s being regarded as giving rise to unjust enrichment. 
      
That conclusion cannot be called into question by the Court’s judgments in Case 177/McCarren [1979] ECR and Case 222/Apple and Pear Development Council [1983] ECR 4083. Even if, in paragraph of the judgment in McCarren and paragraph of the judgment in Apple and Pear Development Council, the Court did not rule out that the national court, applying its national law, could take into consideration possible methods
         of refusing reimbursement of an unlawful tax other than passing on, it must be noted that the Court, in paragraph of the
         present judgment, states that the direct passing on of the tax wrongly levied to the purchaser constitutes the sole exception
         to the right to reimbursement of tax levied in breach of European Union law. 
      
The answer to the second and third questions is therefore that the recovery of sums wrongly paid can give rise to unjust enrichment
         only when the amounts wrongly paid by a taxpayer under a tax levied in a Member State in breach of European Union law have
         been passed on direct to the purchaser. Consequently, European Union law precludes a Member State from refusing reimbursement
         of a tax wrongfully levied on the ground that the amounts wrongly paid by the taxpayer have been set off by a saving made
         as a result of the concomitant abolition of other levies, since such a set-off cannot be regarded, from the point of view
         of European Union law, as an unjust enrichment as regards that tax.
      
Having regard to the reply given to the second and third questions, it is not necessary to answer the first and fourth questions.
         
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:
The rules of European Union law on recovery of sums wrongly paid must be interpreted to the effect that recovery of sums wrongly
            paid can give rise to unjust enrichment only when the amounts wrongly paid by a taxpayer under a tax levied in a Member State
            in breach of European Union law have been passed on direct to the purchaser. Consequently, European Union law precludes a
            Member State from refusing reimbursement of a tax wrongfully levied on the ground that the amounts wrongly paid by the taxpayer
            have been set off by a saving made as a result of the concomitant abolition of other levies, since such a set-off cannot be
            regarded, from the point of view of European Union law, as an unjust enrichment as regards that tax.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Danish.
      
Top  
 