
Case C-506/Rico Graf and Rudolf Engel
v
Landratsamt Waldshut
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Amtsgericht Waldshut-Tiengen) 
(Agreement between the European Community and its Member States, of the one part, and the Swiss Confederation, of the other,
         on the free movement of persons – Equal treatment – Self-employed frontier workers – Agricultural lease – Agricultural structure – Legislation of a Member State enabling an objection to be made to the contract if the goods produced in national territory
         by the self‑employed Swiss frontier farmers are intended to be exported, free of duty, to Switzerland)
      
Summary of the Judgment
International agreements – EC/Switzerland Agreement on the free movement of persons – Equal treatment – Access to self-employed
            activity and the exercise thereof – Self-employed frontier workers
(EC/Switzerland Agreement on the free movement of persons, Annex I, Art. 15(1))
The principle of equal treatment laid down in Article 15(1) of Annex I to the Agreement between the European Community and
         its Member States, of the one part, and the Swiss Confederation, of the other, on the free movement of persons precludes legislation
         of a Member State under which the competent authority of that Member State may object to an agricultural lease – relating
         to land located in a given area of the territory of that Member State and concluded between a resident of that Member State
         and a frontier-zone resident of the other contracting party – on the grounds that the land leased is used for producing agricultural
         products intended for export, free of duty, outside the internal market of the European Union and so gives rise to distortion
         of competition, if the application of that legislation affects a much greater number of nationals of the other Contracting
         Party than nationals of the Member State on whose territory that legislation applies. It is for the national court to determine
         whether that latter situation in fact exists.
      
(see para. 36, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Agreement between the European Community and its Member States, of the one part, and the Swiss Confederation, of the other,
         on the free movement of persons – Equal treatment – Self-employed frontier workers – Agricultural lease – Agricultural structure – Legislation of a Member State enabling an objection to be made to the contract if the goods produced in national territory
         by the self‑employed Swiss frontier farmers are intended to be exported, free of duty, to Switzerland)
      
In Case C‑506/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Amtsgericht Waldshut-Tiengen (Germany), made by decision
         of September 2010, received at the Court on October 2010, in the proceedings
      
Rico Graf,
Rudolf Engel
v
Landratsamt Waldshut,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, D. Šváby, R. Silva de Lapuerta, E. Juhász (Rapporteur) and J. Malenovský,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: N. Jääskinen,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–      R. Engel, by H. Hanschmann, Rechtsanwalt,
–      Landratsamt Waldshut, by M. Núñez‑Müller, Rechtsanwalt,
–      European Commission, by F. Erlbacher and S. Pardo Quintillán, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of the relevant provisions of the Agreement between the
         European Community and its Member States, of the one part, and the Swiss Confederation, of the other, on the free movement
         of persons, signed in Luxembourg on June (OJ L 114, p. 6, the ‘Agreement’).
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between Mr Graf, a Swiss national, and Mr Engel, a German national, on
         the one hand, and Landratsamt Waldshut (Waldshut Agricultural Office, the ‘Agricultural Office’) on the other, concerning
         the refusal of the latter to approve, in accordance with the applicable legislation, an agricultural lease concluded between
         Mr Graf and Mr Engel.
      
 Legal context
 The Agreement
According to Article 1(a) and (d) of the Agreement, its objective is, inter alia, to accord nationals of the Member States
         of the European Community and the Swiss Confederation a right of entry, residence, access to work as employed persons, establishment
         on a self‑employed basis and the right to stay in the territory of the contracting parties, and to accord them the same living,
         employment and working conditions as those accorded to nationals.
      
Article 2, entitled ‘Non-discrimination’, provides:
      
‘Nationals of one Contracting Party who are lawfully resident in the territory of another Contracting Party shall not, in
         application of and in accordance with the provisions of Annexes I, II and III to this Agreement, be the subject of any discrimination
         on grounds of nationality.’
      
Under Article 7, entitled ‘Other rights’, ‘[t]he Contracting Parties shall make provision, in accordance with Annex I, for
         the following rights in relation to the free movement of persons:
      
the right to equal treatment with nationals in respect of access to, and the pursuit of, an economic activity, and living,
         employment and working conditions;
      
…’
Article 13, entitled ‘Standstill’ provides:
      
‘The Contracting Parties undertake not to adopt any further restrictive measures vis-à-vis each other’s nationals in fields
         covered by this Agreement.’
      
Article of the Agreement, entitled ‘Reference to Community law’, is worded as follows:
      
‘1. In order to attain the objectives pursued by this Agreement, the Contracting Parties shall take all measures necessary
         to ensure that rights and obligations equivalent to those contained in the legal acts of the European Community to which reference
         is made are applied in relations between them.
      
2. In so far as the application of this Agreement involves concepts of Community law, account shall be taken of the relevant
         case-law of the Court of Justice of the European Communities prior to the date of its signature. Case-law after that date
         shall be brought to Switzerland’s attention. To ensure that the Agreement works properly, the Joint Committee shall, at the
         request of either Contracting Party, determine the implications of such case-law.’
      
Annex I to the Agreement is dedicated to the free movement of persons. Under Article 2, ‘Residence and economic activity’,
         ‘[w]ithout prejudice to the provisions for the transitional period, which are laid down in Article of this Agreement and
         Chapter VII of this Annex, nationals of a Contracting Party shall have the right to reside and pursue an economic activity
         in the territory of the other Contracting Party under the procedures laid down in Chapters II to IV. That right shall be substantiated
         through the issue of a residence permit or, for persons from frontier zones, by means of a special permit.
      
…’
Article of that same annex, entitled ‘Public order’, provides in paragraph 1:
      
‘The rights granted under the provisions of this Agreement may be restricted only by means of measures which are justified
         on grounds of public order, public security or public health.’
      
Chapter of that Annex is dedicated to ‘self-employed persons’ who, in accordance with the definition given in Article 12(1)
         of that Chapter, are the nationals of a Contracting Party wishing to become established in the territory of another Contracting
         Party in order to pursue a self-employed activity.
      
Article 13(1) of that Chapter, entitled ‘Self-employed frontier workers’ provides:
      
‘A self‑employed frontier worker is a national of a Contracting Party who is resident in the territory of a Contracting Party
         and who pursues a self‑employed activity in the territory of the other Contracting Party, returning to his place of residence
         as a rule every day or at least once a week.’
      
Article 15(1) of the same Chapter, entitled ‘Equal treatment’ provides: 
      
‘As regards access to a self-employed activity and the pursuit thereof, a self-employed worker shall be afforded no less favourable
         treatment in the host country than that accorded to its own nationals.’
      
Article 25(3), the only article in Chapter VI to Annex I of the Agreement, entitled ‘Purchase of immovable property’, provides:
      
‘A frontier worker shall enjoy the same rights as a national as regards the purchase of immovable property for his economic
         activity and as a secondary residence. Leaving the host state shall not entail any obligation to dispose of such property.
         He may also be authorised to purchase holiday accommodation. This Agreement shall not affect the rules applying in the host
         state to pure capital investment or business of unbuilt land and apartments.’
      
 National legislation
It is apparent from the file before the Court that, pursuant to Article of the Federal Law on Notification of and Objection
         to Agricultural Tenancy Dealings (Gesetz über die Anzeige und Beanstandung von Landpachtverträgen), of November (BGBl.
         I, p. 2075), the competent authority, the Agricultural Office, must be notified of the conclusion of an agricultural lease
         within the period of one month. Thus notified, that authority may, in accordance with Article 4(1) of that law, object to
         the lease in so far as the latter results in an ‘unsound’ division of land use or an unprofitable division in the light of
         its use, or if the rent is disproportionate in relation to the yield. Pursuant to Article 4(6) of the same law, the Länder
         may provide other grounds for objection in respect of certain parts of their territory, in so far as that is absolutely necessary
         to prevent serious harm to the agricultural structure.
      
Having made use of that opportunity, the Land of Baden‑Wurtemberg adopted a law applying the (federal) laws on land transactions
         and agricultural tenancy agreements (Baden‑Württembergisches Ausführungsgesetz zum Grundstücksverkehrsgesetz und zum Landpachtverkehrgesetz,
         Law of the German Land of Baden‑Württemberg Law on Implementation of the Law on property transactions and of the Law on agricultural tenancy transactions
         , ‘the Implementation Law’), in its version of February (Gesetzblatt (2006) p. 85), Article 6(1) of which reads as follows:
      
‘In addition to the grounds referred to in Paragraph of the Law on Agricultural Tenancy Dealings, in order to safeguard
         against serious risks to agricultural structures, objections to agricultural tenancy agreements in the part of the Land concerned
         may also be raised where the land leased is used for the production of agricultural goods which are exported free of duty
         outside the common market, and distortions of competition arise as a result.’
      
From July 2010, the Implementation Law was replaced by the law concerning measures for the improvement of the agricultural
         structure in the Land of Baden‑Wurtemberg (Gesetz über Maßnahmen zur Verbesserung der Agrarstruktur in Baden-Württenberg)
         of November (Gesetzblat, p. 645). The second sentence of Article 13(3) of that law is identical in content to Article 6(1) of the Implementation
         Law.
      
 Main proceedings and the question referred for preliminary ruling 
On April 2010, Mr Graf, a Swiss farmer whose business is established in Switzerland, in the area bordering Germany, and
         Mr Engel, the owner of farmland in the Land of Baden‑Wurtemberg in Germany, submitted a lease signed on February to
         the Waldshut Agricultural Office for approval. Under that contract, Mr Engel leases an area of ares of arable land situated
         in the area bordering Switzerland to Mr Graf for an annual rent of EUR 200. Mr Graf intends to export the produce yielded
         by that land to Switzerland.
      
By decision of June 2010, the Agricultural Office objected to the lease and ordered the parties to that agreement to terminate
         it immediately. Although stating that, as self-employed frontier workers, Swiss farmers are treated in the same way as German
         farmers with regard to approval procedures under the Law on Agricultural Tenancy Dealings, the Agricultural Office took the
         view, nevertheless, that the refusal to approve the agricultural lease was based on Paragraph 6(1) of the Implementation Law.
         The Agricultural Office stated that there was distortion of competition and that German farmers, needing to expand their holdings
         of small size, had expressed their interest in taking a lease of the land at a rent customary for the area. Accordingly, there
         is an unsound distribution of land in the present case.
      
Mr Graf and Mr Engel challenged that decision before the Amtsgericht Waldshut‑Tiengen (Waldshut‑Tiengen District Court), submitting,
         inter alia, that Paragraph 6(1) of the Implementation Law is contrary to the Agreement.
      
The national court notes that there is distortion of competition since Mr Graf will receive considerably more in Switzerland
         for produce grown in Germany than he would in Germany. That court holds that the objection to the contract made by the Agricultural
         Office would be valid if Paragraph 6(1) of the Implementation Law was compatible with the Agreement.
      
Having regard to those considerations, the national court stayed proceedings pending a preliminary ruling from the Court of
         Justice on the following question:
      
‘Is Paragraph 6(1) of the [Implementation Law] compatible with the Agreement (…)?’
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
It is to be noted that the situation of a self-employed border farmer who is established in the territory of one Contracting
         Party and leases farmland situated in the territory of the other Contracting Party falls within the scope of the Agreement,
         regardless of the purpose of the economic activity for which the agricultural lease is used.
      
It should further be noted that it is apparent from the case-law that the principle of equal treatment, laid down in Article 15(1)
         of Annex I to the Agreement, concerning access to a self-employed activity and the pursuit thereof, is valid not only for
         ‘self-employed persons’, within the meaning of Article 12(1) of that Annex, but also for ‘self-employed frontier workers’,
         within the meaning of Article 13(1) of that Annex, such as the self-employed Swiss border farmers (see judgment in Case C-13/Stamm and Hauser [2008] ECR I‑11087, paragraphs to and the operative part of the judgment).
      
Consequently, it must be examined whether the principle of equal treatment with regard to access to a self-employed activity
         and the pursuit thereof, established, for self-employed frontier workers, in Article 15(1) of Annex I to the Agreement, precludes
         legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings.
      
It should be stated that, according to its wording, the legislation at issue in the main proceedings does not introduce any
         direct discrimination on grounds of nationality, given that the competent authority may object to agricultural leases irrespective
         of the nationality of the parties, as long as the conditions laid down by the legislation are fulfilled.
      
However, according to the Court’s settled case-law, the principle of equal treatment, which is a concept of European Union
         law, prohibits not only overt discrimination, based on nationality, but also all covert forms of discrimination which, through
         application of other criteria of differentiation, lead in fact to the same result (see, by way of example, Case C‑278/Commission v Belgium [1996] ECR I‑4307, paragraph and the case-law cited). That case-law, which was already in existence at the date of the
         signature of the Agreement, is also valid with regard to the application of that Agreement, in accordance with Article 16(2)
         thereof.
      
As regards the question whether the conditions laid down in the legislation at issue in the main proceedings for the purpose
         of the prohibition of an agricultural lease do, as a matter of fact, involve indirect discrimination, it is enough to hold
         that, in so far as the number of frontier workers established in Switzerland and working agricultural land in Germany comprise
         distinctly more persons of Swiss nationality than of German nationality, such indirect discrimination does exist (see, to
         that effect, Case C‑107/Asscher [1996] ECR I‑3089, paragraphs and 38).
      
Indeed, the conditions laid down in the legislation at issue in the main proceedings operate primarily to the detriment of
         the Swiss farmers.
      
Where it is found that such discrimination exists, it is necessary to investigate whether that discrimination may be justified
         for reasons provided for in the Agreement. 
      
It should be emphasised at the outset that the distortion of competition, alleged by the Agricultural Office, due to the fact
         that the Swiss frontier workers, such as Mr Graf, can receive considerably more in Switzerland for produce grown in Germany
         than they would if they sold it in Germany, does not constitute a reason, laid down in Article 5(1) of Annex I to the Agreement,
         that could be relied on to limit the rights granted by the provisions of that Agreement.
      
The Agricultural Office also raises the objective of agricultural land-use planning as a public order justification, for the
         purposes of Article 5(1) of Annex I to the Agreement.
      
Under that provision, ‘public order’ constitutes a reason which may limit the rights granted under the Agreement. If, for
         the most part, the contracting States remain free to determine, in accordance with their national needs which may vary from
         one State to another and from one era to another, the requirements of public policy and public order, their scope cannot be
         determined unilaterally by each Member State without any control by the Court (see, to this effect, Case C‑33/Jipa [2008] ECR I‑5157, paragraph and the case-law cited). In the light of that finding, the concept of ‘public order’ should
         be contemplated and interpreted in the context of the Agreement and in conformity with the objectives pursued by that Agreement.
      
It is important to note that the Agreement falls within the more general context of relations between the European Union and
         the Swiss Confederation, which, although it did not opt to participate either in the European Economic Area or in the Union’s
         internal market, is nevertheless linked to the Union by numerous agreements covering a wide range of areas and prescribing
         rights and specific obligations, analogous, in some respects, to those laid down by the Treaty. The general objective of these
         agreements, including the Agreement at issue in the main proceedings, is to strengthen the economic ties between the European
         Union and the Swiss Confederation. Therefore, the reasons, exhaustively listed in Article 5(1) of Annex I to the Agreement,
         as justifications for derogation from the fundamental rules of the latter such as the principle of equal treatment, must be
         interpreted strictly.
      
From that perspective, it must be concluded that, if agricultural land‑use planning and the rational division of agricultural
         land can, in certain circumstances, constitute a legitimate objective in the public interest, rules, such as those at issue
         in the main proceedings, concerning the leasing of agricultural land could not in any way be covered by the concept of ‘public
         order’, for the purposes of Article 5(1) of Annex I to the Agreement nor limit the rights granted by that Agreement. 
      
It must be added that national legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which is discriminatory, would also
         contravene, as a new restrictive measure, the ‘Standstill’ clause provided for in Article of the Agreement.
      
In view of the foregoing considerations, the reply to the question submitted by the national court must be that the principle
         of equal treatment laid down in Article 15(1) of Annex I to the Agreement precludes legislation of a Member State, such as
         that at issue in the main proceedings, under which the competent authority of that Member State may object to an agricultural
         lease – relating to land in a particular area of the territory of that Member State and concluded between a resident of that
         Member State and a frontier-zone resident of the other Contracting Party – on the grounds that the land leased is used for
         producing agricultural products intended for export, free of duty, outside the internal market of the European Union and so
         gives rise to distortion of competition, if the application of that legislation affects a much greater number of nationals
         of the other Contracting Party than nationals of the Member State in whose territory that legislation applies. It is for the
         national court to determine whether that latter situation in fact exists. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
The principle of equal treatment laid down in Article 15(1) of Annex I to the Agreement between the European Community and
            its Member States, of the one part, and the Swiss Confederation, of the other, on the free movement of persons, signed in
            Luxembourg on June 1999, precludes legislation of a Member State, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, under
            which the competent authority of that Member State may object to an agricultural lease – relating to land located in a given
            area of the territory of that Member State and concluded between a resident of that Member State and a frontier-zone resident
            of the other contracting party – on the grounds that the land leased is used for producing agricultural products intended
            for export, free of duty, outside the internal market of the European Union and so gives rise to distortion of competition,
            if the application of that legislation affects a much greater number of nationals of the other Contracting Party than nationals
            of the Member State on whose territory that legislation applies. It is for the national court to determine whether that latter
            situation in fact exists.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 