
Avis juridique important
|
61997JJudgment of the Court (First Chamber) of October 1998.  -  Commission of the European Communities v Ireland.  -  Failure to fulfil obligations - Failure to transpose Directive 93/103/EC.  -  Case C-364/97.  
European Court reports Page I-Summary
Parties
Grounds
Decision on costs
Operative part
Keywords
Actions for failure to fulfil obligations - Consideration of the merits by the Court - Situation to be taken into account - Situation as it stood at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion(EC Treaty, Art. 169)  
Summary
In proceedings pursuant to Article of the Treaty, the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations must be determined by reference to the situation in the Member State as it stood at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion, and the Court cannot take account of any subsequent changes. 
Parties
In Case C-364/97,Commission of the European Communities, represented by Pieter Jan Kuijper, Legal Adviser, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of Carlos Gómez de la Cruz, of its Legal Service, Wagner Centre, Kirchberg, applicant, v Ireland, represented by Michael A. Buckley, Chief State Solicitor, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Irish Embassy, Route d'Arlon, defendant, APPLICATION for a declaration that, by not adopting and/or by not communicating to the Commission the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Council Directive 93/103/EC of November concerning the minimum safety and health requirements for work on board fishing vessels (thirteenth individual directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC) (OJ L 307, p. 1), Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EC Treaty, THE COURT (First Chamber), composed of: P. Jann (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, L. Sevón and M. Wathelet, Judges, Advocate General: A. La Pergola, Registrar: R. Grass, having regard to the Report of the Judge-Rapporteur, after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 1998, gives the following Judgment  
Grounds
By application lodged at the Court Registry on October 1997, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action under Article of the EC Treaty for a declaration that, by not adopting and/or by not communicating to the Commission the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Council Directive 93/103/EC of November concerning the minimum safety and health requirements for work on board fishing vessels (thirteenth individual directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC) (OJ L 307, p. 1; hereinafter `the Directive'), Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EC Treaty.Under Article 13(1) of the Directive, the Member States were required to bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with the Directive by November at the latest. Since the Commission was not notified of any legislation intended to transpose the Directive into Irish law and had no information enabling it to conclude that Ireland had complied with that obligation, it initiated against that State the infringement procedure provided for by Article of the Treaty by sending it a letter of formal notice on February 1996. Receiving no reply, the Commission sent Ireland a reasoned opinion by letter of December 1996, calling upon it to adopt the measures necessary to comply with the Directive within two months from the date of its notification. When no official response to that opinion was forthcoming, the Commission brought the present proceedings. In its defence, the Irish Government does not deny the infringement, but states that draft ministerial orders transposing the Directive into national law are in the process of being adopted.  It also requests the Court to stay the proceedings for a period of three months. In its reply, the Commission maintains its pleadings, but submits no observations regarding the Irish Government's request. It is settled law that the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations must be determined by reference to the situation in the Member State as it stood at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion, and that the Court cannot take account of any subsequent changes (see, inter alia, Case C-361/Commission v Spain [1997] ECR I-7351, paragraph 13). Since the Directive was not transposed into national law within the period prescribed, the Commission's application must be regarded as well founded. It must therefore be held that, by failing to adopt within the period prescribed the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with the Directive, Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 13(1) thereof.  
Decision on costs
CostsUnder Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs. Since Ireland has been unsuccessful in its pleadings, it must be ordered to pay the costs.  
Operative part
On those grounds,THE COURT (First Chamber) hereby: 1. Declares that, by failing to adopt within the period prescribed the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Council Directive 93/103/EC of November concerning the minimum safety and health requirements for work on board fishing vessels (thirteenth individual directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC), Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 13(1) thereof; 2. Orders Ireland to pay the costs.  
Top  
 