
Case C-219/Commission of the European Communities
v
Kingdom of Belgium
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Freedom to provide services – Unjustified obstacle – Posting of workers who are nationals of non-member States)
Summary of the Judgment
Freedom to provide services – Restrictions – Posting of workers who are nationals of non-member States by an undertaking in
            another Member State
(Art. EC)
The requirement by a Member State that a service provider should furnish a simple prior declaration certifying that the situation
         of the workers posted to that State who are nationals of non-member States is lawful, particularly in the light of the requirements
         of residence, work visas and social security cover in the Member State where that provider employs them, is a measure which,
         in principle, does not go beyond what is necessary in order to prevent the abuse to which the implementation of the freedom
         to provide services may give rise.
      
(see paras 16, 18)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Freedom to provide services – Unjustified obstacle – Posting of workers who are nationals of non-member States)
In Case C‑219/08,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on May 2008,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by E. Traversa, J.‑P. Keppenne and G. Rozet, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Kingdom of Belgium, represented by C. Pochet, acting as Agent, assisted by M. Detry, avocat,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber (Rapporteur), J.‑C. Bonichot, P. Kūris, L. Bay Larsen and C. Toader,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: M.‑A. Gaudissart, Head of Unit,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on May 2009,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities is seeking a declaration by the Court that, by requiring, in
         the event that workers who are nationals of non-member States are posted by Community undertakings in the framework of a provision
         of services:
      
–        authorisation prior to the exercise of the economic activity;
–        that the residence permit issued in the State in which the employer is established must be valid three months beyond the end
         of the service provided; and
      
–        that a worker must have been in the service of the same employer providing the services for at least sixth months,
the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC.
 National legal context 
Under the Law of April on the employment of foreign workers (Moniteur belge of May 1999, p. 17800), as amended by the Royal Decree of July (Moniteur belge of August 2000, p. 29642), a foreign worker and his employer must obtain in advance a work permit and an employment permit,
         respectively. The first paragraph of Article of that law provides, however:
      
‘The King may, by a decree debated in the Council of Ministers, exempt such categories of foreign workers as He shall determine
         from the requirement to obtain a work permit.’
      
Article of the Royal Decree of June implementing the Law of April on the employment of foreign workers (Moniteur belge of June 1999, p. 24162), as amended by the Royal Decree of February (Moniteur belge of February 2003, p. 9583), provides:
      
‘The following shall not be required to obtain a work permit:
…
14°      workers who are not nationals of a Member State of the European Economic Area and who are employed by an undertaking which
         is established in a Member State of the European Economic Area and enters Belgium in order to provide services, on condition
         that:
      
(a)      those workers have a right or permit to reside for longer than three months in the Member State of the European Economic Area
         in which they are resident;
      
(b)      those workers are legally permitted to work in their Member State of residence, and such permission is valid for at least
         the length of time the service is going to be provided in Belgium;
      
(c)      those workers are in possession of a lawful contract of employment;
(d)      those workers have been in the service of the undertaking for a continuous period of at least six months;
(e)      in order to ensure they return to their country of origin or residence, those workers are in possession of a passport and
         a residence permit that are valid three months beyond the end of the service provided.’
      
 Pre-litigation procedure
The Commission took the view that the Kingdom of Belgium was in breach of Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment
         Article EC) with regard to the posting of workers who are nationals of non-member States and are employed by an undertaking
         established in a Member State other than the Kingdom of Belgium and sent that Member State formal notice, by letter of March 1997, to which it replied by letter of May 1997.
      
By letter of September 1998, the Commission issued a reasoned opinion, to which the Kingdom of Belgium replied by letter
         of November 1998.
      
After a further exchange of correspondence, the Commission, by letter of July 2005, issued another reasoned opinion, to
         which the Kingdom of Belgium replied by letter of October 2005.
      
Not being satisfied with the Kingdom of Belgium’s reply, the Commission decided to bring this action.
      
 Procedure before the Court
By order of the President of the Court of October 2008, the Republic of Poland was granted leave to intervene in support
         of the form of order sought by the Commission. However, after informing the Court that it was withdrawing its intervention
         in this case, that Member State was removed from the register as an intervener in the case by order of the President of the
         Court of January 2009.
      
By a document lodged at the Registry on March 2009, the Commission informed the Court that, in the light of the adoption,
         and the communication by the Kingdom of Belgium, by letter of June 2008, of the Royal Decree of April amending
         Article 2, first paragraph, 14°, of the Royal Decree of June implementing the Law of April on the employment
         of foreign workers (Moniteur belge of May 2008, p. 26202), it had withdrawn its action in so far as it concerned the second and third pleas it had raised.
      
 The action
In its first plea, concerning the need to obtain authorisation prior to the exercise of the economic activity, which, following
         the Commission’s partial withdrawal, became the sole plea in the action, the Commission complains that the Kingdom of Belgium
         unduly restricts the posting, by Community undertakings operating within the freedom to provide services, of workers who are
         nationals of non-member States, where they are posted from a Member State which does not apply the Schengen acquis in its
         entirety or where they are posted, for a period of more than three months, from a Member State which does apply the Schengen
         acquis in its entirety. In such cases, the Kingdom of Belgium requires workers wishing to be posted to Belgium to obtain in
         advance a visa or temporary residence permit under a cumbersome procedure designed to check whether the worker’s posting complies
         with all the criteria of the case-law stemming from Case C‑43/Vander Elst [1994] ECR I-3803).
      
The Commission considers that the restriction on the freedom to provide services arises, in particular, from the fact that
         the Belgian authorities require the workers concerned to produce documents to prove, first, that they are moving to Belgium
         in connection with a posting and that they are therefore exempt from the work permit requirement and, second, that they have
         sufficient means of subsistence, accommodation in Belgium and travel insurance, all this in order to obtain a visa.
      
The Kingdom of Belgium does not deny that it requires production of the evidence mentioned by the Commission. However, the
         evidence can be supplied by any legally permissible means and, in particular, by production of a posting certificate issued
         by the social security authority of the State of origin (Form E 101). The Kingdom of Belgium maintains that such evidence
         is intended only to show that a posted worker fulfils the criteria laid down in the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement
         of June between the Governments of the States of the Benelux Economic Union, the Federal Republic of Germany and the
         French Republic on the gradual abolition of checks at their common borders (OJ L 239, p. 19), signed at Schengen (Luxembourg)
         on June 1990, with subsequent detailed amendments by the Common consular instructions on visas for the diplomatic missions
         and consular posts (OJ C 326, p. 1).
      
In that regard, the Court notes that it is settled case-law that Article EC requires not only the elimination of all discrimination
         on grounds of nationality against service providers who are established in another Member State, but also the abolition of
         any restriction, even if it applies without distinction to national providers of services and to those of other Member States,
         which is liable to prohibit, impede or render less advantageous the activities of a service provider established in another
         Member State, where he lawfully provides similar services (see, in particular, Case C‑244/Commission v Germany [2006] ECR I‑885, paragraph 30).
      
However, where national legislation falling within an area which has not been harmonised at Community level is applicable
         without distinction to all persons and undertakings operating in the territory of the Member State concerned, it may, notwithstanding
         its restrictive effect on the freedom to provide services, be justified where it meets an overriding requirement in the public
         interest and that interest is not already safeguarded by the rules to which the service provider is subject in the Member
         State in which he is established and in so far as it is appropriate for securing the attainment of the objective which it
         pursues and does not go beyond what is necessary in order to attain it (Commission v Germany, paragraph 31, and case-law cited).
      
More particularly, it has already been held that a Member State may check that an undertaking established in another Member
         State, which deploys on the territory of the first-mentioned Member State workers who are nationals of a non-member State,
         is not availing itself of the freedom to provide services for a purpose other than the accomplishment of the service concerned
         (Commission v Germany, paragraph 40, and case-law cited).
      
In that context, the Court held that a requirement that the service provider furnishes a simple prior declaration certifying
         that the situation of the workers concerned is lawful, particularly in the light of the requirements of residence, work visas
         and social security cover in the Member State where that provider employs them, is a measure which, in principle, does not
         exceed what is necessary to prevent the abuse to which the implementation of the freedom to provide services may give rise
         (see, to that effect, Case C‑445/Commission v Luxembourg [2004] ECR I‑10191, paragraph 46, and Commission v Germany, paragraphs and 42).
      
At the hearing the Commission stated that it did not intend to challenge that case-law. It maintained however that the fact
         that the Belgian authorities require the workers concerned to have a Form E constitutes a more detailed procedure than
         the production of a prior declaration by the service provider. 
      
According to the Kingdom of Belgium, production of a Form E is in fact a less onerous procedure for the worker concerned
         than production of a prior declaration by the service provider. However, the Kingdom of Belgium expressly agreed at the hearing
         that, since the evidence required by the Belgian authorities that is described in paragraph above may be supplied by any
         legally permissible means, it may also be supplied by production of a prior declaration by the service provider within the
         meaning of the case-law cited in paragraph above.
      
In those circumstances, it must be stated that the Commission has not shown that the Kingdom of Belgium insists on an authorisation
         prior to the exercise of economic activity where workers who are nationals of non-member States are posted by Community undertakings
         in the framework of a provision of services.
      
In its plea, the Commission also complains of a lack of diligence by the Kingdom of Belgium in granting the visa applied for,
         since the visa is not issued until hours after the person concerned has supplied the necessary documents. It also complains
         of a lack of transparency on the part of the Kingdom of Belgium. In particular, due to the failure to adopt an administrative
         circular, although one had been previously announced by the Belgian authorities, economic operators are unable to know in
         advance the requirements they must fulfil in order to provide services in Belgium.
      
In that regard, suffice it to say that such complaints, even if they were valid, do not show that the Kingdom of Belgium insists
         on an authorisation prior to the exercise of the economic activity.
      
The action must therefore be dismissed.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs, if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Under the first subparagraph of Article 69(5), on application by a party
         who discontinues or withdraws from proceedings, the costs are to be borne by the other party if this appears justified by
         the conduct of that party.
      
In the present case, the Commission has been unsuccessful as regards the single plea it maintained. The partial withdrawal
         by the Commission was the result of the communication by the Kingdom of Belgium of the Royal Decree of April after
         the present action was brought.
      
In the circumstances of this case, each party must bear its own costs. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Dismisses the action;
2.      Orders the Commission of the European Communities and the Kingdom of Belgium each to bear its own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 