
         				Ordonnance de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-82/Agence maritime Lalemant NVvMalzfabrik Tivoli GmbH and OthersandMalzfabrik Tivoli GmbHvBelgisch Interventie- en Restitutiebureau(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Hof van Cassatie)
         
«(Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure – Agriculture – Export refunds – Conditions for payment – Leaving the geographical territory of the Community – Definition)»
Order of the Court (First Chamber), February I - Summary of the Order
Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Export refunds – Conditions of payment – Leaving the geographical territory of the Community – Definition(Commission Regulation No 2730/79, Art. 9(1))Article 9(1) of Regulation No 2730/79, which makes the payment of the export refund subject to the condition that, as matters
         stand, the product must have left the geographical territory of the Community, must be interpreted as meaning that the expression
          
         geographical territory of the Community refers to a physical concept and that the requirement that the product in respect of which export refunds have been applied
         for must have left the geographical territory of the Community is not satisfied either by placing the product under customs
         control or by bringing it within the customs warehousing procedure.see para. 46, operative part
      
  
ORDER OF THE COURT (First Chamber)February (1)
((Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure – Agriculture – Export refunds – Conditions for payment – Leaving the geographical territory of the Community – Definition))
In Case C-82/02, 
         REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Hof van Cassatie (Belgium) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings
         pending before that court between 
         
 Agence Maritime Lalemant NV
and
 Malzfabrik Tivoli GmbH, Malteurop GIE, Belgisch Interventie- en Restitutiebureau and between Malzfabrik Tivoli GmbH and  Belgisch Interventie- en Restitutiebureau,
on the interpretation of Article 9(1) of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2730/of November laying down common detailed
         rules for the application of the system of export refunds on agricultural products (OJ L 317, p. 1), as amended by Commission
         Regulation (EEC) No 3826/of December (OJ L 371, p. 1),
         
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of: M. Wathelet, President of the Chamber, P. Jann and A. Rosas (Rapporteur), Judges, 
         
Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs, Registrar: R. Grass, after informing the referring court that the Court proposes to give its decision by reasoned order pursuant
         to Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure, after inviting the persons referred to in Article of the EC Statute of the
         Court of Justice to submit any observations they might have in that regard, 
         
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General, makes the following 
Order
            
By judgment of February 2002, received at the Court on March 2002, the Hof van Cassatie (Court of Cassation) referred
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC a question on the interpretation of Article 9(1) of Commission
         Regulation (EEC) No 2730/of November laying down common detailed rules for the application of the system of export
         refunds on agricultural products (OJ L 317, p. 1), as amended by Commission Regulation (EEC) No 3826/of December
         (OJ L 371, p. 1,  
         Regulation No 2730/79). 
         
            
That question was raised in proceedings between,  
          inter alia , Agence Maritime Lalemant NV (
         Lalemant) and Belgisch Interventie- en Restitutiebureau (the Belgian Intervention and Refund Board,  
         BIRB) concerning the grant of export refunds for consignments of malt exported in September and October 1986. 
         
Relevant provisions
Export refunds
         
            
The Community rules applicable in the various sectors of the common agricultural policy provide that, to the extent necessary
         to enable a product to be exported, the difference between the world price and the Community price may be covered by an export
         refund. 
         
            
At the time of the facts in the main proceedings, Article of Regulation (EEC) No 2727/of the Council of October on the common organisation of the market in cereals (OJ L 281, p. 1) provided that such a refund could be granted in
         the cereals sector. 
         
            
Also at that time, the common detailed rules for the application of the system of export refunds were governed by Regulation
         No 2730/79. 
         
            
Pursuant to Articles and of that regulation, an exporter wishing to receive an export refund must file a declaration of
         export. The date on which that declaration is accepted by the customs authorities is regarded as the  
         date of export, allowing the rate of the refund to be calculated. For the purposes of applying that regulation, the acceptance of the declaration
         of export is also considered to mark the completion of the customs export formalities and results in the products being placed
         under customs control until they leave the Community or until they reach their destination, as the case may be. 
         The requirement that the products must leave the geographical territory of the Community
         
            
The fourth and fifth recitals in the preamble to Regulation No 2730/are drafted as follows: Whereas the general rules laid down by the Council provide for the refund to be paid upon proof being furnished that the products
         have been exported from the Community; whereas, in order that the notion of  
         exportation from the Community may be interpreted in a uniform manner, it should be specified that a product shall be regarded as having been exported when
         it leaves the geographical territory of the Community;whereas, in view of the special situation of the commune of Livigno in Italy, products dispatched to that commune should be
         regarded as having left the geographical territory of the Community.
         
            
Article of Regulation No 2730/provides that: 
         
1.
 Without prejudice to the provisions of Articles 10, and 26, the refund shall be paid only upon proof being furnished that
         the product in respect of which customs export formalities have been completed has, within days from the day of completion
         of such formalities:
         
─
in the cases specified in Article 5, reached its destination unaltered, or 
         
─
in other cases, left the geographical territory of the Community unaltered. 
         
...
         
2.
 For the purposes of this Regulation:
         
─
products shall be considered to have left the geographical territory of the Community when they have left for territories
            which, although forming part of the geographical territory of a Member State, form part of the customs territory of a non-member
            country; conversely, products shall not be considered to have left the geographical territory of the Community if sent to
            a destination which, although forming part of the geographical territory of a non-member country, is incorporated in the customs
            territory of the Community, 
         
─
the territory of the commune of Livigno shall be considered not to form part of the geographical territory of the Community,
            
         
─
the territories of the Canary Islands, Ceuta and Melilla shall be considered not to form part of the geographical territory
            of the Community, 
         
─
deliveries of catering supplies to platforms as specified in Article 19b(1)(a) shall in all cases be considered to have left
            the geographical territory of the Community
         
. 
         
            
Article of Regulation No 2730/defines certain circumstances in which the exporter must prove not only that the product
         left the geographical territory of the Community, but also that it was imported into a non-member country. Article of that
         regulation, which applies where the rate of refund varies according to destination, requires proof of completion of the customs
         entry formalities for home use in the non-member country. Article of the same regulation, which applies to products for
         the victualling of seagoing vessels and aircraft, provides that Member States may advance the net amount of the refund to
         the exporter subject to certain special conditions, in particular that the products be placed in victualling warehouses under
         customs supervision. 
         Payment in advance of export refunds
         
            
Article of Regulation No 2730/provides that that regulation applies without prejudice to the Community provisions for
         advance payment of export refunds. 
         
            
At the time of the facts in the main proceedings, that subject was governed by Council Regulation (EEC) No 565/of March
         on the advance payment of export refunds in respect of agricultural products (OJ L 62, p. 5), and Commission Regulation
         (EEC) No 798/of March laying down general rules on the advance payment of export refunds and positive monetary
         compensatory amounts in respect of agricultural products (OJ L 87, p. 42). 
         
            
The fifth recital in the preamble to Regulation No 565/states that the payment of an amount equal to the export refund
         does not in any way affect the conditions under which the right to an export refund is established. 
         
            
Under Article 5(1) of Regulation No 565/80, an exporter may obtain the payment of an amount equal to the export refund as
         soon as the products or goods have been brought under the customs warehousing or free zone procedure with a view to their
         being exported within a set time-limit.  
         
            
In that case, pursuant to Regulation No 798/80, the exporter must lodge a payment declaration and provide a security, the
         purpose of which is to ensure that the time-limits laid down by the applicable rules are complied with and that repayments
         of overpaid sums are made where the amount of the refund to which the exporter is entitled is less than the amount of the
         advance payment. 
         
            
Article 11(2) of Regulation No 798/provides that products or goods may remain under the customs warehousing or free zone
         procedure for six months from the date of acceptance of the payment declaration. Article 11(3) of the same regulation provides,
          
          inter alia , that, within days from the date on which the products or goods are no longer subject to the procedure provided for in
         Article of Regulation No 565/80, they must leave the geographical territory of the Community. 
         The disputes in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
            
The judgment ordering reference shows that Malteurop GIE (
         Malteurop), a French company, contacted Lalemant to ask it to complete the formalities and steps necessary for the shipment of consignments
         of malt from Antwerp (Belgium) to Algeria. 
         
            
On June 1986, Malteurop informed Lalemant that tonnes had to be shipped. In a letter drafted in French, Malteurop
         asked Lalemant to place tonnes of malt  
         in a customs warehouse on behalf of Malzfabrik Tivoli GmbH (
         Tivoli) by June at the latest. 
         
            
On June 1986, the customs formalities were completed by the establishment of a Tdocument for the export of tonnes
         of malt. 
         
            
Certain consignments of malt only left the geographical territory of the Community on September (tonnes) and October (tonnes), more than days after completion of the customs export formalities. 
         
            
On January 1987, Lalemant submitted an export refund application in the name of Tivoli. Those refunds were paid. 
         
            
Following an investigation by the German authorities, which found that tonnes of malt had left the geographical area of
         the Community more than days after the completion of the customs export formalities, the Belgian State, represented by
         the service responsible for refunds which preceded the BIRB, brought two sets of proceedings against Lalemant and Tivoli seeking
         repayment of refunds in the sum of BEF and BEF 919. Lalemant summoned Malteurop to appear as intervener and
         third party and Tivoli brought third-party proceedings against Lalemant. 
         
            
In considering the main actions and, more precisely, Lalemant's plea in law that goods placed in a customs warehouse should
         be regarded as having left the geographical territory of the Community within the meaning of Article 9(1) of Regulation No
         2730/79, the Hof van Cassatie held it necessary to refer the following question to the Court for a preliminary ruling: Must Article 9(1) of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2730/of November laying down common detailed rules for the
         application of the system of export refunds on agricultural products be interpreted as meaning that goods exported to non-member
         countries and in respect of which customs export formalities have been completed are to be regarded as having left the geographical
         territory of the Community when they actually leave the territory of the Community or when they are placed in a customs warehouse?
         The question referred for a preliminary ruling
            
By its question, the national court essentially asks whether, on a proper interpretation of Article 9(1) of Regulation No
         2730/79,  
         geographical territory of the Community refers to a physical concept or whether the requirement that the product in respect of which export refunds have been applied
         for must have left the geographic territory of the Community is satisfied where the product was placed in a customs warehouse.
          
         
            
Since it considered that the answer to that question left no room for reasonable doubt, the Court, pursuant to Article 104(3)
         of its Rules of Procedure, informed the national court that it was proposing to give its decision by reasoned order and invited
         the interested parties referred to in Article of the EC Statute of the Court of Justice to submit any observations they
         might have in that regard. Only Lalemant and the BIRB of the parties to the main action, and the Commission, replied to the
         Court's invitation, stating that they had no observations to make. 
         Observations submitted to the Court on the question referred for a preliminary ruling
         
            
Lalemant submits that the reply to the question referred for a preliminary ruling should be that the goods placed in a customs
         warehouse immediately after completion of the customs formalities, prior to their carriage by ship to a non-member country,
         must be treated, the moment they were so placed, as having left the geographical territory of the Community within the meaning
         of Article 9(1) of Regulation No 2730/79. 
         
            
Citing the judgment of October in Case 337/Ireland  v  
          Commission  [1987] ECR 4237, in which the Court held that, where products exported by sea had to undergo transhipment in a Community
         port other than the port of loading, the first port of loading had to be equated, for the purposes of the payment of export
         refunds, to the port of final departure from the geographical territory of the Community within the meaning of Article 9(1)
         of Regulation No 2730/79, Lalemant concludes that the product must be treated as having left that territory not only when
         it has physically left, but also where the export formalities referred to in Articles and of that regulation have been
         completed. 
         
            
That, it maintains, is the case where products are placed immediately in a customs warehouse awaiting shipment to a non-member
         country, since those products then lose the status of Community goods and are no longer in free movement within the Community
         market. In particular, they can only be the subject of specific operations (Case 49/Commission  v  
          Netherlands  [1983] ECR 1195), which distinguishes placement in a customs warehouse from placement under customs control within the meaning
         of Article 3(3) of Regulation No 2730/79.  
         
            
That interpretation of Article 9(1) of Regulation No 2730/is supported by Article of Regulation No 565/80, which provides
         that a refund may be paid in advance for products or goods which have been brought under the customs warehousing or free zone
         procedure with a view to their being exported within a set time-limit, and by Article 11(3) of Regulation No 798/80, which
         provides that products or goods must leave the geographical territory of the Community within days of the date on which
         they are no longer subject to the procedure laid down in Article of Regulation No 565/80. 
         
            
The BIRB, the Italian Government and the Commission, by contrast, consider that Article 9(1) of Regulation No 2730/requires
         the products to have actually left the geographical territory of the Community. 
         
            
They claim that Regulation No 2730/refers to the physical concept of geographical territory, and not to the legal concept
         of customs territory. They cite the fourth recital in the preamble to that regulation in support of that distinction.  
         
            
They point out that that regulation lays down expressly the exceptions to the definition of geographical territory, such as
         the placement of goods for the victualling of ships and aircraft in warehouses under customs supervision, the departure of
         products to territories which, although forming part of the geographical territory of a Member State, are included in the
         customs territory of a non-member country, or the case of the commune of Livigno, which is in Italy but is subject to a separate
         customs regime.  
         
            
They submit that the Community legislature should, similarly, have adopted a specific measure equating the concept of geographical
         territory to that of customs territory. The BIRB states in that regard that if the legislature had intended the placement
         under customs control to be equated to actually leaving the territory, it would have made the grant of export refunds subject
         only to the customs authority's acceptance of the declaration of export. 
         
            
The Commission states that the interpretation that the products must physically leave the geographical territory of the Community
         is supported by Articles to of Regulation No 2730/and by the judgment of December in Case 276/Metelmann  [1985] ECR 4057. That judgment concerned a product which, after completion of the customs export formalities, had been placed
         in a customs warehouse where it was repackaged into different units and subsequently left the geographical territory of the
         Community. The Commission claims that it is perfectly apparent from that judgment that Article 9(1) of the same regulation
         requires the product actually to leave the geographical territory of the Community and not merely that it be placed in a customs
         warehouse.  
         
            
The BIRB further states that it was wrongly suggested to the national court that the goods had been brought under the customs
         warehousing procedure, since there was no declaration of storage. The goods were merely the subject of a declaration of export
         in export form EX69, after which they were placed under customs control and stored temporarily in a grain silo while awaiting
         shipment. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
The condition laid down by Article 9(1) of Regulation No 2730/concerning the departure of goods from the geographical territory
         of the Community refers to a physical concept and not to the legal concept of customs territory. 
         
            
That interpretation is supported by the fourth recital in the preamble to Regulation No 2730/79, which states that the geographical
         territory concept was adopted in order to enable the concept of exportation from the Community to be interpreted in a uniform
         manner. 
         
            
Moreover, that interpretation alone makes sense of the various points contained in Article 9(2) and the fifth recital in the
         preamble to the same regulation concerning the various circumstances in which the concepts of geographical territory and customs
         territory do not overlap. 
         
            
Second, it should be noted that the placement of goods under customs control cannot be equated to their leaving the geographical
         territory of the Community. If it were otherwise, the condition laid down in that regard in Article 9(1) of Regulation No
         2730/would be devoid of any purpose and export refunds would be granted upon completion of the export formalities within
         the meaning of that regulation. 
         
            
That interpretation of Article 9(1) of Regulation No 2730/is supported by Article of the same regulation, relating to
         victualling products, which sets out expressly the particular circumstances in which the placement of such products in premises
         under customs supervision enables the export refunds to be paid in advance. 
         
            
That interpretation is not undermined by the judgment in  
          Ireland  v  
          Commission , cited above. That case concerned the particular context of maritime transhipment operations, which become necessary in certain
         circumstances and on the subject of which the Community Transit Committee, in an opinion in 1973, explained the concept of
         leaving the geographical territory of the Community. 
         
            
Third, in so far as the concept of bringing goods under the customs warehousing procedure is relevant to the circumstances
         of the main proceedings, as described by the national court, it should be noted that the provisions applicable to export refunds
         at the time of the facts in the main proceedings lay down two separate procedures. The exporter may export directly, pursuant
         to Regulation No 2730/79, or export goods only after storage in accordance with the customs warehousing procedure under Article
         of Regulation No 565/80. 
         
            
Where the exporter wishes to obtain refunds for direct exports, he must lodge a declaration of exportation and place the goods
         under customs supervision where they may remain for a maximum of days. Where the exporter wishes to obtain payment in advance
         of refunds for goods previously placed in storage, he must file a payment declaration and bring the goods under the customs
         warehousing procedure where they may remain for a maximum of six months, the exporter having to complete the export formalities
         within that period and export the goods within the following days.  
         
            
It follows from the provisions applicable to those two procedures when read together that the exporter who completes the customs
         export formalities within the meaning of Regulation No 2730/has categorically undertaken to export the goods within days starting from the day on which the declaration of exportation is accepted, and is unable subsequently to opt for the
         procedure of payment of the refunds in advance after the goods have been stored in a customs warehouse under Regulation No
         565/80.  
         
            
Bringing goods under the customs warehousing procedure in order to benefit from the payment in advance of refunds, as provided
         for by Article of Regulation No 565/80, can thus only occur prior to completion of the customs export formalities and provided
         that a payment declaration has been filed.  
         
            
It follows that Lalemant's interpretation of Article 9(1) of Regulation No 2730/79, that the requirement to leave the geographical
         territory of the Community is met by bringing the product under the customs warehousing procedure, is manifestly unfounded.
         
         
            
It follows from the foregoing that Article 9(1) of Regulation No 2730/must be interpreted as meaning that the expression
          
         geographical territory of the Community refers to a physical concept and that the requirement that the product in respect of which export refunds have been applied
         for must have left the geographical territory of the Community is not satisfied either by placing the product under customs
         control or by bringing it within the customs warehousing procedure. 
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the Italian Government and by the Commission, which have submitted observations to the Court, are not
         recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the actions pending before the
         national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (First Chamber),
in answer to the question referred to it by the Hof van Cassatie by judgment of February 2002, hereby rules:
         Article 9(1) of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2730/of November laying down common detailed rules for the application
            of the system of export refunds on agricultural products, as amended by Commission Regulation (EEC) No 3826/of December
            must be interpreted as meaning that the expression  
            geographical territory of the Community refers to a physical concept and that the requirement that the product in respect of which export refunds have been applied
            for must have left the geographical territory of the Community is not satisfied either by placing the product under customs
            control or by bringing it within the customs warehousing procedure.Delivered in open Court in Luxembourg on February 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
M. Wathelet  
Registrar
President of the First Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: Dutch.
Top  
 