
Case C-392/Uszodaépítő kft
v
APEH Központi Hivatal Hatósági Főosztály
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Baranya Megyei Bíróság)
(Sixth VAT Directive – Directive 2006/112/EC – Right to deduct input tax – New national legislation – Requirements as to the content of an invoice – Retroactive application – Loss of the right to deduct)
Summary of the Judgment
Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax – Deduction of input tax – Reverse
            charge procedure – Taxable person liable for value added tax as the person to whom goods or services provided – Right to deduct
(Council Directive 2006/112, Arts 167, and 178)
Articles 167, and of Directive 2006/112, on the common system of value added tax, must be interpreted as precluding
         the retroactive application of national legislation which, in the context of a reverse charge regime, makes the deduction
         of value added tax relating to construction works conditional upon the amendment of invoices for those services and the submission
         of a supplementary, amending tax declaration, while the tax authority concerned has all the information necessary to establish
         that the taxable person is, as the recipient of the supply of services at issue, liable to value added tax, and to ascertain
         the amount of tax deductible.
      
The fact that a taxpayer opts to apply a new value added tax law rather than a previous one cannot of itself affect its right
         to deduct the input value added tax paid, which arises directly from Articles and of Directive 2006/112. The principle
         of fiscal neutrality also requires deduction of input tax to be allowed if the substantive requirements are satisfied, even
         if the taxable person has failed to comply with some of the formal requirements. Therefore, when the tax authority has the
         information necessary to establish that the taxable person is, as the recipient of the supply of services at issue, liable
         to value added tax, Articles 167, and 178(f) of Directive 2006/preclude legislation which imposes, in relation to
         the right of that taxable person to deduct that tax, additional conditions which may have the effect of rendering that right
         ineffective for practical purposes. This could be the case when the substantive conditions in order to benefit from the right
         to deduct, laid down in Article 168(a) of Directive 2006/112, have been fulfilled and, at the time the tax authority denies
         the taxpayer the right to deduct the value added tax, that authority has all the information necessary to establish that the
         taxpayer is liable to value added tax.
      
(see paras 36, 39-40, 42-43, 46, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
September (*)
      
(Sixth VAT Directive – Directive 2006/112/EC – Right to deduct input tax – New national legislation – Requirements as to the content of an invoice – Retroactive application – Loss of the right to deduct)
In Case C‑392/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, by the Baranya Megyei Bíróság (Hungary), made by decision of April
         2009, received at the Court on October 2009, in the proceedings
      
Uszodaépítő kft
v
APEH Központi Hivatal Hatósági Főosztály,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, R. Silva de Lapuerta, E. Juhász, J. Malenovský and D. Šváby,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: N. Jääskinen,
Registrar: R. Grass,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        the Hungarian Government, by J. Fazekas, M. Fehér and Z. Tóth, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by B.D. Simon, acting as Agent,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles and of the Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC
         of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes – Common system of value added
         tax: uniform basis of assessment (OJ L 145, p. 1), as amended by Council Directive 2001/115/EC of December (OJ L 15, p. 24, ‘the Sixth Directive’) and the interpretation of the general principles of European Union law.
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between Uszodaépítő kft and APEH Központi Hivatal Hatósági Főosztály (central office
         of the administrative department of the tax and finance inspection office, ‘the APEH’) in relation to the latter’s denial
         of the right of the applicant in the main proceedings to deduct, from the value added tax (‘VAT’) which it was liable to pay,
         the VAT relating to the supply of construction work which had been made to it.
      
 Legal context
 European Union legislation
Council Directive 2006/112/EC of November on the common system of value added tax (OJ L 347, p. 1) repealed and
         replaced from January 2007, pursuant to Articles and thereof, European Union law on VAT, in particular the Sixth
         Directive. According to the first and third recitals in the preamble to Directive 2006/112, the recasting of the Sixth Directive
         was necessary to ensure that the provisions on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to VAT are presented
         in a clear and rational manner in a revised structure and wording while, in principle, not making material changes. The provisions
         of Directive 2006/are therefore identical, essentially, to the corresponding provisions of the Sixth Directive.
      
Under Article of Directive 2006/112, which repeats the wording of Article 17(1) of the Sixth Directive, ‘[a] right of
         deduction shall arise at the time when the deductible tax becomes chargeable’.
      
Article 168(a) of Directive 2006/112, the wording of which is essentially identical to that of Article 17(2)(a) of the Sixth
         Directive, in the version given in Article 28f(1) of that directive, provides:
      
‘In so far as the goods and services are used for the purposes of the taxed transactions of a taxable person, the taxable
         person shall be entitled, in the Member State in which he carries out these transactions, to deduct the following from the
         VAT which he is liable to pay:
      
(a)      the VAT due or paid in that Member State in respect of supplies to him of goods or services, carried out or to be carried
         out by another taxable person’.
      
Article of Directive 2006/112, which essentially repeats the wording of Article 18(1) of the Sixth Directive, in the version
         given in Article 28f(2) of that directive, contains the following provisions:
      
‘In order to exercise the right of deduction, a taxable person must meet the following conditions:
…
(f)      when required to pay VAT as a customer where Articles to or Article apply, he must comply with the formalities
         as laid down by each Member State.’
      
Article 199(1)(a) of Directive 2006/provides:
      
‘1.      Member States may provide that the person liable for payment of VAT is the taxable person to whom any of the following supplies
         are made:
      
(a)      the supply of construction work …’.
A regime such as that arising from Article 199(1)(a) of Directive 2006/is known as the ‘reverse charge procedure’ and
         was previously provided for under Article 21(1) of the Sixth Directive.
      
 National legislation
Paragraph 127(1)(a) of Law CXXVII of on value added tax (Általános forgalmi adóról szóló 2007. évi CXXVII törvény, ‘the
         new VAT Law’), which came into force on January 2008, provides that ‘[a]n objective condition for the exercise of the right
         to deduct is that the taxable person personally have … an invoice issued in his name which attests to the performance of the
         transaction’.
      
Paragraph 142(1)(b) of the new VAT Law provides:
      
‘1.      The tax shall be paid by the acquirer of the goods or the recipient of the services:
…
(b)      in the event of construction … work …’.
Paragraph 142(7) of the new VAT Law states that ‘[w]here subparagraph applies, the transferor of the goods or supplier of
         the service shall undertake to issue an invoice in which the tax charged and the rate … do not appear’.
      
Paragraph 169(k) of the new VAT Law provides:
      
‘The invoice must contain the following details:
(k)      … where the acquirer of the goods or the recipient of the service is liable for the tax, a reference to a legal rule or some
         other unequivocal indication that the sale of the goods or provision of the service
      
…
(k)(b)is liable to tax in the hands of the acquirer of the goods or the recipient of the service’.
Paragraph 269(1) of the new VAT Law further provides: 
      
‘In the event that both the present law and Law LXXIV of on value added tax [‘the previous VAT Law’] govern, for the
         person or persons concerned, the rights and obligations which are to be exercised with regard to self-assessment and which
         arise as a result of a taxable transaction constituted by the same events, the determination and application of such rights
         and obligations shall continue to be governed, once the present law has entered into force, exclusively by the provisions
         of the [previous] VAT Law, unless the present law removes obligations with regard to all the persons concerned taken together,
         or imposes less onerous obligations or establishes new rights or improvements compared with the [previous] VAT Law. In such
         a case, the rights and obligations may be determined and applied – on the basis of a joint decision by all those concerned
         – having regard to the provisions of this law, even where such rights and obligations arose prior to the entry into force
         of the present law, within the limitation period, provided that the persons concerned have previously notified their joint
         decision to that effect in writing to the State tax authority by means of a joint application which must be received by the
         competent office of that authority by February at the latest. That time-limit is mandatory and may not be extended.
         If the application is submitted late, a supplementary declaration may be made free of surcharge.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
On June 2006, the applicant in the main proceedings concluded a contract for works with NÁS MPS-kft, the developer, relating
         to construction work. The applicant in the main proceedings carried out the works with the participation of various subcontractors.
      
The work began in the spring of but came to a halt in the summer of because of financial problems. The invoices
         relating to the work completed at that point were issued. Both the applicant in the main proceedings and its subcontractors
         complied with their obligations as regards the declaration and payment of VAT under the previous VAT law.
      
On February 2008, following the entry into force of the new VAT law, the applicant in the main proceedings, the developer
         and the subcontractors, by a joint decision and in accordance with Paragraph 269(1) of that law, requested that the provisions
         of the new VAT Law be applied to the work carried out under both the contract between the applicant in the main proceedings
         and the developer and the contract entered into between the applicant and its subcontractors (‘the declaration of February
         2008’).
      
Following an examination by the tax authority of the VAT declaration made by the applicant in the main proceedings for the
         financial year 2007, by decision of May the authority made a determination of a VAT debt of HUF in respect
         of the period from April to September for which the applicant in the main proceedings was liable. In that connection,
         the tax authority reasoned that the invoices issued by the subcontractors did not provide a basis for the applicant’s right
         to deduct, since those invoices did not comply with the provisions of the new VAT Law. Following the declaration of February
         2008, the new VAT law’s provisions relating to the reverse charge procedure were applicable retroactively to the invoices
         issued during the financial year 2007. The authority submits that the invoices issued by the subcontractors ought to have
         complied with the provisions of Paragraphs 142(7) and 169(k) of the new law. Consequently, in order for the applicant in the
         main proceedings to be able to exercise its right to deduct in accordance with the provisions of the new VAT Law, the subcontractors
         should have amended the invoices issued and the applicant should have amended its VAT declaration for the financial year by means of a supplementary declaration.
      
By a decision of September 2008, the APEH upheld the decision of May 2008.
      
The applicant in the main proceedings brought an action before the Baranya Megyei Bíróság (Baranya regional court) for the
         annulment of the APEH’s decision of September 2008. The Baranya Megyei Bíróság considers that, by cancelling retroactively
         the right to deduct lawfully exercised by the applicant in the main proceedings in accordance with the previous VAT law, Paragraph
         269(1) of the new VAT law infringes Articles and of the Sixth Directive and various general principles of European Union
         law.
      
In those circumstances the Baranya Megyei Bíróság decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following questions to the
         Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Is a provision of a law of a Member State, which entered into force on January 2008, after the right to deduct had arisen,
         and which, for the purposes of the deduction of VAT paid and declared in relation to supplies of goods or services made in
         the financial year, requires the amendment of the content of invoices and the submission of a supplementary declaration,
         compatible with Articles and of the Sixth Directive?
      
(2)      Is the measure laid down by Paragraph 269(1) of the new VAT Law, according to which, if the conditions set out in that paragraph
         are met, rights and obligations must be determined and applied in accordance with the provisions of that Law, even where they
         arose before the entry into force thereof, subject to limitation, compatible with the general principles of [European Union]
         law, and, in particular, is it objectively justifiable, reasonable, proportionate and consistent with the principle of legal
         certainty?’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred
 Admissibility
The Hungarian Government submits that the main proceedings do not require an interpretation of the provisions and legal principles
         referred to in the order for reference. In that connection, it points out, first, that the retroactive application of the
         provisions of the new VAT law is based exclusively on an explicit and voluntary expression of the will of the applicant in
         the main proceedings and the other taxpayers concerned. Since the applicant in the main proceedings specifically requested
         the retroactive application of that law, it must comply with the legal consequences flowing therefrom. Second, the main proceedings
         arise from the misinterpretation by the applicant in the main proceedings of the transitional provisions of the new VAT law.
         The proceedings raise a question of the interpretation of national law not European Union law.
      
In that regard, it should be borne in mind that, in accordance with settled case-law, in the context of the cooperation between
         the Court of Justice of the European Union and the national courts provided for by Article TFEU, it is solely for the
         national court before which the dispute has been brought, and which must assume responsibility for the subsequent judicial
         decision, to determine in the light of the particular circumstances of the case both the need for a preliminary ruling in
         order to enable it to deliver judgment and the relevance of the questions which it submits to the Court. Consequently, where
         questions submitted by national courts concern the interpretation of a provision of European Union law, the Court of Justice
         is bound, in principle, to give a ruling (see, inter alia, Case C‑379/PreussenElektra [2001] ECR I‑2099, paragraph 38; Case C‑103/Gottwald [2009] ECR I‑9117, paragraph 16; and Case C‑82/Dimos Agiou Nikolaou [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 14).
      
It follows that the presumption that questions referred by national courts for a preliminary ruling are relevant may be rebutted
         only in exceptional cases, where it is quite obvious that the interpretation which is sought of the provisions of European
         Union law referred to in the questions bears no relation to the actual facts of the main action or to its purpose (see, inter
         alia, Gottwald, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
In the present case, notwithstanding the fact that the applicant in the main proceedings opted to apply the new VAT law, and
         even if the choice made by it is based on a misinterpretation of the law in question, it is nevertheless the case that the
         provisions of that new law are applicable to the main proceedings and that the national court is uncertain as to whether the
         transitional measures of that law are compatible with various provisions of European Union law, since those measures prevent
         the applicant from exercising its right to deduct VAT.
      
Clearly, therefore, it is not obvious that the interpretation of European Union law sought is irrelevant in light of the decision
         which the national court is called upon to give.
      
Consequently, the reference for a preliminary ruling must be declared admissible.
      
 The first question
As regards, first, the subject-matter of the first question, it should be stated that the national court’s reference concerns
         the interpretation of Articles and of the Sixth Directive.
      
However, in accordance with Articles and of Directive 2006/112, that directive repealed and replaced the Sixth Directive
         from January 2007.
      
Thus, since the relevant facts in the main proceedings post-date January 2007, only the interpretation of the provisions
         of Directive 2006/is relevant to the present case.
      
The fact that the national court has, formally speaking, worded the questions referred for a preliminary ruling with reference
         solely to provisions of the Sixth Directive does not preclude the Court from providing to the national court all the elements
         of interpretation which may be of assistance in adjudicating on the case pending before it, whether or not that court has
         referred to them in the wording of its questions (see, to that effect, Case C‑115/ČEZ [2009] ECR I‑10265, paragraph 81, and Case C‑341/Petersen [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 48).
      
In that regard, it must be observed that, as is clear from the third recital of Directive 2006/112, that directive is a recasting
         of the existing legislation on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to VAT, and in particular the Sixth
         Directive, and does not in principle involve any material changes to that legislation.
      
In those circumstances, it must be held that the first question referred concerns the interpretation of Articles and of Directive 2006/112, which correspond to the provisions of the Sixth Directive mentioned in the order for reference. In
         addition, since the first question concerns, in essence, the procedure for exercising the right to deduct VAT, it must be
         held that it also concerns the interpretation of Article of Directive 2006/112.
      
Second, as regards the substance, the national court asks, in essence, whether Articles 167, and of Directive 2006/preclude national legislation, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which, in the context of the retroactive application
         of new provisions relating to the reverse charge procedure, makes the deduction of VAT conditional upon the amendment of invoices
         for the services provided before the new law entered into force and the submission of a supplementary tax declaration.
      
In that regard, it must be recalled, first, that the right to deduct provided for in Articles and of Directive 2006/is an integral part of the VAT scheme and in principle may not be limited. The right to deduct is exercisable immediately
         in respect of all the taxes charged on transactions relating to inputs (Case C‑368/Pannon Gép Centrum [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
The deduction system is meant to relieve the taxpayer entirely of the burden of the VAT payable or paid in the course of all
         his economic activities. The common system of VAT consequently ensures complete neutrality of taxation of all economic activities
         provided that they are themselves subject in principle to VAT (Case C‑408/Abbey National [2001] ECR I-1361, paragraph 24; Case C‑25/HE [2005] ECR I‑3123, paragraph 70; and Joined Cases C‑439/and C-440/Kittel and Recolta Recycling [2006] ECR I‑6161, paragraph 48).
      
The fact that the taxpayer opted to apply the new VAT law rather than the previous one cannot therefore of itself affect its
         right to deduct the input VAT paid, which arises directly from Articles and of Directive 2006/112.
      
As regards, second, the procedures for exercising the right to deduct VAT, such as those referred to in Article of Directive
         2006/112, since a reverse charge procedure under Article 199(1)(a) of that directive is at issue, only the procedure referred
         to in Article 178(f) is applicable. Therefore, a taxable person who is liable as the recipient of services for the VAT relating
         thereto is not obliged to hold an invoice drawn up in accordance with the formal requirements of Directive 2006/in order
         to be able to exercise his right to deduct, and only has to fulfil the formalities laid down by the Member State concerned
         in the exercise of the option conferred by Article 178(f) of that directive (see, to that effect, Case C‑90/Bockemühl [2004] ECR I-3303, paragraph 47).
      
It is apparent from the case-law that the formalities thus laid down by the Member State concerned, which must be complied
         with by a taxable person in order to be able to exercise the right to deduct VAT, should not exceed what is strictly necessary
         for the purposes of verifying the correct application of the reverse charge procedure (see, to that effect, Bockemühl, paragraph 50).
      
In that regard, it has already been held that the principle of fiscal neutrality requires deduction of input tax to be allowed
         if the substantive requirements are satisfied, even if the taxable person has failed to comply with some of the formal requirements
         (Joined Cases C‑95/and C-96/Ecotrade [2008] ECR I-3457, paragraph 63).
      
Therefore, where the tax authority has the information necessary to establish that the taxable person is, as the recipient
         of the supply of services at issue, liable to VAT, Articles 167, and 178(f) of Directive 2006/preclude legislation
         which imposes, in relation to the right of that taxable person to deduct that tax, additional conditions which may have the
         effect of rendering that right ineffective for practical purposes (see, to that effect, Bockemühl, paragraph and Ecotrade, paragraph 64).
      
In the context of the main proceedings, the tax authority denied the applicant the right to deduct the VAT relating to the
         construction work carried out during by its subcontractors, on the ground that, first, the applicant did not hold invoices
         for the services amended in accordance with the provisions of Paragraphs 142(7) and 169(k) of the new VAT Law, which were
         applicable retroactively from January 2008, and that, second, it had failed to amend its tax declaration for on the
         basis of the invoices thus amended.
      
First, it is apparent from the file that the substantive conditions in order to benefit from the right to deduct VAT, laid
         down in Article 168(a) of Directive 2006/112, have been fulfilled so that the applicant in the main proceedings is entitled
         to deduct the VAT relating to the construction work carried out by its subcontractors. It should be noted that those services
         were used for the purposes of the taxable person’s taxable transactions in the Member State concerned. In addition, on the
         basis of the tax declaration for 2007, the tax authority in question was informed that the substantive conditions had been
         fulfilled.
      
Second, it is not disputed that, at the time the tax authority denied the applicant in the main proceedings the right to deduct
         the VAT, that authority had, on the basis of the tax declaration for the financial year and the declaration of February
         2008, all the information necessary to establish that the applicant in the main proceedings was, as the recipient of the construction
         work carried out by its subcontractors, liable to VAT.
      
As the European Commission points out, the imposition of formal requirements such as those at issue in the main proceedings
         could have the effect of rendering the applicant’s right to deduct ineffective.
      
Having regard to the case-law referred to at paragraphs and above, it must therefore be held that Articles 167, and of Directive 2006/preclude the imposition of formal requirements such as those at issue in the main proceedings.
      
In those circumstances, Articles 167, and of Directive 2006/must be interpreted as precluding the retroactive
         application of national legislation which, in the context of a reverse charge regime, makes the deduction of VAT relating
         to construction works conditional upon the amendment of invoices for those services and the submission of a supplementary,
         amending tax declaration, while the tax authority concerned has all the information necessary to establish that the taxable
         person is, as the recipient of the supply of services at issue, liable to VAT, and to ascertain the amount of tax deductible.
      
 The second question
In view of the answer to the first question, there is no need to answer the second question.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
Articles 167, and of Council Directive 2006/112/EC of November on the common system of value added tax must
            be interpreted as precluding the retroactive application of national legislation which, in the context of a reverse charge
            regime, makes the deduction of value added tax relating to construction works conditional upon the amendment of invoices for
            those services and the submission of a supplementary, amending tax declaration, while the tax authority concerned has all
            the information necessary to establish that the taxable person is, as the recipient of the supply of services at issue, liable
            to value added tax, and to ascertain the amount of tax deductible.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Hungarian.
      
Top  
 