
Joined Cases C-230/and C-231/Hauptzollamt Koblenz
v
Kurt und Thomas Etling in GbR
and
Hauptzollamt Oldenburg
v
Theodor Aissen and Hermann Rohaan
(References for a preliminary ruling from the Bundesfinanzhof)
(Agriculture – Milk and dairy sector – Regulation (EC) No 1788/– Levy in the milk and dairy sector – Regulation (EC) No 1782/– Direct support schemes under the common agricultural policy – Transfer of individual reference quantities – Repercussions on the calculation of the levy – Repercussions on the calculation of the dairy premium)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Milk and milk products – Levy in the milk and dairy sector – Reallocation
            of the unused part of the national reference quantity allocated to deliveries
(Council Regulation No 1788/2003, as amended by Regulation No 2217/2004, Arts 5(j) and 10(3))
2.        Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Milk and milk products – Levy in the milk and dairy sector – Reallocation
            of the unused part of the national reference quantity allocated to deliveries 
(Council Regulation No 1788/2003, as amended by Regulation No 2217/2004)
3.        Agriculture – Common agricultural policy – Direct support schemes under the common agricultural policy – Single payment scheme
            – Concept of individual reference quantity eligible for premium and available on the holding 
(Council Regulations No 1782/2003, as amended by Regulation No 118/2005, Art. 95(1), and No 1788/2003, as amended by Regulation
            No 2217/2004, Art. 5(k))
1.        Article 10(3) of Regulation No 1788/establishing a levy in the milk and milk products sector, as amended by Regulation
         No 2217/2004, must be interpreted as meaning that the reallocation of the unused part of the national reference quantity allocated
         to deliveries must be carried out in proportion to the individual reference quantity of each producer having overdelivered,
         namely, that determined at April of the relevant 12-month period, or according to objective criteria to be set by the Member
         States. The concept of individual reference quantity, as defined in Article 5(j) of the said regulation, in that it refers
         to the starting date of the relevant 12‑month period, does not allow transfers of reference quantities during that period
         to be taken into account.
      
(see paras 72, 79, operative part 1)
2.        National legislation implementing the option, provided for in Article 10(3) of Regulation No 1788/establishing a levy
         in the milk and milk products sector, as amended by Regulation No 2217/2004, of setting objective criteria according to which
         the reallocation of the unused part of the national reference quantity allocated to deliveries is to be carried out must observe,
         in particular, the general principles of EU law and the objectives pursued by the common agricultural policy, more especially
         those concerning the common organisation of the markets in the milk sector. 
      
Those objectives do not preclude national legislation, adopted in the context of the implementation of that option, which
         allows overdelivering producers, who have, in accordance with the provisions of Regulation No 1788/as amended, received
         a transfer, during the relevant 12‑month period, of an individual reference quantity under which milk has already been delivered
         for that same period by the producer who previously held it, to participate in that reallocation by including some or all
         of that reference quantity. Member States must, however, ensure that such legislation does not give rise to transfers which,
         while formally satisfying the conditions laid down by that regulation, are intended solely to allow certain overdelivering
         producers to obtain a more favourable position on that reallocation. 
      
(see para. 79, operative part 2-3)
3.        The expression ‘individual reference quantity eligible for premium and available on the holding’ contained in Article 95(1)
         of Regulation No 1782/establishing common rules for direct support schemes under the common agricultural policy and establishing
         certain support schemes for farmers, as amended by Regulation No 118/2005, which corresponds to the expression ‘available
         reference quantity’ contained in Article 5(k) of Regulation No 1788/2003, establishing a levy in the milk and milk products
         sector, as amended by Regulation No 2217/2004, must be interpreted as meaning that, when a producer has received a transfer,
         during the relevant 12-month period, of a reference quantity under which milk has already been delivered by the transferor
         during the same period, that expression does not cover, as regards the transferee, that part of the transferred reference
         quantity under which milk has already been delivered exempt from the levy by the transferor.
      
(see para. 93, operative part 4)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Agriculture – Milk and dairy sector – Regulation (EC) No 1788/– Levy in the milk and dairy sector – Regulation (EC) No 1782/– Direct support schemes under the common agricultural policy – Transfer of individual reference quantities – Repercussions on the calculation of the levy – Repercussions on the calculation of the dairy premium)
In Joined Cases C‑230/and C-231/09,
REFERENCES for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, from the Bundesfinanzhof (Germany), made by decision of March
         2009, received at the Court on June 2009, in the proceedings
      
Hauptzollamt Koblenz (C-230/09),
v
Kurt Etling und Thomas Etling in GbR,
intervening parties:
Bundesministerium der Finanzen,
and
Hauptzollamt Oldenburg (C-231/09),
v
Theodor Aissen,
Hermann Rohaan,
intervening parties:
Bundesministerium der Finanzen,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of A. Tizzano, President of Chamber, A. Borg Barthet, M. Ilešič (Rapporteur), M. Safjan and M. Berger, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: B. Fülöp, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on May 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Hauptzollamt Koblenz, by C. Busse, Regierungsdirektor,
–        Kurt Etling und Thomas Etling in GbR, by G. Zulauf, Rechtsanwalt,
–        Hauptzollamt Oldenburg, by A. Kramer and W. Uhlig, Regierungsdirektoren,
–        Mr Aissen, by A. Enninga, Rechtsanwalt,
–        Mr Rohaan, by D. Schuhmacher, Rechtsanwalt,
–        the European Commission, by G. von Rintelen and H. Tserepa‑Lacombe, acting as Agents.
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
The references for a preliminary ruling concern the interpretation of Council Regulation (EC) No 1788/of September
         establishing a levy in the milk and milk products sector (OJ L 270, p. 123), as amended by Council Regulation (EC)
         No 2217/of December (OJ L 375, p. 1; ‘Regulation No 1788/2003’).
      
The references were made in disputes between, in Case C‑230/09, the Hauptzollamt Koblenz (principal customs office, Koblenz)
         and Kurt Etling und Thomas Etling in GbR, and, in Case C‑231/09, between the Hauptzollamt Oldenburg (principal customs office,
         Oldenburg) and Mr Aissen and Mr Rohaan, respectively concerning, first, determination of the reference quantity by reference
         to which the amount of the dairy premium is fixed, and, secondly, determination of the basis on which participation in the
         reallocation of the unused part of the national reference quantity allocated to deliveries is to be fixed.
      
 Legal context
 European Union legislation
 The legislation on the levy in the milk sector
In 1984, by reason of a persisting imbalance between supply and demand in the milk sector, an additional levy system in that
         sector, based on the principle that a levy is due for quantities of milk and/or milk equivalent exceeding a reference quantity
         to be determined, was established by Council Regulation (EEC) No 856/of March amending Regulation (EEC) No 804/on the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products (OJ L 90, p. 10).
      
The same day saw the adoption of Council Regulation (EEC) No 857/of March adopting general rules for the application
         of the levy referred to in Article 5c of Regulation (EEC) No 804/in the milk and milk products sector (OJ L 90, p. 13).
      
The additional levy system was extended on a number of occasions, notably by Council Regulation (EEC) No 3950/92, of December
         1992, establishing an additional levy in the milk and milk products sector (OJ L 405, p. 1), which was amended several
         times.
      
With a view in particular to simplification and clarification, that latter regulation was repealed and replaced by Regulation
         No 1788/2003, which was in turn repealed and replaced by Council Regulation (EC) No 1234/of October establishing
         a common organisation of agricultural markets and on specific provisions for certain agricultural products (‘Single CMO’ Regulation)
         (OJ L 299, p. 1), with effect from April 2008. The disputes in the main proceedings nevertheless remain governed ratione temporis by Regulation No 1788/2003.
      
The fourth, tenth and fourteenth recitals of Regulation No 1788/were worded as follows:
      
‘(5)      The levy should be set at a dissuasive level and be payable by the Member States as soon as the national reference quantity
         is exceeded. The Member State should then divide the burden of payment among the producers who have contributed to the overrun.
         The latter must be liable vis-à-vis the Member State for payment of their contribution to the levy due for the mere fact of
         having overrun their available quantity.
      
…
(10)      … The sum of the quantities allocated to the producers by the Member States may not exceed the national reference quantities.
         …
      
…
(14)      In order to ensure that administration of the scheme remains sufficiently flexible, the Member States should be authorised
         to reallocate unused reference quantities at the end of a period, either nationally or among purchasers.’
      
Regulation No 1788/established rules for allocating each national reference quantity between producers, in the form of
         individual reference quantities.
      
Article of that regulation provided:
      
‘The levy shall be entirely allocated, in accordance with the provisions of Articles and 12, among the producers who have
         contributed to each of the overruns of the national reference quantities referred to in Article 1(2).
      
Without prejudice to Article 10(3) and Article 12(1), producers shall be liable vis‑à-vis the Member State for payment of
         their contribution to the levy due, calculated in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3, for the mere fact of having
         overrun their available reference quantities.’
      
Article of Regulation No 1788/provided:
      
‘For the purposes of this Regulation:
…
(i)      “national reference quantity” means the reference quantity fixed in Annex I for each Member State; 
(j)      “individual reference quantity” means a producer’s reference quantity at April of any twelve-month period;
(k)      “available reference quantity” means the reference quantity available to producers on March of the twelve-month period
         for which the levy is calculated, taking account of all transfers, sales, conversions and temporary re-allocations provided
         for in this Regulation which have taken place during that twelve-month period.’
      
According to Article 6(5) of Regulation No 1788/2003:
      
‘Individual reference quantities shall be modified, where appropriate, for each of the twelve-month periods concerned, so
         that, for each Member State, the sum of the individual reference quantities for the deliveries and that for the direct sales
         does not exceed the corresponding part of the national reference quantity adapted in accordance with Article 8, taking account
         of any reductions made for allocation to the national reserve as provided for in Article 14.’
      
Article 10(3) of the same regulation allowed for the possibility of carrying out a reallocation of the unused part of the
         national reference quantity allocated to deliveries. It provided:
      
‘Each producer’s contribution to payment of the levy shall be established by decision of the Member State, after any unused
         part of the national reference quantity allocated to deliveries has or has not been re-allocated, in proportion to the individual
         reference quantities of each producer or according to objective criteria to be set by the Member States:
      
(a)      either at national level on the basis of the amount by which each producer’s reference quantity has been exceeded,
(b)      or firstly at the level of the purchaser and thereafter at national level where appropriate.’
Articles to of Regulation No 1788/laid down certain conditions under which individual reference quantities could
         be transferred.
      
The first subparagraph of Article 16(1) of that regulation provided:
      
‘By the end of each twelve-month period, Member States shall authorise, for the period concerned, any temporary transfers
         of part of individual reference quantities which the producers who are entitled thereto do not intend to use.’
      
Article 17(1) of that regulation provided:
      
‘The individual reference quantities shall be transferred with the holding to the producers taking it over when it is sold,
         leased, transferred by actual or anticipated inheritance or any other means involving comparable legal effects for the producers,
         in accordance with detailed rules to be determined by the Member States, taking account of the areas used for dairy production
         or other objective criteria and, where applicable, of any agreement between the parties. The part of the reference quantity
         which, where applicable, has not been transferred with the holding shall be added to the national reserve.’
      
Article 18(1) of Regulation No 1788/provided:
      
‘With a view to successfully restructuring milk production or improving the environment, Member States may, in accordance
         with detailed rules which they shall lay down taking account of the legitimate interests of the parties concerned:
      
…
(b)      determine on the basis of objective criteria the conditions on which producers may obtain, in return for payment, at the beginning
         of a twelve‑month period, the re-allocation by the competent authority or a body designated by that authority of individual
         reference quantities released definitively at the end of the preceding twelve-month period by other producers in return for
         compensation in one or more annual instalments equal to the abovementioned payment;
      
…
(e)      determine, on the basis of objective criteria, the regions or collection areas within which the permanent transfer of reference
         quantities without transfer of the corresponding land is authorised, with the aim of improving the structure of milk production;
      
(f)      authorise, upon application by a producer to the competent authority or a body designated by that authority, the definitive
         transfer of reference quantities without transfer of the corresponding land, or vice versa, with the aim of improving the
         structure of milk production at the level of the holding or to allow for extensification of production.’
      
 The legislation on direct support in the context of the common agricultural policy
With a view in particular to ensuring a fair standard of living for the agricultural population, Council Regulation (EC) No
         1782/of September establishing common rules for direct support schemes under the common agricultural policy and
         establishing certain support schemes for farmers and amending Regulations (EEC) No 2019/93, (EC) No 1452/2001, (EC) No 1453/2001,
         (EC) No 1454/2001, (EC) 1868/94, (EC) No 1251/1999, (EC) No 1254/1999, (EC) No 1673/2000, (EEC) No 2358/and (EC) No 2529/(OJ L 270, p. 1) as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 118/of January (OJ L 24, p. 15; ‘Regulation
         No 1782/2003’) established the system of single payment and other support systems making provision for direct payments, including
         that concerning the dairy premium and additional payments. That regulation was repealed and replaced by Council Regulation
         (EC) No 73/of January establishing common rules for direct support schemes for farmers under the common agricultural
         policy and establishing certain support schemes for farmers, amending Regulations (EC) No 1290/2005, (EC) No 247/2006, (EC)
         No 378/and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1782/(OJ L 30, p. 16). Nevertheless, the dispute in the main proceedings
         in Case C‑230/remains governed ratione temporis by Regulation No 1782/2003.
      
The system established by that latter regulation was based, in particular, on the principles of moving from support of production
         to support of the producer, by introducing a system disconnected from income support for each agricultural holding, and on
         the combining of a number of direct payments made under various schemes into a single payment, determined on the basis of
         previous entitlements during a reference period. 
      
The final sentence of the twenty-ninth recital of that regulation stated that the single payment was to be established at
         farm level.
      
Article of Regulation No 1782/concerned the regional implementation of the single payment system. That article provided:
      
‘the Member State may decide that the amounts resulting from dairy premiums and additional payments, provided for in Articles
         and 96, shall be included, in part or in full, in the single payment scheme starting from 2005. Entitlements established
         under this paragraph shall be modified accordingly.
      
The reference amount for those payments shall be equal to the amounts to be granted according to Articles and calculated
         on the basis of the individual reference quantity for milk available on the holding on March of the year of inclusion,
         in part or in full, of those payments in the single payment scheme.
      
…’
Article of Regulation No 1782/provided:
      
‘1.      From to 2007, milk producers shall qualify for a dairy premium. It shall be granted per calendar year, per holding and
         per tonne of individual reference quantity eligible for premium and available on the holding.
      
…
Individual reference quantities which have been the subject of temporary transfers in accordance with Article of … Regulation
         (EEC) No 3950/[…]or Article of … Regulation (EC) No 1788/… on March of the calendar year concerned shall be
         deemed to be available on the holding of the transferee for that calendar year.
      
…’
 National legislation
Paragraph 14(1) of the Order concerning the levy on milk [Verordnung zur Durchführung der EG-Milchabgabenregelung (Milchabgabenverordnung)]
         of August (BGBl. I, p. 2143; ‘the MilchAbgV’) provided:
      
‘The purchaser may allocate delivery reference quantities which have not been used during the relevant 12-month period (under-deliveries)
         to other milk producers whose deliveries have exceeded the delivery reference quantities which were allocated to them (deliverers
         of excess quantities). Allocation of unused delivery reference quantities to the deliverer of excess quantities concerned
         shall be effected in accordance with the following formula:
      
Total of the under-deliveries x delivery reference quantity of the deliverer of excess quantities
Total of the delivery reference quantities of all the deliverers of excess quantities’
…’
In accordance with Article 2(1) of the law applying the single payment system [Gesetz zur Durchführung der einheitlichen Betriebsprämie
         (Betriebsprämiendurchführungsgesetz), BGBl. I 2004, p. 1868)] of July 2004, the Federal Republic of Germany implemented
         the single payment system at regional level as from January 2005.
      
Paragraph of the Order concerning the premium for milk products [Verordnung über die Durchführung der Milchprämie und der
         Ergänzungszahlung zur Milchprämie (Milchprämienverordnung)] of February (BGBl. I, p. 267; ‘the MilchPrämV’) was made
         applicable to the calculation of the single payment by virtue of Paragraph 34(1) of the Order on the integrated management
         and control system [Verordnung über die Durchführung von Stützungsregelungen und gemeinsamen Regeln für Direktzahlungen nach
         der Verordnung (EG) Nr. 1782/im Rahmen des Integrierten Verwaltungs- und Kontrollsystems sowie zur Änderung der Kartoffelstärkeprämienverordnung
         (InVeKoS-Verordnung)] of December (BGBl. I, p. 3194).
      
Paragraph of the MilchPrämV provided:
      
‘1.      The reference quantities determinant for the granting of the dairy premium and the additional payment, which the milk producer
         holds on March of the year of the application, shall be attested by a certificate …, in the case of “delivery” reference
         quantities for the buyer designated in paragraph 2, point 2, issued by the competent customs office (main customs office)
         (certificate determining the reference quantities).
      
2.      The certificate determining the reference quantities shall at the same time indicate 
(1)      the quantities of milk or milk equivalent which have been actually delivered or marketed by the milk producer during the twelve-month
         period ending on March of the year of the application ...
      
…’
 The actions in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 Case C-231/The reference for a preliminary ruling in Case C-231/concerns two sets of proceedings pending before the referring court,
         one initiated by Mr Aissen and the other by Mr Rohaan, both of whom are milk producers who made deliveries during the twelve-month
         period 2004/2005. Each of them took over, during that period, a holding producing milk, with a reference quantity transferred
         with the holding, but which had been partially used for that period by the previous farmer.
      
They both asked the competent authority to certify that the reference quantity of the previous farmer had been transferred
         to them in its entirety. The authority issued a certificate to that effect to each of them, but specified therein that, in
         the event of transfer during the twelve‑month period, the dairy must indicate to the new farmer the reference quantity remaining
         to be delivered, taking account of the amount already delivered by the previous farmer during the same period.
      
On the basis of those certificates and information provided by the dairy concerned, the Hauptzollamt Oldenburg recalculated
         the reference quantities of Mr Aissen and Mr Rohaan, and allocated to each of them, for the twelve‑month period 2004/2005,
         only the part of the transferred reference quantity for which milk had not been delivered by the previous farmer, the other
         part being left to the latter for that period.
      
Mr Aissen and Mr Rohaan having both exceeded their reference quantities allocated to the respective deliveries, the Hauptzollamt
         Oldenburg determined the contribution of each of them to the levy.
      
In determining the levy, the Hauptzollamt Oldenburg proceeded to reallocate the unused part of the national reference quantity
         allocated to deliveries, provided for in Article 10(3) of Regulation No 1788/2003. For that reallocation, both in the case
         of Mr Aissen and that of Mr Rohaan, it did not take account of the part of the reference quantity corresponding to the holding
         taken over during the period concerned which had already been used by the previous farmer.
      
Mr Aissen and Mr Rohaan brought actions against the notices determining their respective contributions to the levy.
      
The Finanzgericht Hamburg (Finance Court, Hamburg) upheld the actions, taking the view that the whole of the reference quantity
         corresponding to the holding taken over should be taken into account, in favour of the new farmer, on the reallocation of
         the unused part of the national reference quantity allocated to deliveries, without taking account of milk deliveries made
         by the previous farmer.
      
The Hauptzollamt Oldenburg brought an action on a point of law (‘Revision’) before the Bundesfinanzhof (Federal Finance Court).
      
According to the latter, it follows from Article 5(k) of Regulation No 1788/that account must be taken of transfers,
         sales, conversions and temporary re‑allocations of reference quantities which took place during a twelve-month period when
         examining, after the expiry of that period, whether the producer delivered more milk exempt of the levy than he was entitled
         to do. That right was exhausted once used. The transfer of a reference quantity already used once could not, therefore, whatever
         the legal context in which it took place, restore the right to deliver milk exempt of the levy during the relevant twelve-month
         period.
      
The Bundesfinanzhof considers, however, that a concept of the reference quantity as an abstract right might be envisaged.
         In that respect, EU law does not provide, in the case of a transfer of a holding during a twelve-month period, for the determination
         or calculation of a second reference quantity, but provides for account to be taken of a single reference quantity, the use
         of which is, however, at the disposal first of one producer and then the other, the latter being able to use it only in so
         far as it has not already been exhausted by reason of milk deliveries made by the former. It does not therefore appear to
         the Bundesfinanzhof that the reference quantity should be split in accordance with some method between successive producers.
      
The Bundesfinanzhof thus found it conceivable, when reallocating the unused part of the national reference quantity, that
         account might be taken, in the case of the transfer of a holding during a twelve-month period, of the total individual reference
         quantity at the disposal of the new farmer at the expiry of that period, even if the latter had never held the full right
         to deliver that quantity of milk exempt from levy.
      
On the other hand, the Bundesfinanzhof does not exclude the possibility that, particularly by reason of the risk of speculative
         transfers likely to be made solely for the purpose of obtaining a better position on the reallocation of the unused part of
         the national reference quantity, such a conceptual dissociation between the use of the individual reference quantity and the
         taking into account of that reference quantity in the context of the reallocation as the ‘available reference quantity’ within
         the meaning of Article 5(k) of Regulation No 1788/2003, might be contrary to the letter and spirit of EU law, including the
         general principles on the organisation of the milk market.
      
In those circumstances, the Bundesfinanzhof decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court
         for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘1. Must [EU] law, in particular Article 5(k) of Regulation No 1788/2003, be interpreted as meaning that the reference quantity
         of a producer who, in the course of an ongoing 12-month period, took over an agricultural holding from another producer does
         not include the quantity in respect of which, during the 12‑month period concerned, milk was delivered by that other producer
         prior to the transfer of the holding?
      
2.      Do provisions of [EU] law or general principles governing the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products
         preclude a rule of national law which, in the framework of the scheme provided for in Article 10(3) of Regulation No 1788/for offsetting excess deliveries against the unused portion of the national reference quantity, allows the producer in the
         situation at issue in the first question, who has taken over the agricultural holding in the course of the 12-month period,
         to participate in the allocation of that unused portion on the basis of a quantity which includes the portion of the reference
         quantity already delivered by the other producer?’
      
 Case C-230/The German civil law company Kurt und Thomas Etling in GbR produces milk. For the milk marketing year 2004/2005, that company
         was allocated a reference quantity for deliveries of kg, taking account, in particular, of the fact that, since the
         year 2000, it had leased a part of its reference quantity allocated to deliveries in the amount of kg. The lease was
         terminated during February 2005, so that that part of the reference company was transferred to the said company as from March 2005.
      
At the request of the latter, the competent agricultural authority issued a certificate that a reference quantity allocated
         to deliveries of kg was transferred to it as from March 2005, in which it was however stated that, for the twelve-month
         period 2004/2005, the only part of the reference quantity which could be used was that which was not yet exhausted, that part
         to be determined by the dairy.
      
The outgoing lessee had, before the termination of the lease, already delivered kg of milk for that twelve-month period.
         On the basis of the certificate referred to above and information provided by the dairy, the Hauptzollamt Koblenz, for the
         purposes inter alia of establishing the levy due, recalculated the reference quantity for the deliveries of Kurt und Thomas
         Etling in GbR and that of the said lessee, and considered that, as the reference quantity transferred had been fully exhausted
         by the latter, it had to be entered, for the said twelve‑month period, on the account of the latter, and not on the account
         of Kurt und Thomas Etling in GbR.
      
For the purposes of calculating the dairy premium, the Hauptzollamt Koblenz issued to that company a certificate in which
         account was not taken of the taking over of the reference quantity previously leased, so that only the reference quantity
         of kg was indicated there.
      
Its complaint against that certificate having been rejected, Kurt und Thomas Etling in GbR brought an action before the Finanzgericht
         Rheinland-Pfalz (Finance Court Rheinland-Pfalz), which that court upheld, taking the view that, in the circumstances at issue
         in the main proceedings, the obtaining of such a premium by virtue of Regulation No 1782/2003, did not depend on deliveries
         which might have been made by the lessee.
      
The Hauptzollamt Koblenz brought a ‘Revision’ action against that decision before the Bundesfinanzhof.
      
That court considered that it might be possible, in the context of Article 95(1) of Regulation No 1782/2003, which provides
         that the calculation of the dairy premium is to be made by reference, inter alia, to the individual reference quantity eligible
         for that premium and available in the holding, to allocate that premium, in the case of the transfer of an individual reference
         quantity during a twelve-month period, by reference to the total individual reference quantity at the disposal of the acquirer
         of the reference quantity transferred at the end of that period, even if the latter had never held the full right to deliver
         that quantity of milk exempt from levy.
      
The Bundesfinanzhof does not, however, exclude the possibility that such a conceptual dissociation between the use of the
         individual reference quantity and the taking into account of that reference quantity in the context of the calculation of
         the dairy premium as the ‘available reference quantity’ within the meaning of Article 5(k) of Regulation No 1788/2003, might
         be contrary to the letter and spirit of EU law, including the general principles on the organisation of the milk market.
      
In those circumstances, the Bundesfinanzhof decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following question to the Court
         of Justice for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘Must [EU] law, in particular Article 5(k) of Regulation No 1788/2003, be interpreted as meaning that the reference quantity
         of a producer, in the 12-month period in which a reference quantity was transferred to that producer from another producer,
         does not include the quantity in respect of which, during the 12-month period in question, milk was already delivered by that
         other producer?’
      
By order of the President of the Court of August 2009, Cases C‑230/and C‑231/were joined for the purposes of the written
         and oral procedures and of the judgment.
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 Preliminary observations
Regulation No 1788/made provision for various cases of transfer, between producers, of individual reference quantities
         or parts thereof. In that respect, the legislature thought it appropriate, first, to provide for exceptions to the principle
         that the reference quantity for a farm is transferred with the farm, and, secondly, to maintain temporary transfer or reallocation
         mechanisms designed to enable certain producers to increase the quantity of milk marketed, within the limits of the national
         reference quantity, exempt from the levy for a given twelve-month period. One such mechanism was that provided for in Article
         10(3) of Regulation No 1788/2003, which allowed reallocation of the unused part of the national reference quantity to producers
         who had overdelivered during a twelve-month period. 
      
That regulation further made provision, in Articles and 18, for transfers of reference quantities which, whilst taking
         place during that period or at the beginning of it, habitually affected the reference quantity of a producer beyond the end
         of that period. With regard to those transfers, it follows from the general system of Regulation No 1788/2003, from the objective
         pursued by the latter of re-establishing the balance between supply and demand on the milk market, characterised by structural
         surpluses, by means of a limitation on milk production which that regulation is designed to ensure, and from the principle
         set out in the tenth recital of the regulation and enacted in Article 6(5) thereof, according to which the sum of the quantities
         allocated to producers by a Member State and those allocated by the latter to the national reserve may not exceed the national
         reference quantity, that the individual reference quantity forming the subject-matter of such a transfer may allow the transferee
         producer to market milk exempt from the levy for the same period only in so far as the former holder of that reference quantity
         has not used it.
      
 The two questions in Case C-231/By its two questions in Case C-231/09, which need to be examined together first, the referring court asks, in essence, under
         what conditions it is permitted to determine the participation in the reallocation of the unused part of the national reference
         quantity allocated to deliveries, provided for in Article 10(3) of Regulation No 1788/2003, of a producer who has delivered
         in excess, where that producer has taken over, during the relevant twelve-month period, a farm with an individual reference
         quantity and in which milk has been produced and delivered for that same period by the producer who previously operated it.
      
It should be noted at the outset that Article 10(3) of Regulation No 1788/gave Member States the choice whether or not
         to proceed to a reallocation of the unused part of the national reference quantity allocated to deliveries to producers who
         had overdelivered before establishing, in accordance with the rules in point (a) or point (b) of that provision, the contribution
         of each of those producers to payment of the levy due for the relevant twelve-month period.
      
It should next be noted that the operation of reallocating the unused part of the national reference quantity allocated to
         deliveries and the operation of establishing the contribution of producers to payment of the levy due constitute two distinct
         operations, even if they are linked, in so far as the first is an optional precursor of the second and affects the result
         of the latter.
      
Moreover, it follows from the very wording of Article 10(3) of Regulation No 1788/that the rules laid down in point (a)
         or point (b) of that provision refer only to the operation for establishing the contribution of producers to payment of the
         levy due. 
      
It follows that, contrary to the view of the European Commission, the criterion of ‘the amount by which each producer’s reference
         quantity has been exceeded’ laid down in Article 10(3)(a) of Regulation No 1788/does not relate to the operation for
         reallocating the unused part of the national reference quantity allocated to deliveries.
      
In any event, the available reference quantity, as defined in Article 5(k) of Regulation No 1788/2003, cannot constitute a
         criterion for the purposes of that reallocation. It follows from that definition that that quantity is determined, in particular,
         taking account of ‘temporary re‑allocations provided for in this Regulation’, which includes the reallocation provided for
         in Article 10(3) of the said regulation. The available reference quantity, within the meaning of Article 5(k), is thus not
         known until after that reallocation, in so far as the latter has taken place.
      
However, it is necessary to examine whether other criteria laid down in Article 10(3) are applicable in the event of a Member
         State deciding to carry out such a reallocation.
      
In that respect, in the German, French, Portuguese and Slovene versions of that provision, the legislature has used, respectively,
         the formulation ‘Neuzuweisung …, die proportional zu den Referenzmengen der einzelnen Erzeuger oder nach objektiven, von den
         Mitgliedstaaten festzulegenden Kriterien erfolgt’ (‘reallocation made proportionally to the reference quantities of each producer
         or according to objective criteria to be determined by the Member States’), the formulation ‘après réallocation ou non, proportionnellement
         aux quantités de référence individuelles de chaque producteur ou selon des critères objectifs à fixer par les États membres,
         de la partie inutilisée de la quantité de référence nationale affectée aux livraisons’ (‘after reallocation or not, proportionately
         to the individual reference quantities of each producer or in accordance with objective criteria to be determined by the Member
         States, of the unused part of the national reference quantity allocated to deliveries’), and the formulation ‘após eventual
         reatribuição – proporcionalmente às quantidades de referência individuais de cada produtor ou de acordo com critérios objectivos
         a definir pelos Estados‑Membros – da parte não utilizada da quantidade de referência nacional afectada às entregas’ (‘after
         possible reallocation, proportionately to the individual reference quantities of each producer or in accordance with objective
         criteria to be defined by the Member States, of the unused part of the national reference quantity allocated to deliveries’),
         and the formulation ‘porazdeljen ali ne, v sorazmerju z individualnimi referenčnimi količinami vsakega proizvajalca ali skladno
         z objektivnimi merili, ki jih določijo države članice’ (‘reallocated or not, proportionately to the individual reference quantities
         of each producer or in accordance with objective criteria determined by the Member States’).
      
It appears however from other language versions of Regulation No 1788/2003, such as the Bulgarian, English and Dutch versions,
         that the terms ‘proportionately to the (individual) reference quantities of each producer or in accordance with objective
         criteria to be determined by the Member States’ contained in Article 10(3) of that regulation, refer not to the possible reallocation
         of the unused part of the national reference quantity allocated to deliveries, but to the establishment of the contribution
         of producers to payment of the levy due.
      
According to settled case-law, the wording used in one language version of an EU provision cannot serve as the sole basis
         for the interpretation of that provision, or be made to override the other language versions in that regard. (see, in particular,
         Case C-187/Endendijk [2008] ECR I‑2115, paragraph 23; Case C-239/Sabatauskas and Others [2008] ECR I‑7523, paragraph 38). The various language versions of a text of EU law must be given a uniform interpretation
         and hence, in the case of divergence between the language versions, the provision in question must be interpreted by reference
         to the purpose and general scheme of the rules of which it forms a part (see, to that effect, Endendijk, cited above, at paragraph 24, and Case C‑340/M and Others [2010] ECR I-0000, paragraph 44).
      
In that respect, it is important to note, first, that as the fourteenth recital of Regulation No 1788/states, the legislature
         wished to give a certain flexibility to the management of the levy system in the milk and dairy sector by authorising Member
         States to reallocate unused reference quantities at the end of a period.
      
It does not however appear that that possibility was an innovation in relation to the previous system or that a notable modification
         of the latter was made by the legislature on this point.
      
On the contrary, the seventh recital of Regulation No 3950/92, which Regulation No 1788/replaced, already provided that
         ‘in order to keep the management of the scheme sufficiently flexible, provision should be made for individual overruns to
         be equalled out over all the individual reference quantities of the same type within the territory of a Member State’. In
         the same way, the second subparagraph of Article 2(1) of Regulation No 3950/92, corresponding to Article 10(3) of Regulation
         No 1788/2003, provided that ‘[i]n accordance with a decision of the Member State, the contribution of producers towards the
         levy payable shall be established, after the unused reference quantities have been reallocated or not, either at the level
         of the purchaser, in the light of the overrun remaining after unused reference quantities have been allocated in proportion
         to the reference quantities of each producer, or at national level, in the light of the overrun in the reference quantity
         of each individual producer’.
      
It is clear from all the language versions of that latter provision that it was indeed the allocation of unused reference
         quantities which was to be carried out ‘in proportion to the reference quantities of each producer’ and that the contribution
         of producers to the payment of the levy due was, for its part, established by reference to the overrun of the reference quantity
         of each individual producer.
      
Secondly, if Article 10(3) of Regulation No 1788/had to be interpreted as meaning that the words ‘in proportion to the
         individual reference quantities of each producer or according to objective criteria to be set by the Member States’ relate
         to the establishment of the contribution of producers to payment of the levy due, the criteria contained in that formulation
         would be additional to that laid down in point (a) of Article 10(3), namely ‘on the basis of the amount by which each producer’s
         reference quantity has been exceeded’, which would, at the very least, unnecessarily complicate the application of the levy
         system.
      
It follows from the above that the criteria contained in that formulation apply to the reallocation of the unused part of
         the national reference quantity allocated to deliveries.
      
As for the precise scope of those criteria, it should be noted that the German version of Article 10(3) of Regulation No 1788/used the term ‘Referenzmengen’ (‘reference quantities’).
      
As stated in paragraph of this judgment, the wording used in one language version of an EU provision cannot serve as the
         sole basis for the interpretation of that provision.
      
In this case, the language versions of Article 10(3) other than the German version used the words ‘individual reference quantities’,
         which were moreover defined in Article 5(j) of Regulation No 1788/as ‘a producer’s reference quantity at April of any
         twelve-month period’.
      
In those circumstances, as the Hauptzollamt Koblenz and the Hauptzollamt Oldenburg argue, Article 10(3) of Regulation No 1788/must be interpreted as meaning that the reallocation of the unused part of the national reference quantity allocated to deliveries
         must be carried out in proportion to the individual reference quantity of each producer having overdelivered, namely that
         determined at April of the relevant twelve-month period, or according to objective criteria to be set by the Member States.
      
In that respect, it is for the referring court to verify whether, in adopting Paragraph 14(1) of the MilchAbgV, the Federal
         Republic of Germany intended to apply the option, provided for in Article 10(3) of Regulation No 1788/2003, whereby that reallocation
         is carried out in proportion to the individual reference quantity of each producer which has overdelivered, or whether that
         Member State intended, by having recourse to the option also provided by that provision to set other objective criteria for
         the purposes of that reallocation, to allow such a producer who, during the relevant twelve-month period, has had transferred
         to him a reference quantity under which milk had already been produced and delivered for that same period by the producer
         who previously held it, to participate in that reallocation by including some or all of that reference quantity.
      
If the Federal Republic of Germany opted for the first solution, it should be noted that the concept of individual reference
         quantity, as defined in Article 5(j) of Regulation No 1788/2003, in that it refers to the starting date of the relevant twelve-month
         period, does not in any event allow transfers of reference quantities during that period to be taken into account.
      
If the Federal Republic of Germany opted for the second solution, it should be noted that, by providing for the possibility
         of the Member States establishing, for the purposes of reallocating the unused part of the national reference quantity allocated
         to deliveries, objective criteria other than that of the individual reference quantity, the EU legislature left them, for
         that purpose, a fairly wide margin of discretion. The fact remains, however, that the Member States were not empowered to
         introduce any kind of criteria at all in that respect.
      
When adopting measures to implement EU legislation, Member States must exercise their discretion in compliance with the general
         principles of EU law (Case C‑313/Mulligan [2002] ECR I‑5719, paragraph 35, Case C‑495/Azienda Agricola Giorgio, Giovanni and Luciano Visentin [2004] ECR I‑2993, paragraph 40), which include the principles of legal certainty, the protection of legitimate expectations,
         proportionality and non-discrimination. Similarly, such implementing measures must comply with fundamental rights, such as
         the right to property (Mulligan, paragraph 36).
      
Moreover, having regard to the fact that the adoption of national legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings
         forms part of the common agricultural policy, such legislation cannot be established or applied in such a way as to compromise
         the objectives pursued by that policy, and more particularly those envisaged by the common organisation of the markets in
         the milk sector (Mulligan, paragraph 33). Reference should be made in particular, on that subject, to the principles of the functioning of the levy
         system, established by Regulation No 1788/2003, including those concerning the transfer of reference quantities.
      
In that respect, although the principle mentioned in paragraph of this judgment that the sum of the quantities allocated
         to producers by a Member State and those allocated by the latter to the national reserve must not exceed the national reference
         quantity affects the right of a producer who has taken a transfer of an individual reference quantity that has already been
         used in whole or in part to deliver milk exempt from the levy, that principle cannot have any impact on the reallocation operation
         provided for in Article 10(3) of Regulation No 1788/2003. In so far as the only purpose of that operation is to allow Member
         States to allocate, at the end of a twelve-month period, the unused part of the national reference quantity allocated to deliveries
         between producers who have overdelivered, it has no impact on the volume of that unused part and is thus not capable of affecting
         the equality between, on the one hand, the sum of the individual reference quantities and the reference quantities allocated
         by the Member State concerned to the national reserve, and, on the other hand, the national reference quantity.
      
It was therefore lawful for Member States, when implementing the option provided for by Article 10(3) of Regulation No 1788/2003,
         to set ‘objective criteria’ to allow those producers, who had received a transfer, during the relevant twelve-month period,
         of a reference quantity under which milk had already been delivered for that same period by the producer who had previously
         held it to participate in that reallocation by including some or all of that reference quantity, provided that legislation
         complies with the other imperatives mentioned in paragraphs and of this judgment.
      
Member States must however ensure that such legislation is established in such a way as not to give rise to transfers which,
         while formally complying with the conditions laid down by Regulation No 1788/2003, are intended solely to allow certain overdelivering
         producers to obtain a more favourable position on the reallocation of the unused part of the national reference quantity allocated
         to deliveries. The case-law of the Court shows that the application of EU regulations cannot be extended to cover abusive
         practices of economic operators (Case C‑206/Paletta [1996] ECR I‑2357, paragraph and case-law cited, Case C‑110/Emsland-Stärke [2000] ECR I‑11569, paragraph 51).
      
Having regard to the whole of the above considerations, the answers to the questions in Case C‑231/are as follows: 
      
–        Article 10(3) of Regulation No 1788/must be interpreted as meaning that the reallocation of the unused part of the national
         reference quantity allocated to deliveries must be carried out in proportion to the individual reference quantity of each
         producer having overdelivered, namely that determined at April of the relevant twelve-month period, or according to objective
         criteria to be set by the Member States. The concept of individual reference quantity used in that provision does not allow
         transfers of reference quantities during that period to be taken into account.
      
–        National legislation implementing the option, provided for in Article 10(3) of Regulation No 1788/2003, of setting objective
         criteria according to which the reallocation of the unused part of the national reference quantity allocated to deliveries
         is to be carried out must comply, in particular with general principles of EU law and the objectives pursued by the common
         agricultural policy, especially those concerning the common organisation of the markets in the milk sector.
      
–        Those objectives do not preclude national legislation, adopted in the context of the implementation of that option, which
         allows overdelivering producers, who have, in accordance with the provisions of Regulation No 1788/2003, received a transfer,
         during the relevant twelve-month period, of an individual reference quantity under which milk has already been delivered for
         that same period by the producer who previously held it, to participate in that reallocation by including some or all of that
         reference quantity. Member States must however ensure that such legislation does not give rise to transfers which, while formally
         complying with the conditions laid down by that regulation, are intended solely to allow certain overdelivering producers
         to obtain a more favourable position on that reallocation.
      
 The question in Case C-230/It is apparent from the order for reference in Case C-230/that the dispute in the main proceedings in that case concerns
         the determination of the reference quantity by reference to which the amount of the dairy premium enjoyed by Kurt und Thomas
         Etling in GbR was to be fixed. In that respect, the referring court seeks an interpretation of Article 5(k) of Regulation
         No 1788/only in so far as it considers that Article 95(1) of Regulation No 1782/2003, which governed the calculation
         of that premium at the time of the facts in the main proceedings, referred, on the subject of that calculation, to the said
         Article 5(k).
      
In those circumstances, the question of the referring court must be interpreted as asking, in essence, whether the expression
         ‘individual reference quantity eligible for premium and available on the holding’ in Article 95(1) of Regulation No 1782/must be interpreted as meaning that, where a producer has received a transfer, during the relevant twelve-month period, of
         a reference quantity already used by its previous holder during the same period, that expression also includes that latter
         reference quantity.
      
It needs to be examined first whether the premiss that Article 95(1) of Regulation No 1782/referred to the concept of
         ‘available reference quantity’ as defined in Article 5(k) of Regulation No 1788/is correct.
      
As has been pointed out both by the Commission in its pleadings and by the Advocate General in points and of his Opinion,
         Article 95(1) of Regulation No 1782/did not use exactly the words ‘available reference quantity’ defined in Article 5(k)
         of Regulation No 1788/2003. The fact remains, however, that, in so far as the said Article 95(1) used the expression ‘individual
         reference quantity’, recourse to the part ‘available on the holding’ would have been devoid of purpose if the legislature
         had intended to refer to the concept of the ‘individual reference quantity’, referred to in Article 5(j) of Regulation No 1788/2003.
      
In addition, it follows from Article 95(3) of Regulation No 1782/that individual reference quantities having formed the
         subject-matter of temporary transfers under Article of Regulation No 1788/on March of the calendar year are to
         be regarded as being available to the farm of the transferee. It is thus at that date that the situation of a producer capable
         of benefiting from the dairy premium must be assessed for the purposes of calculating that premium.
      
It is the ‘available reference quantity’ which, in accordance with Article 5(k) of Regulation No 1788/2003, is determined
         by reference to the said date.
      
Having regard to those considerations, it must be held that, in Article 95(1) of Regulation No 1782/2003, the legislature
         effectively envisaged the concept of ‘available reference quantity’ as defined in Article 5(k) of Regulation No 1788/2003.
      
It next needs to be examined whether, when a producer has received a transfer, during the relevant twelve-month period, of
         a reference quantity already used by the previous holder during the same period, that concept also includes that latter reference
         quantity.
      
The term ‘available reference quantity’, defined in Article 5(k) of Regulation No 1788/2003, designates ‘the reference quantity
         available to producers on March of the twelve-month period for which the levy is calculated, taking account of all transfers,
         sales, conversions and temporary re-allocations provided for in [that] regulation which have taken place during that twelve-month
         period’. It thus plays a particular role in the system of the said regulation, and, therefore, cannot be analysed outside
         that context.
      
It is apparent from the wording of the fifth recital of Regulation No 1788/and from that of Articles 4, second paragraph,
         and 10(3)(a) thereof, that that reference quantity serves solely as the basis for determining possible overdeliveries made
         by producers and thus the amount of the levy due, the words ‘available reference quantity’ not being used in any other provision
         of that regulation.
      
In that respect, if an individual reference quantity or a part of it could, in the case of a transfer, be used by a producer
         in order to make deliveries exempt from the levy for a period of twelve months and, subsequently, by the transferee producer
         in order to include it in his available reference quantity and thus reduce his overdelivery for that same period, a single
         reference quantity would be used twice for the same twelve-month period, which would go against the principle mentioned in
         paragraph and recalled in paragraph of this judgment, according to which the sum of the quantities allocated to producers
         by the Member States and those allocated to the national reserve may not exceed the national reference quantity.
      
That solution also conforms with the general system of Regulation No 1782/2003, in so far as it avoids the risk of a dairy
         premium being granted, for one and the same period, to two different producers on the basis of the same available reference
         quantity.
      
Thus, the concept of an available reference quantity cannot be dissociated from the use which producers make of it, and cannot
         therefore cover an individual reference quantity which has been transferred, or a part of the latter, which has already been
         used by another producer for the same twelve-month period.
      
Therefore, having regard to the whole of the above considerations, the answer to the question referred in Case C‑230/is
         that the expression ‘individual reference quantity eligible for premium and available on the holding’ contained in Article 95(1)
         of Regulation No 1782/2003, which corresponds to the expression ‘available reference quantity’ contained in Article 5(k) of
         Regulation No 1788/2003, must be interpreted as meaning that, where a producer has received a transfer, during the relevant
         twelve-month period, of a reference quantity under which milk has already been delivered by the transferor during the same
         period, that expression does not cover, as regards the transferee, the part of the transferred reference quantity under which
         milk has already been delivered exempt from the levy by the transferor.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article 10(3) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1788/of September establishing a levy in the milk and milk products
            sector, as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 2217/of December 2004, must be interpreted as meaning that the reallocation
            of the unused part of the national reference quantity allocated to deliveries must be carried out in proportion to the individual
            reference quantity of each producer having overdelivered, namely that determined at April of the relevant twelve-month period,
            or according to objective criteria to be set by the Member States. The concept of individual reference quantity used in that
            provision does not allow transfers of reference quantities during that period to be taken into account.
2.      National legislation implementing the option, provided for in Article 10(3) of Regulation No 1788/2003, as amended by Regulation
            No 2217/2004, of setting objective criteria according to which the reallocation of the unused part of the national reference
            quantity allocated to deliveries is to be carried out must comply, in particular with general principles of EU law and the
            objectives pursued by the common agricultural policy, especially those concerning the common organisation of the markets in
            the milk sector.
3.      Those objectives do not preclude national legislation, adopted in the context of the implementation of that option, which
            allows overdelivering producers, who have, in accordance with the provisions of Regulation No 1788/2003, as amended by Regulation
            No 2217/2004, received a transfer, during the relevant twelve-month period, of an individual reference quantity under which
            milk has already been delivered for that same period by the producer who previously held it, to participate in that reallocation
            by including some or all of that reference quantity. Member States must however ensure that such legislation does not give
            rise to transfers which, while formally complying with the conditions laid down by that regulation, are intended solely to
            allow certain overdelivering producers to obtain a more favourable position on that reallocation.
4.      The expression ‘individual reference quantity eligible for premium and available on the holding’ contained in Article 95(1)
            of Council Regulation (EC) No 1782/of September establishing common rules for direct support schemes under the
            common agricultural policy and establishing certain support schemes for farmers and amending Regulations (EEC) No 2019/93,
            (EC) No 1452/2001, (EC) No 1453/2001, (EC) No 1454/2001, (EC) 1868/94, (EC) No 1251/1999, (EC) No 1254/1999, (EC) No 1673/2000,
            (EEC) No 2358/and (EC) No 2529/2001, as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 118/of January 2005, which corresponds
            to the expression ‘available reference quantity’ contained in Article 5(k) of Regulation No 1788/2003, as amended by Regulation
            No 2217/2004, must be interpreted as meaning that, where a producer has received a transfer, during the relevant twelve-month
            period, of a reference quantity under which milk has already been delivered by the transferor during the same period, that
            expression does not cover, as regards the transferee, the part of the transferred reference quantity under which milk has
            already been delivered exempt from the levy by the transferor.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 