
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-383/De Danske BilimportørervSkatteministeriet, Told- og Skattestyrelsen(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Østre Landsret)
         
«(Free movement of goods – Charge on the registration of new motor vehicles – Internal taxation – Measure having an effect equivalent to a quantitative restriction)»
Opinion of Advocate General Jacobs delivered on February Judgment of the Court, June Summary of the Judgment
Tax provisions – Internal taxation – Charge on the registration of new motor vehicles where there is no similar or competing domestic production – Examination in the light of Article EC – Conditions – Compliance with that provision – Assessment of the charge on the basis of Article EC et seq. – Excluded where there are no figures to show the free movement of goods is impeded(Arts EC and EC) Since it is part of a general system of internal dues applied systematically to categories of vehicles in accordance with
         objective criteria, irrespective of the origin of the products, a charge on the registration of new motor vehicles established
         by a Member State which does not have any domestic production of vehicles constitutes internal taxation whose compatibility
         with Community law must be examined in the light of Article EC. That provision must be interpreted as not precluding such
         a charge where there is no domestic production of cars nor of any products liable to compete with cars in the Member State
         concerned.Although, moreover, it is true that it is not permissible for the Member States to impose on products which thus escape the
         application of the prohibitions contained in Article EC charges of such an amount that the free movement of goods within
         the common market would be impeded as far as those goods were concerned, it cannot be considered that that charge has ceased
         to be internal taxation and should be classified as a measure having equivalent effect to a quantitative restriction, for
         the purposes of Article EC, where the figures as to the number of new vehicles registered in the Member State concerned,
         and thus imported into that Member State, do not in any way show that the free movement of that type of goods between that
         Member State and the other Member States is impeded.see paras 35, 39-43, operative part
      
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURTJune (1)
((Free movement of goods – Charge on the registration of new motor vehicles – Internal taxation – Measure having an equivalent effect to a quantitative restriction))
In Case C-383/01, 
 REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Østre Landsret (Denmark) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending
            before that court between
            
 De Danske Bilimportører
and
 Skatteministeriet, Told- og Skattestyrelsen,
 on the interpretation of Articles EC and EC,
THE COURT,,
 composed of: J.-P. Puissochet, President of the Sixth Chamber, acting for the President, M. Wathelet (Rapporteur) and R. Schintgen (Presidents of Chambers), C. Gulmann, A. La Pergola, P. Jann, V. Skouris, F. Macken, N. Colneric, S. von Bahr and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs, Registrar: H. von Holstein, Deputy Registrar, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
 De Danske Bilimportører, by K. Dyekjær-Hansen and T. Ryhl, advokaterne, 
               
─
 the Danish Government, by J. Molde, acting as Agent, and K. Hagel-Sørensen, advokat, 
               
─
 the Italian Government, by U. Leanza, acting as Agent, and M. Fiorilli, avvocato dello Stato, 
               
─
 the Finnish Government, by E. Bygglin, acting as Agent, 
               
─
 the Commission of the European Communities, by H.C. Støvlbæk, acting as Agent, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of De Danske Bilimportører, represented by K. Dyekjær-Hansen, of the Danish Government,
               represented by J. Molde and K. Hagel-Sørensen, of the Finnish Government, represented by T. Pynnä, acting as Agent, and of
               the Commission, represented by H.C. Støvlbæk, at the hearing on November 2002,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on February 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By order of September 2001, received at the Court on October 2001, the Østre Landsret (Eastern Regional Court) referred
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC two questions on the interpretation of Articles EC and EC.
         
         
            
 The questions were raised in the context of proceedings between De Danske Bilimportører (
         DBI), a professional association of car importers, and the Skatteministeriet (Danish Ministry of Fiscal Affairs) concerning the
         levy of a charge on the registration of new motor vehicles. 
         
Legal background
 Community provisions
         
            
 Articles EC to EC, which form Title I, entitled  
         Free movement of goods, of the EC Treaty, introduce a customs union and prohibit quantitative restrictions on trade between Member States. 
         
            
 In particular, Article EC states: Customs duties on imports and exports and charges having equivalent effect shall be prohibited between Member States. This
         prohibition shall also apply to customs duties of a fiscal nature.
         
            
 Furthermore, under Article EC,  
         [q]uantitative restrictions on imports and all measures having equivalent effect shall be prohibited between Member States. Article EC contains an identical prohibition in respect of exports. 
         
            
 However, under Article EC: The provisions of Articles and shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports or goods in transit
         justified on grounds of public morality, public policy or public security; the protection of health and life of humans, animals
         or plants ... Such prohibitions or restrictions shall not, however, constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination or a disguised
         restriction on trade between Member States.
         
            
 Articles EC to EC form Chapter 2, entitled  
         Tax provisions, of Title VI, entitled  
         Common rules on competition, taxation and approximation of laws, of the Treaty. 
         
            
 Article EC states: No Member State shall impose, directly or indirectly, on the products of other Member States any internal taxation of any
         kind in excess of that imposed directly or indirectly on similar domestic products.Furthermore, no Member State shall impose on the products of other Member States any internal taxation of such a nature as
         to afford indirect protection to other products.
          National legislation
         
            
 The lov om registreringsafgift af motorkøretøjer (Law on registration duty on motor vehicles), in the version resulting from
         Consolidating Law No of April 1999, which was applicable at the material time, provides for the levy of a charge, known
         as  
         registration duty, on new motor vehicles. That charge, levied upon first registration of the vehicle in the national territory, is based on
         the purchase price. The rate of the charge is 105% on the first portion, which is fixed annually, and 180% on the remainder
         of the price. In 1999, the first portion was DKK 800. 
         
            
 Furthermore, the price taken as the tax base already includes 25% value added tax and a flat-rate mark-up of 9% to take account
         of dealer margin, regardless of the margin actually taken by the dealer. 
         
            
 It is apparent from the documents before the Court that the principal purpose of the registration duty is to raise tax revenue,
         although other considerations such as environmental protection and road safety may also account for the levy. 
         
            
 Since the duty is levied upon first registration of the vehicle in Denmark, but not upon any subsequent resale, it is also
         levied when a used vehicle is imported into Denmark. 
         
            
 Before 1990, the registration duty was applied to imported used vehicles in a way which did not adequately reflect depreciation
         in their value. Therefore, in Case C-47/Commission  v  
          Denmark  [1990] ECR I-4509, the Court held that, by imposing a registration duty on imported used motor vehicles generally based on
         an estimated value which is higher than the real value of the vehicle, with the result that imported used motor vehicles were
         taxed more heavily than used motor vehicles sold on the domestic market after being registered in Denmark, the Kingdom of
         Denmark had failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of the EEC Treaty (which became Article of the EC Treaty
         and is now, after amendment, Article EC). 
         
            
 In the infringement proceedings which resulted in that judgment, the Commission also contested the compatibility of the registration
         duty on new motor vehicles with Article of the Treaty, having regard in particular to the very high level of the duty.
         
         
            
 The Court however rejected that claim of infringement after having found that Article of the Treaty could not be invoked
         against internal taxation imposed on imported products where there is no similar or competing domestic production, and that,
         in particular, that article did not provide a basis for censuring the excessiveness of the level of taxation which the Member
         States might adopt for particular products, in the absence of any discriminatory or protective effect (
          Commission  v  
          Denmark , paragraph 10). 
         
            
 In paragraph of  
          Commission  v  
          Denmark , the Court admittedly noted that, as it had held in Case 31/Stier  [1968] ECR 235, it is not permissible for the Member States to impose on products which, in the absence of comparable domestic
         production, escape the application of the prohibitions contained in Article of the Treaty charges of such an amount that
         the free movement of goods within the common market would be impeded as far as those goods were concerned. It added, however,
         in paragraph of  
          Commission  v  
          Denmark , that the only possibility of appraising an adverse effect of that kind on the free movement of goods is by reference to
         Article of the EEC Treaty (which became Article of the EC Treaty and is now, after amendment, Article EC) et seq.
         The Commission's action in that case was not however based on those articles. 
         The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 It should be stated at the outset that, as is apparent from the documents before the Court, there is no production of motor
         vehicles in Denmark. During the period from to 2000, the total number of registered vehicles in Denmark rose from to and the number of new registrations varied between and per year. 
         
            
 In January 1999, DBI purchased a new Audi vehicle for the use of its director for a total price (including delivery costs)
         of DKK 546, including DKK in registration duty. 
         
            
 Since DBI took the view that that charge had been levied in breach,  
          inter alia , of Article EC, it requested its repayment from the tax authorities, relying in particular on paragraphs and of
          
          Commission  v  
          Denmark . In its submission, the excessive level of the registration duty made it impossible to import motor vehicles to Denmark under
         normal commercial conditions, to the benefit of domestic purchases of previously registered used vehicles, which were to be
         regarded as Danish products, in accordance with the case-law of the Court (
          Commission  v  
          Denmark , paragraph 17, and Case C-228/Dounias  [2000] ECR I-577, paragraph 42). 
         
            
 The Skatteministeriet responded that, according to the case-law of the Court (see,  
          inter alia ,  
          Dounias , paragraph 39), fiscal contributions cannot be caught by Article EC, since the lawfulness of domestic taxation may be
         assessed only in the light of Article EC. It stated further that, in Case C-132/Commission  v  
          Greece  [1990] ECR I-1567, paragraph 17, the Court found that, as Community law stands at present, the Member States are at liberty
         to make products such as cars subject to a system of tax which increases progressively in amount according to an objective
         criterion and that Article of the Treaty does not provide a basis for censuring the excessiveness of the level of taxation
         which the Member States might adopt for particular products in the light of considerations of social policy. 
         
            
 According to the Skatteministeriet, the proviso adopted by the Court in paragraphs and of  
          Commission  v  
          Denmark  relates only to cases in which, as a result of internal taxation, trade in the product in question ceases or is insignificant
         in volume. The registration duty on motor vehicles, however, is not prohibitive and the total number of motor vehicles in
         Denmark is comparable to that in other Member States. 
         
            
 In those circumstances the Østre Landsret decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following two questions to the Court
         for a preliminary ruling: 
         
(1)
 Can an indirect duty (registration duty) charged by a Member State, which in the case of new cars amounts to 105% of DKK and 180% of the remainder of the taxable value, be a measure having an effect equivalent to a quantitative restriction on
         imports and for that reason prohibited under Article EC (reference is made in this connection to the Court's judgment in
         Case C-47/Commission  v  
          Denmark  [1990] ECR I-4509, paragraph 13)? 
         
(2)
 If the answer to Question is yes: can that registration duty be justified on the grounds that are mentioned in Article EC
         or follow from the Court's case-law on Article EC (reference is made to Case 120/Rewe-Zentral  (
         Cassis de Dijon) [1979] ECR 649)?
         
The first question referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 By its first question, the national court is essentially asking the Court whether Article EC must be interpreted as precluding,
         as a rule, the levy of a charge on the registration of new motor vehicles, such as the registration duty at issue in the main
         proceedings. 
          Observations submitted to the Court
         
            
 DBI claims, in substance, that the Danish registration duty impedes the free movement of new vehicles since, because of its
         excessive level, it prevents the importation of those goods to Denmark under normal commercial conditions, whilst benefiting
         domestic purchases of used vehicles previously registered in Denmark, which must be regarded as Danish products. That duty
         thus amounts to a quantitative restriction on imports contrary to Article EC. 
         
            
 The applicant in the main proceedings bases its analysis on paragraphs and of  
          Commission  v  
          Denmark , from which it is apparent that charges of an amount such that they impede the free movement of goods may be assessed in
         the light of Article EC. 
         
            
 The Danish Government submits that the registration duty cannot be regarded as a quantitative restriction on imports prohibited
         under Article EC. It argues that the assertion in paragraph of  
          Commission  v  
          Denmark  has never been reiterated by the Court in subsequent judgments. On the contrary, it follows from settled case-law that barriers
         of a fiscal nature to the free movement of goods must be assessed in the light of Articles EC to EC or Articles EC
         to EC. In the main proceedings, however, the registration duty on new motor vehicles, which is internal taxation, neither
         discriminates against imported products nor protects domestic production, with the result that it is not prohibited by Article
         EC. 
         
            
 As to the remainder, if the Commission were to consider that the registration duty is excessively high, it would be for it
         to draw up a proposal for a measure on the basis of Article EC with a view to harmonising national legislation. 
         
            
 In the alternative, the Danish Government contends that paragraph of  
          Commission  v  
          Denmark  must be interpreted as meaning that the prohibition on quantitative restrictions on imports, laid down in Article EC,
         relates only to fiscal provisions which have such an impact on intra-Community trade that, as far as the taxed product is
         concerned, that trade is reduced to nothing or becomes insignificant. However, that is not the case in the main proceedings
         since the number of motor vehicles per inhabitant in Denmark is comparable to that in other Member States. 
         
            
 The observations of the Italian and Finnish Governments are to the same effect. 
         
            
 The Commission considers that barriers of a fiscal nature which do not have an effect equivalent to a customs duty fall, as
         a rule, under Article EC, which is a  
          lex specialis  as opposed to the general prohibition on barriers to trade, laid down in Article EC. Barriers of a fiscal nature which
         are not covered by Article EC ─ or by Articles EC to EC ─ may therefore be caught by Article EC where they impede
         the free movement of goods. By contrast, according to the case-law of the Court, a barrier of a fiscal nature cannot fall
         at the same time under the two provisions. 
         
            
 As a consequence, it is for the national court to assess, in the light of the facts in the main proceedings, whether the registration
         duty on new motor vehicles is of a level such that it impedes the free movement of goods. The Commission notes, in that regard,
         that it is apparent from the order for reference that a considerable number of motor vehicles are registered each year in
         Denmark, that the variations in the number of registrations appear to be purely short-term and that the number of motor vehicles
         per inhabitant is at the same level as in other countries of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
         It is therefore not established that the Danish legislation at issue in the main proceedings impedes the free movement of
         goods. 
          Reply of the Court
         
            
 The scope of Article EC does not extend to the obstacles to trade covered by other specific provisions of the Treaty and
         obstacles of a fiscal nature or having an effect equivalent to customs duties, which are covered by Articles EC, EC
         and EC, do not fall within the prohibition laid down in Article EC (see Joined Cases C-78/to C-83/Compagnie Commerciale de l'Ouest and Others  [1992] ECR I-1847, paragraph 20, and  
          Dounias , paragraph 39). 
         
            
 Furthermore, as regards the scope of Articles EC and EC, it is settled case-law that provisions relating to charges
         having equivalent effect and those relating to discriminatory internal taxation cannot be applied together, with the result
         that, under the system established by the Treaty, the same charge cannot belong to both categories at the same time (see Case
         C-234/Nygård  [2002] ECR I-3657, paragraph 17). 
         
            
 In the present case, since a charge on the registration of new motor vehicles, such as the Danish registration duty at issue
         in the main proceedings, is manifestly of a fiscal nature and is charged not by reason of the vehicle crossing the frontier
         of the Member State which introduced the charge, but upon first registration of the vehicle in the territory of that State,
         the charge must be regarded as part of a general system of internal dues on goods and thus examined in the light of Article
         EC. 
         
            
 The fact that a charge of that sort is in fact imposed solely on imported new vehicles, because there is no domestic production,
         is not such as to cause it to be characterised as a charge having equivalent effect, for the purposes of Article EC, rather
         than internal taxation, within the meaning of Article EC, since it is part of a general system of internal dues applied
         systematically to categories of vehicles in accordance with objective criteria irrespective of the origin of the products
         (see, to that effect, Case 90/Commission  v  
          France  [1981] ECR 283, paragraph 14). 
         
            
 Since the applicability of Article EC in the main proceedings is thus established, it should be noted that that article
         expressly prohibits the imposition on products from other Member States of internal taxation in excess of that imposed on
         similar domestic products or internal taxation of such a nature as to afford indirect protection to other products (see  
          Commission  v  
          Denmark , paragraph 8). 
         
            
 It should also be noted that, as paragraph of  
          Commission  v  
          Denmark  shows, the aim of Article EC as a whole is to ensure the free movement of goods between the Member States in normal conditions
         of competition by the elimination of all forms of protection which may result from the application of internal taxation that
         discriminates against products from other Member States. Thus Article EC must guarantee the complete neutrality of internal
         taxation as regards competition between domestic products and imported products. 
         
            
 On the other hand, Article EC cannot be invoked against internal taxation imposed on imported products where there is no
         similar or competing domestic production. In particular, it does not provide a basis for censuring the excessiveness of the
         level of taxation which the Member States might adopt for particular products, in the absence of any discriminatory or protective
         effect (see  
          Commission  v  
          Denmark , paragraph 10). 
         
            
 At present there is no domestic production of cars in Denmark, as has already been noted in paragraph above, nor indeed
         of any products liable to compete with cars. In those circumstances, it must be concluded that the Danish registration duty
         imposed on new motor vehicles is not covered by the prohibitions laid down in Article EC. 
         
            
 It is true, as DBI pointed out, that the Court held, in paragraph of  
          Commission  v  
          Denmark , that it is not permissible for the Member States to impose on products which, in the absence of comparable domestic production,
         escape the application of the prohibitions contained in Article EC charges of such an amount that the free movement of
         goods within the common market would be impeded as far as those goods were concerned. 
         
            
 It is however sufficient in that regard to state that, in any event, the figures communicated by the national court as to
         the number of new vehicles registered in Denmark, and thus imported into that Member State, do not in any way show that the
         free movement of that type of goods between Denmark and the other Member States is impeded. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, it cannot be considered that a charge such as the Danish registration duty has ceased to be internal
         taxation, within the meaning of Article EC, and should be classified as a measure having equivalent effect to a quantitative
         restriction, for the purposes of Article EC, nor is it appropriate to examine the scope of the proviso adopted by the Court
         in paragraphs and of  
          Commission  v  
          Denmark . 
         
            
 In conclusion, the answer to the first question referred for a preliminary ruling must be that: 
         
─
 a charge on the registration of new motor vehicles established by a Member State which does not have any domestic production
            of vehicles, such as that laid down by the lov om registreringsafgift af motorkøretøjer (Law on registration duty on motor
            vehicles), in the version resulting from Consolidating Law No of April 1999, constitutes internal taxation whose compatibility
            with Community law must be examined in the light not of Article EC, but of Article EC; 
         
─
 Article EC must be interpreted as not precluding such a charge. 
         
The second question referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 Having regard to the considerations set out in connection with the first question, it is not necessary to examine the justifications
         put forward in the alternative by the Danish Government in support of the compatibility of the Danish registration duty with
         Community law, with the result that the second question becomes devoid of purpose. 
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the Danish, Italian and Finnish Governments and by the Commission, which have submitted observations
         to the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action
         pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT,
 in answer to the question referred to it by the Østre Landsret by order of September 2001, hereby rules: 
         
1.
 A charge on the registration of new motor vehicles established by a Member State which does not have any domestic production
            of vehicles, such as that laid down by the lov om registreringsafgift af motorkøretøjer (Law on registration duty on motor
            vehicles), in the version resulting from Consolidating Law No of April 1999, constitutes internal taxation whose compatibility
            with Community law must be examined in the light not of Article EC, but of Article EC. 
            
2.
 Article EC must be interpreted as not precluding such a charge.
            
Puissochet
Wathelet 
Schintgen 
Gulmann
La Pergola 
Jann 
Skouris
Macken 
Colneric 
von Bahr
Cunha Rodrigues 
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on June 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: Danish.
Top  
 