
Case C-241/Nicolae Bot
v
Préfet du Val-de-Marne
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Conseil d’État (France))
(Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement – Article 20(1) – Conditions of movement of nationals of a third country not subject to a visa requirement – Maximum stay for a period of three months during the six months following the date of first entry into the Schengen Area
         – Successive stays – Definition of ‘first entry’)
      
Summary of the Judgment
Visas, asylum, immigration – Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement – Conditions of movement of nationals of a third
            country not subject to a visa requirement
(Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement, Art. 20(1))
Article 20(1) of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement is to be interpreted as meaning that the term ‘first entry’
         in that provision refers, besides the very first entry into the territory of the States which contracted that agreement, to
         the first entry into that territory taking place after the expiry of a period of six months from that very first entry and
         also to any other first entry taking place after the expiry of any new period of six months following an earlier date of first
         entry. That provision thus allows nationals of a third country not subject to a visa requirement to stay in the Schengen Area
         for a maximum period of three months during successive periods of six months, provided that each of those periods commences
         with such a first entry. 
      
Moreover, the term ‘first entry’, as thus interpreted, does not in any way deprive the competent national authorities of the
         power to penalise, in compliance with Community law, a national of a third country whose stay in the Schengen Area has exceeded
         the maximum period of three months during an earlier period of six months, even if, on the date of the check to which he was
         subject, his stay in that area has not exceeded three months since the most recent date of first entry. 
      
(see paras 29, 31, and operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement – Article 20(1) – Conditions of movement of nationals of a third country not subject to a visa requirement – Maximum stay for a period of three months during the six months following the date of first entry into the Schengen Area
         – Successive stays – Definition of ‘first entry’)
      
In Case C‑241/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC and Article EC from the Conseil d’État (France), made by decision
         of May 2005, received at the Court on June 2005, in the proceedings
      
Nicolae Bot
v
Préfet du Val-de-Marne,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans and A. Rosas, Presidents of Chambers, J.‑P. Puissochet, R. Schintgen,
         N. Colneric, P. Kūris, E. Juhász, U. Lõhmus, E. Levits, A. Ó Caoimh (Rapporteur) and L. Bay Larsen, Judges,
      
Advocate General: A. Tizzano,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        the French Government, by G. de Bergues and J.‑C. Niollet, acting as Agents,
–        the Czech Government, by T. Boček, acting as Agent,
–        the Slovak Government, by R. Procházka, acting as Agent,
–        the Finnish Government, by T. Pynnä, acting as Agent,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by C. O’Reilly and A.‑M. Rouchaud‑Joët, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 20(1) of the Convention implementing the Schengen
         Agreement of June between the Governments of the States of the Benelux Economic Union, the Federal Republic of Germany
         and the French Republic on the gradual abolition of checks at their common borders (OJ L 239, p. 19) (‘the CISA’), signed
         on June at Schengen (Luxembourg).
      
This reference was made in the course of proceedings brought by Mr Bot, a Romanian national, for the annulment of the decree
         by the Préfet du Val-de-Marne (Prefect of Val-de-Marne) (France) ordering his deportation.
      
 Legal context
 The Schengen acquis
 The Schengen Agreements
The Agreement between the Governments of the States of the Benelux Economic Union, the Federal Republic of Germany and the
         French Republic on the gradual abolition of checks at their common borders, signed at Schengen on June (OJ L
         239, p. 13) (‘the Schengen Agreement’) was implemented by the signature of the CISA.
      
Article of the CISA defines ‘alien’ as ‘any person other than a national of a Member State of the European Communities’.
      
Article 5(1), which appears under Title II of the CISA, entitled ‘Abolition of checks at internal borders and movement of
         persons’, lays down the conditions of entry of aliens into the territories of the Contracting States to the Schengen Agreement
         (‘the Schengen Area’) for stays not exceeding three months.
      
Chapter of Title II of the CISA contains the rules concerning visas. 
      
Article 11(1) of the CISA, which is in Section of Chapter 3, entitled ‘Short-stay visas’, is worded as follows:
      
‘1. The visa provided for in Article may be:
(a)       a travel visa valid for one or more entries, provided that neither the length of a continuous visit nor the total length of
         successive visits exceeds three months in any half-year, from the date of first entry;
      
…’
Article of the CISA, which is in Section of Chapter 3, entitled ‘Long-stay visas’, provides:
      
‘Visas for stays exceeding three months shall be national visas issued by one of the Contracting Parties in accordance with
         its national law… ’
      
Chapter of Title II of the CISA sets out, in Articles to thereof, the conditions governing the movement of aliens.
         Inter alia, it provides the following:
      
‘Article 1. Aliens who hold uniform visas and who have legally entered the territory of a Contracting Party may move freely within
         the territories of all the Contracting Parties during the period of validity of their visas, provided that they fulfil the
         entry conditions referred to in Article 5(1)(a), (c), (d) and (e).
      
…
Article 1. Aliens not subject to a visa requirement may move freely within the territories of the Contracting Parties for a maximum
         period of three months during the six months following the date of first entry, provided that they fulfil the entry conditions
         referred to in Article 5(1)(a), (c), (d) and (e).
      
…
Article 1. Aliens who do not fulfil or who no longer fulfil the short-stay conditions applicable within the territory of a Contracting
         Party shall normally be required to leave the territories of the Contracting Parties immediately.
      
…’
 The Schengen Protocol
Under Article of the Protocol integrating the Schengen acquis into the framework of the European Union, annexed to the Treaty on European Union and to the Treaty establishing the European
         Community by the Treaty of Amsterdam (‘the Schengen Protocol’), Member States of the European Union, including the French
         Republic, were authorised to establish closer cooperation among themselves within the scope of the Schengen acquis as defined in the Annex to that protocol. That cooperation is to be conducted within the legal and institutional framework
         of the Union and of the EU and EC Treaties.
      
As stated in the Annex to the Schengen Protocol, the Schengen Agreement and the CISA are included in the Schengen acquis defined thereby.
      
Under the first subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the Schengen Protocol, from the date of entry into force of the Treaty of
         Amsterdam, that is to say as from May 1999, the Schengen acquis is to apply immediately to the Member States referred to in Article of that protocol.
      
Pursuant to the second sentence of the second subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the Schengen Protocol, the Council of the European
         Union adopted Council Decision 1999/436/EC of May determining, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Treaty
         establishing the European Community and the Treaty on European Union, the legal basis for each of the provisions or decisions
         which constitute the Schengen acquis (OJ L 176, p. 17). It is apparent from Article of that decision, in conjunction
         with Annex A thereto, that the Council designated as the legal basis for Article of the CISA Article 62(3) EC, which is
         part of Title IV of the EC Treaty, entitled ‘Visas, asylum, immigration and other policies related to free movement of persons’.
      
 Regulation (EC) No 539/Under Article 1(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 539/of March listing the third countries whose nationals must
         be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders and those whose nationals are exempt from that requirement (OJ
         L 81, p. 1), as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 2414/of December (OJ L 327, p. 1), Romanian nationals
         are exempt from the requirement of having to be in possession of a visa when crossing Member States’ external borders for
         stays of no more than three months in all.
      
 National legislation
Regulation No 45-of November concerning the entry and residence requirements for aliens in France (Journal officiel de la République française (JORF), November 1945, p. 7225), as amended by, inter alia, Law No 2003-of November concerning immigration
         management, the residence of aliens in France and nationality (JORF, November 2003, p. 20136) (‘Regulation No 45‑2658’),
         provided as follows in Article 22:
      
‘I – The State’s representative in the Département and, in Paris, the chief of police may, by reasoned decree, decide that
         an alien is to be deported in the following instances:
      
(1) If the alien is unable to prove that he has lawfully entered French territory, unless he holds a valid residence permit;
…
II – The provisions of subparagraph of I apply to an alien who is not a national of a Member State of the European Community:
(a) If he does not meet the entry requirements provided for in Article of the [CISA];
(b) Or if, coming directly from the territory of a State which is a party to that Convention, he is unable to prove that he
         has entered the territory of metropolitan France in compliance with the provisions of Article 19(1) or (2), Article 20(1)
         and Article 21(1) or (2) of the [CISA].’
      
 The main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
It is apparent from the order for reference that Mr Bot, a Romanian national, resided in the Schengen Area, inter alia in
         France, from August to November and then from the end of November until the end of January 2003. Subsequently,
         passing through Hungary on February and then, according to what he says, through Austria and Germany, he returned
         to France where he was stopped and questioned on March 2003.
      
On March 2003, a decree for his deportation was issued by the Préfet du Val-de-Marne on the basis of Article 22(II)(b)
         of Regulation No 45‑2658.
      
The application for annulment of that decree made by Mr Bot was rejected by judgment of the Tribunal administratif de Melun
         (Administrative Court of Melun) of April on the ground that, in essence, by returning to France even though the period
         of six months referred to in Article 20(1) of the CISA had not yet elapsed, Mr Bot had infringed that provision on several
         occasions and could not therefore be regarded as having proved that he had entered France lawfully for the purposes of that
         regulation.
      
On May 2003, Mr Bot applied to the Conseil d’État (Council of State) to have that judgment set aside.
      
As it considered that the answer to the question whether, as at the date of the deportation decree, Mr Bot’s position was
         lawful under Article 20(1) of the CISA depends on what is meant by ‘date of first entry’ for the purposes of that provision,
         the Conseil d’État decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following question to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘[What is] meant by “date of first entry” in terms of Article 20(1) of the [CISA] and, in particular, [should] any entry taking
         place at the end of a period of six months during which there has been no other entry into the territory, as well as, in the
         case of an alien who carries out multiple entries for stays of short duration, any entry immediately following the expiry
         of a period of six months from the date of the last known “first entry”, be regarded as a “first entry” into the territory
         of the States which are party to that Convention[?]’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
By its question, the national court seeks an interpretation of the term ‘first entry’ in Article 20(1) of the CISA in order
         to ascertain whether the right of a national of a third country not subject to a visa requirement to move freely within the
         Schengen Area, in accordance with that provision, for a maximum period of three months during a period of six months has been
         exhausted in the case of the applicant in the main proceedings.
      
It is apparent from the order for reference that the applicant, after having made successive stays in the Schengen Area amounting
         to more than three months in all during the six months following the date of his very first entry into that area, entered
         the area again after that initial six‑month period had elapsed and was subject to a check there less than three months after
         that new entry.
      
In those circumstances, the national court raises the question whether the term ‘first entry’ refers to any new entry into
         the Schengen Area or solely, besides the very first entry into that territory, to the next entry made after the expiry of
         a period of six months from that very first entry.
      
As is apparent from the wording of Article 20(1) of the CISA, the date of first entry into the Schengen Area by a national
         of a third country not subject to a visa requirement is the point from which a period of six months starts to run during which
         such a national has the right, in accordance with that provision, to move freely within that area for a maximum period of
         three months.
      
It follows from this that, as observed by the national court, the very first entry of that national into the Schengen Area
         constitutes a first entry within the meaning of Article 20(1) of the CISA from which his right to stay for a maximum period
         of three months during a period of six months must be determined.
      
As all the interested parties who have submitted written observations to the Court have accepted, Article 20(1) of the CISA
         permits in that respect, in the same way as Article 11(1)(a) of the CISA does expressly as regards nationals of third countries
         subject to a visa requirement for stays of short duration, both a continuous visit of three months in length and  successive
         visits of shorter length which, taken together, do not exceed three months in all.
      
However, it is apparent from the wording of Article 20(1) of the CISA, read in conjunction with Article 23(1) thereof, that
         when that right to stay for a maximum period of three months has been exhausted during the six-month period which has elapsed
         since the date of the very first entry into the Schengen Area, the national concerned must, as a rule, if his stay in that
         area is not to exceed that maximum period, leave it immediately.
      
Accordingly, whilst nothing in the wording of Article 20(1) of the CISA precludes the same national from moving within the
         Schengen Area again subsequently, a point which was, moreover, not disputed by any of the interested parties who submitted
         observations to the Court, it is on condition that he effect a new entry into that area and does so after the expiry of a
         period of six months following the date of his very first entry into the area.
      
As submitted by the French, Czech and Slovak Governments, such a new entry must therefore also be regarded as a first entry
         within the meaning of Article 20(1) of the CISA in the same way as the very first entry into the Schengen Area. That provision
         thus allows nationals of a third country not subject to a visa requirement to stay in that area for a maximum period of three
         months during successive periods of six months, provided that each of those periods commences with such a first entry.
      
That interpretation is borne out by the provisions of the CISA applicable to short-stay visas. Under Articles 11(1)(a) and
         of that Convention, nationals of a third country who hold a travel visa and who have legally entered the Schengen Area
         may move freely within it for a period not exceeding three months in any half-year from the first entry, thus expressly allowing
         stays of three months during successive periods of six months.
      
It must also be pointed out that, as correctly submitted by the French and Czech Governments and likewise by the Commission
         of the European Communities, interpreted thus, the term ‘first entry’ in Article 20(1) of the CISA does not in any way deprive
         the competent national authorities of the power to penalise, in compliance with Community law, a national of a third country
         whose stay in the Schengen Area has exceeded the maximum period of three months during an earlier period of six months, even
         if, on the date of the check to which he was subject, his stay in that area, like that of Mr Bot in the main proceedings,
         has not exceeded three months since the most recent date of first entry.
      
The Commission, however, submits that this literal interpretation of Article 20(1) of the CISA is capable of resulting in
         unlawful behaviour intended to circumvent the rules applicable to long stays, although both Articles EC and EC and the
         provisions of the CISA, in particular Articles and thereof, set out a clear distinction between, firstly, stays exceeding
         a period of three months, which are covered by the rules relating to immigration policy, and, secondly, stays of under three
         months, which are covered by the rules relating to the free movement of persons.
      
Thus, the Commission, and likewise the Finnish Government, observe that a national of a third country not subject to a visa
         requirement who, having taken care to leave the Schengen Area on the very day of his first entry, has effected a stay of three
         months less a day at the end of an initial period of six months, could, by leaving that area for a single day at the end of
         that initial period and entering it again the following day, stay in the area for three additional months during a second
         period of six months, thus allowing him to move freely within that territory for a period of six consecutive months less a
         day.
      
In those circumstances, the Commission and the Finnish Government submit that Article 20(1) of the CISA should, in accordance
         with the objectives of that Convention, be interpreted in such a way as to ensure that any national of a third country contemplating
         one or more successive stays exceeding in total the maximum period of three months during any six-month period is subject
         to the rules laid down by the Community legislation relating to long stays.
      
According to the Commission, the term ‘first entry’ is therefore to be interpreted as relating to any first entry into the
         Schengen Area and also  to any new entry provided that a period of more than three months without a stay in that area has
         elapsed between the last exit and that new entry. If that is not the case, a distinction must be drawn according to whether
         the length of the stay during the six-month period preceding that new entry is more or less than three months. In the former
         case, the right to stay would be exhausted. In the latter case, the right to stay would have to be calculated by reference
         to the length of the stays aggregated over the six-month period.
      
As for the Finnish Government, it submits that the term ‘first entry’ is to be interpreted as referring to the first entry
         into the Schengen Area which took place during the six-month period preceding a new entry into that area, with every stay
         which has already been made in the area during that period reducing the length of the permitted three-month stay accordingly.
      
It is indeed apparent from the wording of Article 62(3) EC, which, pursuant to Decision 1999/436, constitutes the legal basis
         for Article 20(1) of the CISA, that the Council can adopt on the basis of that provision of the EC Treaty only measures setting
         out the conditions under which nationals of third countries may move freely within the Schengen Area during a period of no
         more than three months.
      
It follows from this that, regardless of compliance with the requirement as to the period of six months following the date
         of first entry in Article 20(1) of the CISA, nationals of a third country cannot in any event stay in the Schengen Area pursuant
         to that provision for more than three consecutive months in all. As regards nationals of a third country not subject to a
         visa requirement, that absolute maximum limit is clear from Article 5(1) of the CISA and Article 1(2) of Regulation No 539/2001.
      
That being so, contrary to what the Commission and the Finnish Government suggest, the interpretation of the term ‘first entry’
         in Article 20(1) of the CISA, as is apparent from paragraphs and of this judgment, does not in any way have the effect
         of permitting nationals of a third country not subject to a visa requirement to move freely within the Schengen Area for a
         period of more than three consecutive months, since, as has been stated in those paragraphs, every ‘first entry’ within the
         meaning of that provision necessarily calls for a new entry into that area after a prior period of six months has elapsed.
      
Furthermore, although according to the interpretations advocated by the Commission and the Finnish Government the term ‘first
         entry’ is essentially capable of ensuring that a national of a third country not subject to a visa requirement does not stay
         for more than three months in the Schengen Area during any period of six months, that is clearly not the rule laid down by
         Article 20(1) of the CISA, which merely prohibits stays of more than three months during the six months beginning on a date
         corresponding to the first entry into that area. By focusing on the variable dates of first entry depending on the date of
         last entry, those interpretations effectively overlook the fact that Article 20(1) of the CISA is framed around the very notion
         of ‘first entry’, in order to replace it with date of last entry, which is not to be found in that provision.
      
In those circumstances, as they have no basis in the wording of that provision, those interpretations, the relative complexity
         of which could, moreover, affect the uniform application of Article 20(1) of the CISA and therefore prejudice legal certainty
         for individuals, cannot be accepted.
      
As for the risk of circumvention of the rules applicable to long stays, as submitted by the Commission, it is sufficient to
         point out that while Article 20(1) of the CISA allows, as its wording now stands, a national of a third country not subject
         to a visa requirement to stay in the Schengen Area for a period of almost six months by aggregating two successive non-consecutive
         stays, it is for the Community legislature to amend that provision, if necessary, if it takes the view that such an aggregation
         is capable of undermining the rules applicable to stays of more than three months.
      
Consequently, the answer to the question referred for a preliminary ruling must be that Article 20(1) of the CISA is to be
         interpreted as meaning that the term ‘first entry’ in that provision refers, besides the very first entry into the Schengen
         Area, to the first entry into that area taking place after the expiry of a period of six months from that very first entry
         and also to any other first entry taking place after the expiry of any new period of six months following an earlier date
         of first entry.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court hereby rules:
Article 20(1) of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement of June between the Governments of the States
            of the Benelux Economic Union, the Federal Republic of Germany and the French Republic on the gradual abolition of checks
            at their common borders, signed on June at Schengen, is to be interpreted as meaning that the term ‘first entry’ in
            that provision refers, besides the very first entry into the territories of the Contracting States to that agreement, to the
            first entry into those territories taking place after the expiry of a period of six months from that very first entry and
            also to any other first entry taking place after the expiry of any new period of six months following an earlier date of first
            entry.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 