
Judgment of the Court (Seventh Chamber) of October – Commission v Spain
(Case C‑502/08)
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 2005/60/EC – Prevention of the use of the financial system for the purpose of money laundering and terrorist financing – Failure to transpose completely – Failure to communicate the measures to transpose the directive
1.                     Acts of the institutions – Directives – Implementation by Member States (Art. 249, third para., EC) (see para. 21)
2.                     Member States – Obligations – Implementation of directives – Failure to fulfil obligations – National system pleaded as justification
            – Not permissible (Art. EC) (see paras 24-25) 
3.                     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Examination of the merits by the Court – Situation to be taken into consideration
            – Situation on expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion (Art. EC) (see para. 27)
Re: 
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Failure to adopt, within the period prescribed, the measures necessary to
                  comply with Directive 2005/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of October on the prevention of the
                  use of the financial system for the purpose of money laundering and terrorist financing (OJ L 309, p. 15).
               
Operative part
The Court: 
1.
	Declares that, by failing to adopt, within the prescribed period, all the laws, regulations and administrative provisions
                     necessary to comply with Directive 2005/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of October on the prevention
                     of the use of the financial system for the purpose of money laundering and terrorist financing, and by failing to communicate
                     to the Commission of the European Communities, the provisions of national law intended to contribute to ensuring such compliance,
                     the Kingdom of Spain has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of that directive;
                  
2.
	Orders the Kingdom of Spain to pay the costs.
Top  
 