
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-278/Hellenic Republic
v
Commission of the European Communities
(State aid – Settlements of debts of agricultural cooperatives by public authorities)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        State aid – Examination by the Commission – Examination of an aid scheme taken in its entirety – Whether permissible – Aid
            scheme no longer in force – Irrelevant
(Art. EC) 
2.        State aid – Definition – Aid from State resources 
(Art. 87(1) EC) 
3.        State aid – Effect on trade between Member States – Adverse effect on competition – Aid relatively small in amount
(Art. EC)
4.        State aid – Prohibition – Derogations – Scope of the derogation – Strict interpretation – Economic disadvantages directly
            caused by natural disasters or exceptional occurrences
(Art. 87(1) and (2)(b) EC)
5.        State aid – Prohibition – Derogations – Commission’s discretion – Judicial review – Limits – Possibility of adopting guidelines
(Art. 87(3) EC)
6.        State aid – Recovery of unlawful aid – Breach of the principle of proportionality – None
(Art. 88(2), first subpara., EC)
7.        State aid – Recovery of unlawful aid – Possible legitimate expectation on the part of the recipient – Protection – Conditions
            and limits
(Art. EC) 
8.        State aid – Commission decision finding aid to be incompatible with the common market – Difficulties in implementation – Obligation
            on the Commission and the Member State to cooperate in seeking a solution consistent with the Treaty 
(Arts EC and 88(2), first subpara., EC) 
1.        In the case of an aid scheme, the Commission may confine itself to examining the general characteristics of the scheme in
         question without being required to examine each particular case in which it applies. That power cannot be altered by the fact
         that the aid scheme in question has ceased to apply.
      
(see para. 24)
2.        Article 87(1) EC includes all the financial resources which the State may indeed use to support undertakings. The fact that
         those resources constantly remain under public control, and therefore available to the competent national authorities, is
         sufficient for them to be categorised as State resources and for any measure that they finance to fall within the scope of
         Article 87(1) EC.
      
(see para. 52)
3.        The relatively small amount of a State aid or the relatively small size of the undertaking which receives it does not prima
         facie exclude the possibility that intra-Community trade may be affected or competition distorted. Other factors may be decisive
         when assessing the effect of aid on trade, such as whether the aid is cumulative and whether the undertakings that receive
         it are operating in a sector that is particularly exposed to competition.
      
(see paras 69-70)
4.        Since it constitutes a derogation from the general principle laid down in Article 87(1) EC that State aid is incompatible
         with the common market, Article 87(2)(b) EC must be construed narrowly. Consequently, only economic disadvantages directly
         caused by natural disasters or by exceptional occurrences qualify for compensation as provided for in that provision.
      
(see paras 81-82)
5.        When applying Article 87(3) EC, the Commission has a wide discretion the exercise of which involves economic and social assessments
         which must be made in a Community context. The Court of Justice, when reviewing the legality of the exercise of that freedom,
         cannot substitute its own assessment for that of the competent authority but must confine itself to examining whether the
         latter assessment is vitiated by a manifest error or by a misuse of powers.
      
The Commission may, however, adopt a policy as to how it will exercise its discretion in the form of measures such as guidelines,
         in so far as those measures contain rules indicating the approach which the institution is to take and in so far as they do
         not depart from the rules of the Treaty.
      
(see paras 97-98)
6.        Removing unlawful aid by means of recovery is the logical consequence of a finding that it is unlawful. Consequently, the
         recovery of State aid unlawfully granted, for the purpose of restoring the status quo ante, cannot in principle be regarded
         as disproportionate to the objectives of the Treaty in regard to State aid.
      
(see para. 103)
7.        In view of the mandatory nature of the supervision of State aid by the Commission under Article EC, undertakings to which
         aid has been granted may not, in principle, entertain a legitimate expectation that the aid is lawful unless it has been granted
         in compliance with the procedure laid down in that article.
      
(see para. 104)
8.        A Member State which encounters unforeseen and unforeseeable difficulties in implementing a Commission decision on State aid,
         or becomes aware of consequences not envisaged by the Commission, must submit those problems for consideration by the Commission
         and suggest appropriate amendments to the decision in question. In such a case the Commission and the Member State concerned
         must, in accordance with the duty of genuine cooperation between the Member States and the Community institutions stated in
         particular in Article EC, work together in good faith with a view to overcoming the difficulties whilst fully observing
         the Treaty provisions, in particular the provisions on aid.
      
(see para. 114)
  
 JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)April 2004(1)
(State aid  –  Settlements of debts of agricultural cooperatives by public authorities)
 In Case C-278/00,
            
Hellenic Republic,  represented by I. Chalkias and C. Tsiavou, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant,
v
Commission of the European Communities, represented by J. Flett and D. Triantafyllou, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
defendant,
 APPLICATION for the annulment of Commission Decision 2002/458/EC of March relating to the aid schemes implemented by
            Greece in favour of the settlement of debts by the agricultural cooperatives in and 1994, including the aids for reorganisation
            of the dairy cooperative AGNO (OJ L 159, p. 1), or, in the alternative, of Article of that decision,
            
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),,
 composed of: P. Jann, acting for the President of the  Fifth Chamber, C.W.A. Timmermans and S. von Bahr (Rapporteur), Judges,
            
            
 Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed, Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
            
 after hearing oral argument from the parties at the hearing on October 2002,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By application lodged at the Court Registry on July 2000, the Hellenic Republic brought an action under the first paragraph
         of Article EC for the annulment of Commission Decision 2002/458/EC of March relating to the aid schemes implemented
         by Greece in favour of the settlement of debts by the agricultural cooperatives in and 1994, including the aids for reorganisation
         of the dairy cooperative AGNO (OJ L 159, p. 1, hereinafter ‘the contested decision’) or, in the alternative, of Article
         of that decision.
         
Relevant national provisions
            
 Article of Law No 2008/of February (FEK A’16) provides:
         
‘1.
The Greek State undertakes, in connection with the reorganisation of the cooperatives, to assume the debts outstanding at
               December 1990.
            
2.
Similarly, it may assume and settle debts to the Agricultural Bank of Greece incurred by primary, secondary and tertiary cooperative
               associations, cooperatives and undertakings covered by Law No 1541/between and 1989, provided that they stem from
               the implementation of social or some other intervention policy on the instructions or on behalf of the State. The amount of
               those debts shall be fixed for each cooperative by joint order of the Ministers of Finance and Agriculture on the recommendation
               of the committees set up by the Minister of Agriculture.
            
3.
The debts will be assumed and settled by the State if and only if the cooperative, association or company is deemed viable.’
            
 The aim of Article of Law No 2237/of September (FEK A’149) is to define the general framework of Decision No
         of the Governor of the Bank of Greece of October (FEK A’ 236/18.10.1989, hereinafter ‘Decision No 1620/89’), which
         authorises credit institutions in Greece to regularise debts of all kinds.
         
            
 Decision No 1620/provides:
         
‘1.
Credit institutions are authorised to settle their debts, whether outstanding or not, pursuant to any type of loan in drachmae
               or foreign currencies, and those arising out of calls on guarantee.
            
2.
Credit institutions are authorised to convert into equity the debts referred to in the previous paragraph.
3.
Settlements of debts are subject to the condition that credit institutions shall set out the conditions necessary to limit
               the credit risks they assume and to ensure proper service of the debts which have been settled.
            
...’
            
 Article of Law No 2237/provides: 
         ‘The Agricultural Bank of Greece may, by decision of the appropriate staff, settle debts to it outstanding at December
         incurred by primary cooperative associations which convert and market agricultural products, provided that they result
         from the financing of those activities, and by secondary and tertiary cooperative associations, if those debts are not covered
         by realisable goods and assets ..., provided that, in the opinion of the Agricultural Bank of Greece, they are not the result
         of mismanagement but of objective factors (crisis on the market for certain agricultural products or loss of markets owing
         to external events, etc.) ...
          The final amount will be repaid in up to annual instalments and the Agricultural Bank of Greece may, in exceptional cases
         of particularly heavy debts, extend the repayment period to a total of years, with a period of grace of a maximum of three
         years. During the first half of the repayment period, the associations will not be required to pay interest on the amounts
         settled; during the second half, interest shall be chargeable at a rate of 50% of the current market rate. In exceptional
         cases, that percentage may be reduced at the discretion of the Agricultural Bank of Greece ... . Settlement is subject to
         the submission of a study on the feasibility, modernisation and development of the beneficiary cooperative, demonstrating
         that it is able to fulfil the conditions of the settlement ... .’
         
The factsFirst opening of the procedure
            
 On June 1993, the Commission was informed by letter from the Greek Minister of Agriculture of the intention of the Greek
         Government to apply the provisions of Article 32(2) of Greek Law No 2008/to write off the debts of several types of cooperatives
         to the Agricultural Bank of Greece (hereinafter ‘the ABG’), concerning the period to 1989.
         
            
 Initially, the Commission considered this letter as a notification within the meaning of Article 93(3) of the EC Treaty (now
         Article 88(3) EC). Subsequently, the Commission was informed of the fact that aid provided for in Article 32(2) of Greek Law
         No 2008/had already been granted, at least to the dairy cooperative AGNO, without prior Commission approval. The Commission
         therefore decided to include these legal provisions in the register of non-notified aids.
         
            
 By letter dated December 1997, the Commission finally informed Greece of its decision to initiate the procedure laid down
         in Article 93(2) of the Treaty in respect of the aid measures to reimburse debts of cooperatives pursuant to Article 32(2)
         of Greek Law No 2008/92.
         
Second opening of the procedure
            
 By letter of November 1995, the Commission received a complaint regarding aid to the dairy cooperative AGNO in northern
         Greece. According to the complainant, the Greek authorities had decided, through the ABG, to assist AGNO in paying some or
         all of its debts, possibly amounting to GRD billion. AGNO had supposedly also benefited from fiscal concessions available
         to cooperative companies in the agricultural sector in Greece.
         
            
 Following requests for additional information, two bilateral meetings were held, at the request of the Greek authorities,
         on May and July between the Greek authorities and the Commission. As a result of these meetings, the Greek
         authorities supplied additional information by letters dated June and August 1997.
         
            
 From this exchange of information with the Greek authorities, it emerged that the dairy cooperative AGNO benefited from the
         following aid measures, through the ABG:
         
–
GRD million under Article 32(2) of Law No 2008/and GRD 529.million under Article 19(1) of Law No 2198/(non-notified)
               as compensation for losses due to the Chernobyl nuclear disaster,
            
–
GRD billion under Article of Law No 2237/(non- notified) in the form of a consolidation loan linked to a debt
               due to the considerable delays in the implementation of an investment project,
            
–
GRD billion under Decision No 1620/authorising banks to consolidate loans to clients (non-notified).
            
 By letter dated December 1997, the Commission informed the Hellenic Republic of its decision to initiate the procedure
         laid down in Article 93(2) of the Treaty in respect of the general provisions for debt consolidation of agricultural cooperatives,
         as well as in respect of the aids for reorganisation of the cooperative AGNO.
         
Third opening of the procedure
            
 The Commission also opened the procedure provided for in Article 93(2) of the Treaty in relation to Law No 2538/of December
         (FEK A’242) authorising the Greek State to write off debts of over cooperatives (or associations of producers, companies
         and farmers) via the ABG.
         
            
 Subsequently, the Hellenic Republic made a request to the Council to agree to such measures pursuant to the provisions of
         the third subparagraph of Article 93(2). By Decision No 14015, of December 1998, the Council agreed to this request.
         
The contested decision
            
 In the contested decision, the Commission ruled inter alia that Article 32(2) of Law No 2008/constituted State aid which
         did not satisfy the requirements laid down in the rules governing aid to make good the damage caused by natural disasters
         or exceptional occurrences (Article 87(2)(b) EC). It also ruled that Article of Law No 2237/constituted State aid which
         did not satisfy the requirements laid down in the rules governing restructuring aid for undertakings. Both aid schemes were
         declared incompatible with the common market. In passing, and to respond to the arguments advanced by the Greek authorities,
         the Commission investigated the individual case of the settlement of the debts of the AGNO cooperative. This investigation
         confirmed the Commission’s assessment of the two aforementioned aid schemes. Aids granted to AGNO under Article of Law
         No 2198/and Decision No 1620/were also declared incompatible with the common market (Article of the contested decision).
         
            
 The contested decision also invited the Greek authorities to take all the measures necessary to recover from the recipients
         the unlawful aids referred to in Article of the decision within two months of the notification of the decision, in accordance
         with the procedures laid down by national law. The sums to be recovered were to bear interest from the date on which they
         were made available to the recipients until their actual recovery (Article of the contested decision).
         
            
 Finally, the Hellenic Republic was asked to inform the Commission, within two months following notification of the decision,
         of the measures taken to comply with it and to submit a full list of beneficiaries of all the aid schemes, the amounts to
         be recovered and the interest payable. The Commission also requested further information on the control exercised over the
         AGNO cooperative by the ABG, on the relations between the ABG and the Greek State and on the settlement of the debts of the
         cooperatives by the ABG pursuant to Decision No 1620/(Article of the contested decision).
         
Forms of order sought
            
 The Hellenic Republic claims that the Court should:
         
–
declare its application admissible;
–
annul the contested decision in its entirety, or in the alternative annul Article of the decision, which requires recovery
               of the aid found to be unlawful, together with interest.
            
            
 The Commission contends that the Court should:
         
–
dismiss the application as unfounded;
–
order the Hellenic Republic to pay the costs of the proceedings.
The application 
            
 The Hellenic Republic puts forward a large number of arguments relating to Article 32(2) of Law No 2008/and Article of
         Law No 2237/94, and also to AGNO’s particular circumstances. Those arguments may be regrouped into seven pleas which will
         be examined in turn.
         
The first plea, alleging infringement of Article EC The first limb of the first plea, alleging that the subject-matter of the proceedings is misconceived
         
            
 The Hellenic Republic maintains that the Commission’s review should have related to the aids which were actually paid, not
         Article 32(2) of Law No 2008/92. It submits that that provision was no longer applicable to individual cases when the Commission
         stopped considering the matter. The Hellenic Republic maintains that the Commission knew the number and identity of the agricultural
         cooperatives which were the recipients of the aid and, furthermore, based the contested decision on information about those
         cooperatives provided by the Greek Government. In those circumstances, the decisions taken pursuant to Article 32(2) of Law
         No 2008/should have been regarded as individual aid measures. 
         
            
 The Hellenic Republic also claims that each case of rescheduling of debts made pursuant to Article of Law No 2237/should
         have been examined separately.
         
            
 In that regard, it must be stated that the Commission was right to conclude that Article 32(2) of Law No 2008/92, which provides
         for the granting of aid in individual cases to undertakings, defined in a general and abstract manner, is an aid scheme.
         
            
 It must be pointed out that, in the case of an aid scheme, the Commission may confine itself to examining the general characteristics
         of the scheme in question without being required to examine each particular case in which it applies. That power cannot be
         altered by the fact that the aid scheme in question has ceased to apply (see inter alia Joined Cases C-15/and C-105/Italy and Sardegna Lines  v Commission [2000] ECR I-8855, paragraph 51).
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Commission did not err by not examining each individual aid granted pursuant to Article 32(2)
         of Law No 2008/92.
         
            
 It follows that the first limb of the first plea must be rejected.
         
The second limb of the first plea, alleging infringement of the rule in Lorenz
            
 The Hellenic Republic claims that the Commission failed to carry out the preliminary examination of the aid scheme provided
         for in Article 32(2) of Law No 2008/within two months of notification of the scheme, the period set by the Court in Case
         120/Lorenz [1973] ECR 1471). The Commission therefore wrongly classified that aid scheme as a non-notified new aid scheme.
         
            
 The Hellenic Republic states that it had informed the Commission on June of its intention to apply the provisions of
         Article 32(2) of Law No 2008/92. It points out that, according to the settled case-law of the Court of Justice, notification
         of planned aid measures enables the Commission to carry out a preliminary investigation of those measures within a period
         of two months.
         
            
 However, according to the Hellenic Republic, the Commission only informed Greece of its decision to initiate the procedure
         provided for in Article 93(2) of the Treaty, with respect to Article 32(2) of Law No 2008/92, by letter of December 1997,
         that is, four and a half years after notification.
         
            
 In that regard, it should be pointed out that, under the first sentence of Article 88(3) EC, plans to introduce or alter aid
         measures must be notified to the Commission before they are implemented. The Commission then conducts an initial review of
         the planned aid. If at the end of that review it considers a plan to be incompatible with the common market, it must without
         delay initiate the consultative examination procedure under Article 88(2) EC.
         
            
 It follows from the last sentence of Article 88(3) EC that throughout the preliminary period the Member State concerned may
         not put the planned aid into effect. Where the consultative examination procedure is initiated, that prohibition continues
         until the Commission reaches a decision on the compatibility of the planned aid with the common market (Case C-39/SFEI and Others [1996] ECR I-3547, paragraph 38). However, if the Commission has not responded within two months of notification, the Member
         State concerned may implement the plan after informing the Commission (see the judgment in Lorenz, cited above, paragraph 4). 
         
            
 Without it being necessary to decide whether the planned aid was notified in accordance with the provisions of Article 88(3)
         EC and whether the two-month period had elapsed, it must be held that the Hellenic Republic subsequently implemented the planned
         aid without informing the Commission beforehand.
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Commission rightly classified Article 32(2) of Law No 2008/as a non-notified new aid scheme.
         
            
 Accordingly, the second limb of the first plea must be rejected.
         
 The third limb of the first plea, alleging infringement of Council Decision No The Hellenic Republic claims that by Decision No the Council authorised, pursuant to the third subparagraph of Article
         88(2) EC, State aid referred to in Law No 2538/97, which repeatedly refers to the provisions of Law No 2237/94. It maintains
         that it follows that the Council implicitly validated all previous aid measures granted under the latter law. It claims that,
         in those circumstances, farmers and agricultural cooperatives could not foresee that they would have to repay, in 2000, aid
         granted prior to Decision No 14015.
         
            
 In that regard, it should be pointed out that, under the third subparagraph of Article 88(2) EC, the Council may, acting unanimously,
         decide that a State aid measure shall be considered to be compatible with the common market, in derogation from Article EC, if such a decision is justified by exceptional circumstances.
         
            
 Decision No states that some provisions of Law No 2538/are compatible, in derogation from Article EC, with the
         common market up to a maximum of GRD billion.
         
            
 It must be observed that that decision does not relate to the aid schemes covered by the contested decision.
         
            
 In those circumstances, it must be held that Decision No does not affect the validity of the contested decision.
         
            
 It is therefore appropriate to reject the third limb of the first plea and, consequently, the plea in its entirety.
         
The second plea, alleging infringement of Article 87(1) EC The first limb of the second plea, alleging misapplication of the private investor or creditor principle 
         
            
 First, the Hellenic Republic complains that the Commission wrongly concluded that the settlement of debts by the ABG under
         Article of Law No 2237/does not comply with the private investor or creditor principle.
         
            
 It states that in certain circumstances, including the collapse of the Soviet Union, to which most Greek agricultural
         produce was sent, meant that many agricultural cooperatives were unable to pay their debts. 
         
            
 The Hellenic Republic explains that the ABG sought to enable the cooperatives to survive, in order to recover the sums lent
         and to continue to provide the cooperatives with banking services by receiving the commissions and remuneration relating to
         them.
         
            
 It maintains that the ABG’s important role in the agricultural sector in Greece requires that bank to take account of major
         sectorial parameters in its decisions and to protect its reputation as principal lender in the sector. According to the Hellenic
         Republic, it is very doubtful that a private bank could have rescheduled the debts of the agricultural cooperatives to the
         same extent as the ABG.
         
            
 With regard to the AGNO cooperative, the Hellenic Republic considers that, contrary to the view held by the Commission, the
         ABG could accept the personal assets of AGNO’s members as security against the risk of the cooperative’s insolvency.
         
            
 In that regard, it may be observed that Article of Law No 2237/establishes debt rescheduling terms which are very favourable
         to the borrower. As the Advocate General observes in point of his Opinion, it is very difficult to imagine that a private
         bank operating under normal market conditions would agree to a three-year period of grace and an interest rate of 50% of the
         market rate as provided for in that article.
         
            
 It is also apparent from the arguments put forward by the Hellenic Republic that the ABG cannot act solely in its own commercial
         interest, as a private bank would do, but must take account of the broader interests in its decisions.
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Hellenic Republic has not established that the Commission misapplied the private investor criterion
         with regard to the rescheduling of debts by the ABG under Article of Law No 2237/94.
         
            
 So far as concerns the specific case of the AGNO cooperative, it need only be observed that, in the light of the circumstances
         of the case, namely that the AGNO cooperative was in financial difficulties, that it had already benefited from the measures
         under Laws Nos 2008/92, 2198/and 2237/and that it was unable to offer adequate security for the settlement of its debts,
         the Commission was entitled to find that the ABG did not act as a private investor when it rescheduled the debts of that cooperative
         under Article of Law 2237/94.
         
            
 In those circumstances, the first limb of the second plea must be rejected.
         
 The second limb of the second plea, concerning the existence of aid granted by the State or through State resources
         
            
 The Hellenic Republic claims that the settlement of debts by the ABG, in accordance with Article of Law No 2237/94, cannot
         be regarded as aid using State resources since the Greek State did not pay compensation to the ABG.
         
            
 In that regard, it should be pointed out that Article 87(1) EC includes all the financial resources which the State may indeed
         use to support undertakings. The fact that those resources constantly remain under public control, and therefore available
         to the competent national authorities, is sufficient for them to be categorised as State resources and for the measure to
         fall within the scope of Article 87(1) EC (Case C-83/P France v Ladbroke Racing and Commission [2000] ECR I-3271, paragraph 50).
         
            
 It is not disputed that the Greek State is the ABG’s sole shareholder and that it appoints the members of its board of directors.
         The Greek State can thus have a dominant influence, directly or indirectly, on the use of the ABG’s financial resources.
         
            
 Therefore, the Commission was right to conclude, in point of the statement of reasons for the contested decision, that
         the rescheduling of debts under Article of Law No 2237/involved the use of State resources. 
         
            
 The second limb of the second plea must therefore be rejected.
         
 The third limb of the second plea, concerning the absence of an obligation to reschedule debts
         
            
 The Hellenic Republic claims that Article of Law 2237/should not be regarded as State aid since Article does not impose
         any obligation on the ABG to reschedule the debts of the agricultural cooperatives.
         
            
 In that regard, it need only be stated that the fact that the ABG is not required to reschedule the debts of agricultural
         cooperatives which apply for rescheduling does not prevent the measures taken under Article of Law No 2237/from being
         State aid.
         
            
 Since the Commission was entitled to find that the ABG was subject to State control and that it had rescheduled debts of the
         agricultural cooperatives on terms which did not comply with the private investor principle, it could regard Article of
         Law No 2237/as a State aid scheme.
         
            
 The third limb of the second plea must therefore also be rejected.
         
 The fourth limb of the second plea, alleging misapplication of the reference rate
         
            
 The Hellenic Republic maintains that the Commission wrongly concluded, in points to of the grounds of the contested
         decision, that the difference between the interest rate of 21.5% applied by the ABG when rescheduling the debt of the AGNO
         cooperative, under Decision No 1620/89, and the reference rate of 26.47% applicable on that date in Greece constituted State
         aid within the meaning of Article 87(1) EC. The Hellenic Republic considers that the Commission’s belief that the interest
         rate applied to the rescheduling of AGNO’s debt should be compared with the reference rate is unfounded. It claims that the
         Commission applies the reference rate to determine the amount of regional aid. On the other hand, according to the Hellenic
         Republic, the banks do not use that rate when granting loans to their clients. 
         
            
 In that regard, it should be pointed out that the reference rate is used to calculate the element of aid present in subsidised
         loan schemes. The reference rate is deemed to reflect the average level of interest rate applicable in a Member State to medium-
         and long-term loans for which the usual securities have been provided.
         
            
 For reasons of legal certainty and equality of treatment, the Commission may consider, as a general rule, that it is legitimate
         to apply the reference rate in force during a certain period to all loans granted during that period (Case C-457/Belgium  v Commission [2003] ECR I-6931, paragraph 72). 
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Commission rightly held, in points to in the statement of reasons for the contested decision,
         that the difference between the interest rate applied and the higher reference rate applicable on that date in Greece constituted
         State aid within the meaning of Article 87(1) EC.
         
            
 The fourth limb of the second plea must therefore be rejected.
         
 The fifth limb of the second plea, alleging that neither competition nor trade between the Member States has been affected
         
            
 The Hellenic Republic considers that, even if all the settlements of debts under Laws Nos 2237/and 2198/and under Decision
         No 1620/are regarded as State aid within the meaning of Article EC, they have neither distorted competition nor altered
         the conditions of trade between the Member States.
         
            
 According to the Hellenic Republic, the selective granting of a relative competitive advantage through State aid or State
         resources to certain undertakings or for certain products can distort competition only if the negative effects of that advantage
         are evident and conclusive. In the present case, it considers that the lack of a significant effect on intra-Community trade
         prevents classification of aid as contrary to Community law. 
         
            
 It also points out that a large number of debt write-offs under Article 32(2) of Law No 2008/and of settlements of debts
         under Article of Law No 2237/were too small in amount to have a significant effect on intra-Community trade, according
         to Commission Notice 94/C 368/on Community Guidelines on State aid for rescuing and restructuring  firms in difficulty,
         published in the Official Journal of the European Communities  of December (OJ C 368, p. 12, hereinafter ‘the Guidelines’). 
         
            
 According to the Hellenic Republic, the Commission did not explain on what grounds it had reached the conclusion that the
         settlements in question actually affected trade between the Member States.
         
            
 As regards the argument that the overall amount of aid in question is small and that it is divided between a large number
         of farmers, each of whom receives a negligible sum in national or Community terms, it is settled case-law of the Court that
         the relatively small amount of aid or the relatively small size of the undertaking which receives it does not prima facie
         exclude the possibility that intra-Community trade may be affected or competition distorted (see inter alia Case 730/Philip Morris  v Commission [1980] ECR 2671, paragraphs and 12; Case C-142/Belgium  v Commission (‘Tubemeuse’) [1990] ECR I-959, paragraph 43; Joined Cases C-278/to C-280/Spain  v Commission [1994] ECR I-4103, paragraph 42; Case C-310/Italy  v Commission [2002] ECR I-2289, paragraph 86, and Case C-113/Spain  v Commission [2002] ECR I-7601, paragraph 30).
         
            
 Other factors may be decisive when assessing the effect of aid on trade, such as whether the aid is cumulative and whether
         the undertakings that receive it are operating in a sector that is particularly exposed to competition (see Spain  v Commission, cited above, paragraph 30).
         
            
 It appears that the sector in question is exposed to fierce competition between the producers of the Member States whose products
         are traded within the Community. It is also apparent from point of the contested decision that the Greek producers export
         substantial quantities of agricultural products to other Member States. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, the grant of aid will distort competition and affect trade between Member States, as is apparent from
         points and of the statement of reasons for the contested decision.
         
            
 It is true, according to the Guidelines and to the Commission’s Notice 96/C 68/on the de minimis rule for State aid, published in the Official Journal of the European Communities of March (OJ C 68, p. 9, hereinafter ‘the Notice on the de minimis rule for State aid’), that where the amount of aid is very small it may not have an appreciable effect on trade and competition
         between Member States, and is therefore exempt from the requirement of prior notification to the Commission.
         
            
 However, it is apparent both from point 2.of the Guidelines and from the fourth paragraph of the Notice on the de minimis rule for State aid that the de minimis rule does not apply to the agriculture and fisheries sectors (Spain v Commission, cited above, paragraph 35). 
         
            
 The Hellenic Republic is therefore not justified in relying on it in this case.
         
            
 In the light of all these considerations, the fifth limb of the second plea must be rejected as unfounded, and, accordingly,
         the plea must be rejected in its entirety.
         
The third plea, alleging infringement of Article 87(2)(b) EC
            
 The Hellenic Republic maintains that the Commission should have regarded the aid granted under Article 32(2) of Law No 2008/and Article of Law No 2237/as aid compatible with the common market, since it is designed to make good damage caused
         by natural disasters or exceptional occurrences.
         
            
 In any event, it states that the aid granted to AGNO and certain other cooperatives following the Chernobyl nuclear disaster
         should have been regarded as such aid. AGNO bought milk produced by its members at the market price prevailing before Chernobyl
         after the milk market collapsed as a consequence of that disaster. The purpose of the aid granted to the cooperative, under
         Article 32(2) of Law No 2008/and Article of Law No 2198/94, was to reimburse the sums paid out by the cooperative on
         account of the Chernobyl disaster.
         
            
 The Commission disputes the claims made by the Hellenic Republic. In so far as concerns the losses allegedly suffered by AGNO
         and certain other agricultural cooperatives, it argues that the Member State has not established a causal link between those
         losses and the damage caused to farmers by the Chernobyl disaster. According to the Commission, in the application of Article
         32(2) of Law No 2008/no reference whatever is to be found to the damage actually suffered by producers. The absence of
         the essential link between the Chernobyl nuclear accident and the aid is also confirmed by the lapse of time between the circumstances
         which caused the ‘damage’ and the introduction of the scheme.
         
            
 In that regard, it should be pointed out that the provisions of Article 87(2)(b) EC state that ‘aid to make good the damage
         caused by natural disasters or exceptional occurrences’ are to be compatible with the common market.
         
            
 Since it constitutes a derogation from the general principle laid down in Article 87(1) EC that State aid is incompatible
         with the common market Article 87(2)(b) EC must be construed narrowly (Case C-156/Germany  v Commission [2000] ECR I-6857, paragraph 49, and Case C-301/Germany  v Commission [2003] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 66).
         
            
 Consequently, only economic disadvantages directly caused by natural disasters or by exceptional occurrences qualify for compensation
         as provided for in that provision(see to this effect Case C-156/Germany  v Commission, cited above, paragraph 54, and Case C-301/Germany  v Commission, cited above, paragraph 72). 
         
            
 Under Article 32(2) of Law No 2008/92, the Greek State could assume and settle debts owed to the ABG by agricultural cooperatives
         provided that they were incurred owing to the implementation of a social or some other intervention policy on the instructions
         or on behalf of the State.
         
            
 It is apparent from the wording of that provision that it sanctions the intervention of the Greek State to settle all kinds
         of debts incurred by agricultural cooperatives with the ABG, provided that they relate to social purposes. It also appears
         that Article 32(2) of Law No 2008/was applied, in accordance with its wording, to very diverse situations.
         
            
 A provision with so broad a scope cannot be regarded as aid to make good the damage caused by natural disasters or exceptional
         occurrences.
         
            
 It must be said that the same considerations are valid and the same conclusions must be reached with regard to the aid scheme
         provided for in Article of Law No 2237/94.  
         
            
 In those circumstances, it must be held that the Commission did not err in considering that Article 32(2) of Law No 2008/and Article of Law No 2237/did not qualify for the derogation referred to in Article 87(2)(b) EC.
         
            
 As regards the aid granted to AGNO under Article 32(2) of Law No 2008/and Article of Law No 2198/94, it must be held
         that the Hellenic Republic has not been able to establish a direct link between that aid and the Chernobyl nuclear disaster.
         
         
            
 Nor has it established that the amounts of aid granted to AGNO, under those provisions, actually correspond to losses incurred
         by members of the cooperative as a result of the Chernobyl nuclear disaster. 
         
            
 Therefore, the third plea must also be rejected.
         
The fourth plea, alleging infringement of Article 87(3)(a) EC
            
 The Hellenic Republic claims that the Commission wrongly found that Article 32(2) of Law No 2008/did not constitute State
         aid to promote economic development in certain areas of Greece and, accordingly, aid compatible with the common market within
         the meaning of Article 87(3)(a) EC.
         
            
 In that regard, it need only be pointed out that an aid scheme such as that provided for in Article 32(2) of Law No 2008/92,
         to grant aid to agricultural cooperatives irrespective of the area in which they are established, does not satisfy the criterion
         of regional specificity to qualify for the derogation provided in Article 87(3)(a) EC.
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Commission was justified in concluding that Article 32(2) of Law No 2008/did not qualify for
         the derogation provided by Article 87(3)(a) EC. 
         
            
 The fourth plea must therefore be rejected.
         
The fifth plea, alleging infringement of Article 87(3)(c) EC
            
 The Hellenic Republic claims that, even if the Court considers that Article of Law No 2237/should be regarded as State
         aid, the provision is compatible with the common market under Article 87(3)(c) EC, which concerns aid to facilitate the development
         of certain economic activities or certain economic areas.
         
            
 According to the Hellenic Republic, the Commission was wrong to conclude that the rescheduling of the debts by the ABG under
         Article of Law No 2237/did not satisfy the five conditions laid down in the Guidelines, namely, the restoration of the
         viability of the beneficiaries of the aid, the avoidance of undue distortions of competition, the proportionality of the aid,
         the full implementation of a restructuring plan and annual reports to monitor that implementation. The Hellenic Republic considers
         that Article of Law No 2237/does indeed permit the restoration of the firms’ viability, prevents undue distortions of
         competition, provides for aid in proportion to the restructuring benefits, requires full implementation of the restructuring
         plan and provides for appropriate monitoring and for annual reports.
         
            
 In that regard it must be pointed out that, when applying Article 87(3) EC, the Commission has a wide discretion the exercise
         of which involves economic and social assessments which must be made in a Community context, and that the Court of Justice,
         when reviewing the legality of the exercise of that freedom, cannot substitute its own assessment for that of the competent
         authority but must confine itself to examining whether the latter assessment is vitiated by a manifest error or by a misuse
         of powers (Case C-456/France  v Commission [2002] ECR I-11949, paragraph 41). 
         
            
 It should be made clear, however, that the Commission may adopt a policy as to how it will exercise its discretion in the
         form of measures such as guidelines, in so far as those measures contain rules indicating the approach which the institution
         is to take and do not depart from the rules of the Treaty (see, in particular, Case C-288/Germany  v Commission [2000] ECR I-8237, paragraph 62, and Italy  v Commission, cited above, paragraph 52).
         
            
 In the present case, it should be pointed out that the Commission found inter alia in point of the statement of reasons
         for the contested decision, in respect of compliance with the second condition, relating to the prevention of distortions
         of competition, that the measures should avoid, as far as possible, adverse effects on competitors, and that when there is
         an excess of production capacity, the restructuring plan must make a contribution, proportionate to the amount of aid received,
         to the restructuring of the relevant market in the Community by irreversibly reducing or closing the capacity in question.
         The Commission observed, in point of the statement of reasons for the contested decision, that Article of Law No 2237/does not contain any provision concerning measures taken by the Greek State to offset as far as possible adverse effects on
         competition. Furthermore, the aid scheme applies to cooperatives covering all the agricultural sector, including sub-sectors
         for which there is an excess of production capacity. As regards the specific case of AGNO, the Commission stated, in point
         of the statement of reasons for the contested decision, that that undertaking is active in such a sector and that, in
         spite of its size, the restructuring measures imposed on AGNO did not include any type of capacity reduction.
         
            
 Although it states that Article of Law No 2237/satisfies the second condition mentioned in the Guidelines, the Hellenic
         Republic does not challenge the substance of the Commission’s findings in the contested decision.
         
            
 Without it being necessary to examine whether Article of Law No 2237/satisfies the other conditions mentioned in the
         Guidelines, the fifth plea must therefore be rejected.
         
The sixth plea, alleging infringement of the principles of proportionality and the protection of legitimate expectations
            
 The Hellenic Republic claims that the contested decision is disproportionate in that it provides for the recovery of the aid.
         It is inconceivable that aid granted in compliance with the procedure laid down in Article EC should be recovered after
         more than seven years. Referring to Case 223/RSV  v Commission [1987] ECR 4617, it also considers that such a delay could lead the beneficiary of the aid to have legitimate expectations
         which would prevent the Commission from instructing the national authorities to order the repayment of the aid. 
         
            
 It should be pointed out, in that regard, that removing unlawful aid by means of recovery is the logical consequence of a
         finding that it is unlawful. Consequently, the recovery of State aid unlawfully granted, for the purpose of restoring the
         status quo ante, cannot in principle be regarded as disproportionate to the objectives of the Treaty in regard to State aid
         (Tubemeuse, cited above, paragraph 66). 
         
            
 As regards the principle of the protection of legitimate expectations, it should be stated that, in view of the mandatory
         nature of the supervision of State aid by the Commission under Article EC, undertakings to which aid has been granted may
         not, in principle, entertain a legitimate expectation that the aid is lawful unless it has been granted in compliance with
         the procedure laid down in that article (Case C-169/Spain v Commission [1997] ECR I-135, paragraph 51, and Case C-24/Alcan Deutschland [1997] ECR I-1591, paragraph 25). 
         
            
 However, the contested aid was not granted in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article EC.
         
            
 In so far as concerns the judgment in RSV  v Commission, cited above, relied on by the Hellenic Republic, it should be pointed out that the facts in the present case are not comparable
         to the facts which justified the annulment of the Commission’s decision in that judgment. As is apparent from paragraphs to of the judgment in RSV  v Commission, cited above, that case concerned aid to meet additional costs of an operation which had received aid authorised by the Commission
         in a sector which, for years, had received aid granted by the Netherlands Government and authorised by the Commission. 
         
            
 However, in the present case, the procedure opened under Article 88(2) EC concerned new aid schemes which warranted an in-depth
         examination by the Commission. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, the contested decision cannot be regarded, either in so far as it requires repayment of the contested
         aid or in so far as it also requires the payment of interest, as disproportionate or as infringing the legitimate expectations
         of the undertakings which received the aid. 
         
            
 The sixth plea should therefore be rejected.
         
The seventh plea, alleging that it is wholly impossible to recover the aid
            
 The Hellenic Republic maintains that it is wholly impossible to implement the contested decision. It states inter alia that
         the members of the agricultural cooperatives stand surety for the cooperatives when they and their associations are unable
         to pay their debts when they fall due. It points out that the social, economic and political problems which would be caused
         by compulsory sale proceedings against thousands of lone farmers are obvious.
         
            
 It also points out that the rescheduling of the debts of the agricultural cooperatives by the ABG, under Article of Law
         No 2237/and Decision No 1620/89, are based on loan agreements governed by private law. According to the Hellenic Republic,
         the consequence of that is that the Commission cannot order the recovery of the aid relating to an individual case of debt
         rescheduling by the ABG.
         
            
 In that regard, it should be pointed out that, although unsurmountable difficulties may prevent a Member State from complying
         with its obligations under Community law (see to that effect Case 101/Commission  v Italy [1985] ECR 2629, paragraph 16), mere apprehension of such difficulties cannot justify the State’s failure to apply that law
         correctly (see Case C-52/Commission  v France [1995] ECR I-4443, paragraph 38, and Case C-265/Commissio n v France [1997] ECR I-6959, paragraph 55). 
         
            
 The circumstances referred to by the Hellenic Republic, relating to the financial position of the agricultural cooperatives,
         have not shown that it is impossible to recover the aid which is the subject of the contested decision. The same is true of
         the Hellenic Republic’s argument that aid cannot be recovered when it has been granted under a private-law contract. As the
         Advocate General rightly points out, in point of his Opinion, the form in which aid is provided cannot be deemed relevant.
         Member States could otherwise evade the applicable State aid rules by giving them a particular form.
         
            
 It should also be pointed out that a Member State which encounters unforeseen and unforeseeable difficulties in implementing
         a Commission decision on State aid, or becomes aware of consequences not envisaged by the Commission, must submit those problems
         for consideration by the Commission and suggest appropriate amendments to the decision in question. In such a case the Commission
         and the Member State concerned must, in accordance with the duty of genuine cooperation between the Member States and the
         Community institutions stated in particular in Article EC, work together in good faith with a view to overcoming the difficulties
         whilst fully observing the Treaty provisions, in particular the provisions on aid (see inter alia Case C-404/Commission  v Spain [2003] ECR I-6695, paragraph 46, and Case C-457/Belgium  v Commission, cited above, paragraph 99).
         
            
 Accordingly, the seventh plea, alleging that it is wholly impossible to recover the aid, must be rejected.
         
            
 In those circumstances, the application must be dismissed in its entirety.
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Hellenic Republic has
         been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs.
         
On those grounds,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
 hereby:
         
 
1.
Dismisses the application;
 
2.
Orders the Hellenic Republic to pay the costs.
Jann
Timmermans
von Bahr
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on April 2004.
         
R. Grass
V. Skouris
Registrar
President
 –
            
Language of the case: Greek.
Top  
 