
Case C-174/Commission of the European Communities
v
Italian Republic
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Article EC – Automatic suspension of voting rights in privatised undertaking)
Opinion of Advocate General Kokott delivered on March Judgment of the Court (First Chamber), June Summary of the Judgment
Free movement of capital — Restrictions — National rules limiting voting rights attaching to holdings of the capital of undertakings
            operating in the energy sector acquired by certain public undertakings — Not permissible
(Art. EC)
A Member State which maintains in force rules providing for the automatic suspension of voting rights attaching to holdings
         in excess of 2% of the capital of undertakings operating in the electricity and gas sectors, where those holdings are acquired
         by public undertakings not quoted on regulated financial markets and enjoying a dominant position in their own domestic markets,
         has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC. 
      
Such rules mean that the category of public undertakings concerned is precluded from participating effectively in the management
         and control of the undertakings at issue and has the effect of dissuading public undertakings established in other Member
         States, in particular, from acquiring shares in those undertakings.
      
(see paras 30, 42, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
June (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Article EC – Automatic suspension of voting rights in privatised undertaking)
In Case C-174/04,
ACTION for failure to fulfil obligations under Article EC, brought on April 2004,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by E. Traversa and C. Loggi, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Italian Republic, represented by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by P. Gentili, avvocato dello Stato, with an address for service
         in Luxembourg,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, K. Lenaerts, N. Colneric, K. Schiemann and E. Juhász, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure, 
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities seeks a declaration from the Court that Decree-Law (decreto-legge)
         No of May (GURI No of May 2001, p. 4), converted into Law No entitled ‘Urgent provisions to ensure
         the liberalisation and privatisation of specific public service sectors’ (Legge No 301, recante disposizioni urgenti per salvaguardare
         i processi di liberalizzazione e privatizzazione di specifici settori dei servizi pubblici), of July (GURI No of July 2001, p. – ‘Decree-Law No 192/2001’), is incompatible with Article EC in so far as it provides for automatic
         suspension of the voting rights attached to shareholdings exceeding 2% of the capital of companies in the electricity and
         gas sectors.
      
 Legal background
 Community law
Article 56(1) EC is worded as follows: 
‘Within the framework of the provisions set out in this chapter, all restrictions on the movement of capital between Member
         States and between Member States and third countries shall be prohibited.’
      
Annex I to Council Directive 88/361/EEC of June for the implementation of Article of the Treaty (OJ L 178,
         p. 5) contains a nomenclature of the capital movements referred to in Article of that directive (hereinafter ‘the nomenclature
         annexed to Directive 88/361’). It lists, in particular, the following movements:
      
‘I.      Direct investments …
1.      Establishment and extension of branches or new undertakings belonging solely to the person providing the capital, and the
         acquisition in full of existing undertakings.
      
2.      Participation in new or existing undertaking with a view to establishing or maintaining lasting economic links.
…’
According to the explanatory notes that the end of Annex I to Directive 88/361, ‘direct investments’ means:
‘Investments of all kinds by natural persons or commercial, industrial or financial undertakings, and which serve to establish
         or to maintain lasting and direct links between the person providing the capital and the entrepreneur to whom or the undertaking
         to which the capital is made available in order to carry on an economic activity. This concept must therefore be understood
         in its widest sense.
      
…
As regards those undertakings mentioned under I-of the Nomenclature which have the status of companies limited by shares,
         there is participation in the nature of direct investment where the block of shares held by a natural person of another undertaking
         or any other holder enables the shareholder, either pursuant to the provisions of national laws relating to companies limited
         by shares or otherwise, to participate effectively in the management of the company or in its control.
      
…’
The nomenclature annexed to Directive 88/also mentions the following movements:
‘III. Operations in securities normally dealt in on the capital market ...
...
A.      Transactions in securities on the capital market 
1.      Acquisition by non-residents of domestic securities dealt in on a stock exchange …
…
3.      Acquisition by non-residents of domestic securities not dealt in on a stock exchange …
…’
 National law
Article 1(1) and (2) of Decree-Law No 192/provide:
‘Until completion, within the European Union, of a market wholly open to competition in the electricity and gas sectors, with
         a view to safeguarding the processes of liberalisation and privatisation that are under way, in the case of legal persons
         controlled directly or indirectly by a State or by other public authorities and enjoying a dominant position in their domestic
         markets and not quoted on regulated financial markets, which acquire, directly or indirectly, or through an intermediary,
         including by means of a future or deferred public offer, holdings in excess of 2% in the capital of companies operating in
         the abovementioned sectors, directly or through companies controlled by or associated with them, the grant or the transfer
         of authorisation or concession measures provided for by Legislative Decrees No of March on electrical energy and
         No of May on the internal market in natural gas shall be subject to to the conditions set out in paragraph 2.
         The limit of 2% shall apply to the legal person itself and to the group to which it belongs, being deemed to be the person,
         whether or not in the form of a company, which exercises control, the controlled companies and those subject to joint control,
         and related companies. The limit shall also apply to legal persons who, directly or indirectly, including through controlled,
         linked or fiduciary companies or through intermediaries, enter into, with or without third parties, agreements relating to
         the exercise of voting rights or agreements or pacts between shareholders.
      
If the limit referred to in paragraph is exceeded, from the time of the grant or transfer of the authorisations or concessions
         referred to in paragraph 1, the voting rights attaching to the shares in excess of that limit shall be automatically suspended
         and shall not be taken into account in the quorum of deliberative meetings. Future or deferred acquisition or subscription
         rights shall likewise not be exercisable.’
      
 The pre-litigation procedure
By letter of October 2002, the Commission informed the Italian Government that it considered that Decree-Law No 192/2001,
         in so far as it provides, in relation to undertakings operating in the electricity and gas sectors, for the suspension of
         voting rights attached to holdings in excess of 2% where those holdings are acquired by public undertakings, was contrary
         to the Treaty provisions on the free movement of capital. It therefore called on the Italian Government to submit its observations
         within a period of two months.
      
The Italian Government replied that, although Decree-Law No 192/constituted a restriction on the free movement of capital,
         it nevertheless represented the only possible way of protecting the Italian market from forms of investment which do not meet
         the criteria of freedom of competition.
      
Taking the view that those observations did not justify the rules at issue, the Commission sent the Italian Republic a reasoned
         opinion on July 2003, requesting compliance within a period of two months.
      
The Italian Government did not respond to the reasoned opinion and the Commission therefore instituted the present proceedings
         before the Court.
      
 The application
 Arguments of the parties
Relying on the judgments of the Court in Case C-376/Commission v Portugal [2002] ECR I-4731; Case C-483/Commission v France [2002] ECR I-4781; Case C-503/Commission v Belgium [2002] ECR I-4809; Case C-463/Commission v Spain [2003] ECR I-4581, and Case C-98/Commission v United Kingdom [2003] ECR I-4641, the Commission submits that Decree-Law No 192/introduces different and restrictive treatment for
         investments made by a particular category of investors and consequently impedes the free movement of capital within the Community.
         In particular, those rules have a dissuasive effect on public undertakings of other Member States which might be interested
         in acquiring a holding in companies operating in the electricity and gas sectors, since they would be unable to participate
         effectively in the decisions of such companies or to influence the way in which they are managed.
      
Article EC draws no distinction between discriminatory and non-discriminatory measures or between public and private undertakings.
         Although that article does not define the concept of ‘capital movements’, direct cross-frontier investment falls within that
         concept by virtue of the nomenclature annexed to Directive 88/361. It is characterised, in particular, by the possibility
         of taking an effective part in the management and control of a company. The acquisition of holdings and the full exercise
         of voting rights attached to such holdings are therefore covered by the concept of ‘capital movements’.
      
The Italian Government contends that the application should be dismissed. 
Decree-Law No 192/does not in its view give rise to discriminatory treatment. It concerns acquisitions made by Italian
         public undertakings in the same way as acquisitions made by public undertakings of other Member States.
      
Moreover, a limitation of voting rights does not in every case affect the free movement of capital. The Italian Government
         refers, by way of example, to Articles to of Directive 2001/34/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of May on the admission of securities to official stock exchange listing and on information to be published on those securities
         (OJ L 184, p. 1), and Article of Directive 2004/39/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of April on markets in financial instruments, amending Council Directives 85/611/EEC and 93/6/EEC and Directive 2000/12/EC of the European
         Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directive 93/22/EEC (OJ L 145, p. 1), which directly implemented
         Article EC. Those provisions, which also allow a limitation of voting rights to ensure that an ordinary capital investment
         does not give rise to an effective power of control and management of a company, are not themselves incompatible with the
         principle of the free movement of capital.
      
Decree-Law No 192/is in its view compatible with the free movement of capital, principally because it pursues the Community
         objectives formulated in the Commission Communication of March entitled ‘Completing the internal energy market’ (COM
         (2001) final), in particular that of limiting the anti-competitive influence that public undertakings holding a monopoly
         which take control of undertakings operating in the electricity and gas sectors might exercise in the relevant markets.
      
It is true that the opening up of the markets of the Member States in the electricity and gas sectors has progressed considerably
         in recent years because of Community legislation, in particular Directive 96/92/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
         of December concerning common rules for the internal market in electricity (OJ L 27, p. 20) and Directive 98/30/EC
         of the European Parliament and of the Council of June concerning common rules for the internal market in natural gas
         (OJ L 204, p. 1).
      
However, those directives have been transposed into the legal orders of the Member States in such a way that the opening up
         of a number of domestic markets has been asymmetrical. Certain States chose to open their markets to an extent greater than
         that provided for by those directives, whilst others confined themselves to opening their markets strictly within the limits
         imposed by those directives. The measures adopted at Community level to rectify that imbalance have, however, proved insufficient.
         It is therefore the responsibility not only of the Community institutions but also of the Member States to remedy the asymmetry
         existing in the competitive structure of the market in question and any distortions of competition which might derive from
         possible abuses.
      
Thus, Decree-Law No 192/was the only instrument capable of ensuring that the Italian market was not subjected to speculative
         and anti-competitive attacks by public entities operating in the same sector in other Member States and enjoying advantages
         by virtue of their national legislation.
      
The problem in this case is different from that which arose in Commission  v Portugal, Commission  v France, Commission  v Belgium, Commission  v Spain  and Commission  v United Kingdom. In those cases, the national measures at issue were designed in each case to maintain the State’s influence and to prevent
         liberalisation. In contrast, Decree-Law No 192/2001, in so far as it is addressed solely to public undertakings, is designed
         to exclude State influence. Therefore, the criteria laid down in the abovementioned judgments cannot be transposed to the
         present case.
      
Furthermore, Decree-Law No 192/is of a temporary nature. It will apply only until attainment of a fully liberalised internal
         market in the gas and electricity sectors.
      
Finally, being concerned solely with public undertakings holding a dominant position in their domestic markets, it confines
         itself to strictly necessary and proportional measures.
      
According to the Commission, those arguments are all irrelevant. 
The Member States are not entitled to encroach upon the competence of the Community in this area. It is the responsibility
         not of national governments but of the Commission, as guardian of the Treaties, to ensure the proper application of the Community
         provisions at issue and to take action against any infringements in the area of freedom of competition. Unilateral measures
         adopted by certain Member States, on the pretext of avoiding distortions in their markets, in fact introduce such distortions
         in the Community market as a whole, which is unacceptable. The national measures at issue in this case are of a strictly protectionist
         character.
      
Moreover, it cannot be contended that the Community legislation is inadequate. The legislation has even been strengthened
         recently by a number of measures, in particular Directive 2003/54/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of June
         concerning common rules for the internal market in electricity and repealing Directive 96/92/EC (OJ L 176, p. 37)
         and Directive 2003/55/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of June concerning common rules for the internal
         market in natural gas and repealing Directive 98/30/EC (OJ L 176, p. 57).
      
 Findings of the Court
It must be borne in mind at the outset that Article 56(1) EC gives effect to the free movement of capital between Member States
         and between Member States and non-member countries. To that end, in the chapter of the Treaty entitled ‘Capital and payments’,
         it provides that all restrictions on movements of capital between Member States and between Member States and third countries
         are to be prohibited.
      
Although the Treaty does not define the terms ‘movements of capital’ and ‘payments’, it is settled case‑law that Directive
         88/361, together with the nomenclature annexed to it, has an indicative value for the purposes of defining the notion of capital
         movements (see Commission v United Kingdom, paragraph 39, and Case C-222/Trummer and Mayer [1999] ECR I-1661, paragraphs and 21). 
      
Points I and III of the nomenclature annexed to Directive 88/and the explanatory notes which it contains indicate that
         direct investment in the form of a shareholding in an undertaking and the acquisition of securities on the capital market
         constitute capital movements within the meaning of Article EC. By virtue of those explanatory notes, direct investment,
         in particular, is characterised by the possibility of participating effectively in the management and control of a company.
      
In the light of those considerations, it is necessary to examine whether Decree-Law No 192/2001, which provides for the automatic
         suspension of voting rights attaching to holdings exceeding 2% of the capital of undertakings operating in the electricity
         and gas sectors, where such holdings are acquired by public undertakings that are not quoted on regulated financial markets
         and hold a dominant position, constitutes a restriction on capital movements between Member States. 
      
In that connection, it must be pointed out that the suspension of voting rights, as provided for in Decree-Law No 192/2001,
         means that the category of public undertakings concerned is precluded from participating effectively in the management and
         control of Italian undertakings operating in the electricity and gas markets. Since the objective pursued by Decree-Law No
         192/is to avoid ‘anti-competitive attacks by public entities operating in the same sector in other Member States’, it
         has the effect of dissuading public undertakings established in other Member States, in particular, from acquiring shares
         in Italian undertakings operating in the energy sector.
      
It follows that the suspension of voting rights provided for by Decree-Law No 192/constitutes a restriction on the free
         movement of capital prohibited, in principle, by Article EC.
      
The fact that the legislation at issue is addressed only to a category of public undertakings holding a dominant position
         in their domestic markets does not detract from that finding. The Treaty provisions on the free moment of capital do not draw
         a distinction between private undertakings and public undertakings or between undertakings that hold a dominant position and
         those that do not.
      
Furthermore, the Italian Government cannot claim, on the basis of the compatibility with the Treaty provisions on the free
         movement of capital of those provisions of Directive 2004/which, under certain conditions, allow a limitation of the voting
         rights attaching to certain shares, that the same applies to Decree-Law No 192/2001. That directive, which was adopted in
         the context of freedom of establishment and not, contrary to the Italian Government’s assertion, in the context of Article
         EC, was adopted in relation to a different and very specific situation, namely the admission of transferable securities
         to official listing. It provides for limitations on voting rights only to penalise failure to comply with legislative provisions.
         Those limitations are not, therefore, in contrast to those imposed by Decree-Law No 192/2001, liable to dissuade undertakings
         of other Member States from making investments in certain domestic undertakings. Moreover, Articles to of Directive
         2001/merely lay down obligations to provide information when a substantial holding in a company quoted on the stock exchange
         is acquired or transferred and an obligation on Member States to impose appropriate penalties for infringement of those obligations.
         Measures adopted by Member States in that connection are irrelevant in the context of the present case.
      
It is also necessary to consider whether the restriction on the free movement of capital might be justifiable under the provisions
         of the Treaty.
      
In that connection, it must be borne in mind that the free movement of capital, as a fundamental principle of the Treaty,
         may be restricted only by national rules which are justified by reasons referred to in Article 58(1) EC or by overriding public-interest
         grounds. Furthermore, in order to be so justified, the national legislation must be suitable for securing the objective which
         it pursues and must not go beyond what is necessary in order to attain it, so as to accord with the principle of proportionality
         (see Commission v Belgium, paragraph 45, and Case C-319/Manninen [2004] ECR I-7498, paragraph 29).
      
The Italian Government contends that, through the process of liberalisation and privatisation, the energy markets in Italy
         have been opened up to competition. Decree-Law No 192/is designed to ensure sound and fair conditions of competition
         in those markets. It makes it possible to ensure that, pending effective liberalisation of the energy sector in Europe, the
         Italian market is not subjected to anti-competitive attacks by public undertakings operating in the same sector in other Member
         States that have been placed at an advantage by domestic legislation which has kept them in a privileged position. If control
         of undertakings operating in the Italian electricity and gas markets were acquired by public undertakings of that kind, the
         efforts of the Italian authorities to open up the energy sector to competition might be negated.
      
In that connection, as the Court has already held, an interest in generally strengthening the competitive structure of the
         market in question cannot constitute valid justification for restrictions on the free movement of capital (see Commission  v Portugal, paragraph 52).
      
In any event, Council Regulation (EC) No 139/of January on the control of concentrations between undertakings
         (OJ L 24, p. 1) is applicable. It must be borne in mind in that regard that the domestic rules at issue apply only to
         public undertakings which already hold a dominant position in their national markets. Pursuant to Article 2(3) of Regulation
         No 139/2004, the Commission is required to prohibit concentrations with a Community dimension which would significantly impede
         effective competition in the common market or a substantial part thereof ‘in particular as a result of the creation or strengthening
         of a [pre‑existing] dominant position’.
      
The Italian Government also refers to the need to safeguard the supply of energy within Italian territory.
Even though the need to safeguard energy supplies may, under certain conditions, justify restrictions of fundamental freedoms
         under the Treaty (see Case 72/Campus Oil and Others [1984] ECR 2727, paragraphs and 35, and Commission  v Belgium, paragraph 46), the Italian Government has not demonstrated in what way a limitation of voting rights affecting only one
         specific category of public undertakings is necessary in order to attain that objective. In particular, it has not explained
         why it is necessary for the shares of undertakings operating in the energy sector in Italy to be held by private shareholders
         or by public shareholders quoted on regulated financial markets for the undertakings concerned to be able to guarantee sufficient
         and uninterrupted supplies of electricity and gas in the Italian market.
      
It follows that the Italian Government has not established that Decree-Law No 192/is necessary in order to safeguard
         the energy supplies in Italy.
      
It must therefore be held that, by keeping in force Decree-Law No 192/2001, which provides for the automatic suspension of
         voting rights attaching to holdings in excess of 2% of the capital of undertakings operating in the electricity and gas sectors,
         where those holdings are acquired by public undertakings not quoted on regulated financial markets and enjoying a dominant
         position in their own domestic markets, the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Italian Republic has been
         unsuccessful, the Italian Republic must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by maintaining in force Decree-Law (decreto-legge) No of May 2001, converted into Law No 301, entitled
            ‘Urgent provisions to ensure the liberalisation and privatisation of specific public service sectors’ (legge n° 301, recante
            disposizioni urgenti per salvaguardare i processi di liberalizzazione e privatizzazione di specifici settori dei servizi publici),
            of July 2001, which provides for the automatic suspension of voting rights attaching to holdings in excess of 2% of the
            capital of undertakings operating in the electricity and gas sectors, where those holdings are acquired by public undertakings
            not quoted on regulated financial markets and enjoying a dominant position in their own domestic markets, the Italian Republic
            has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC;
2.      Orders the Italian Republic to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
*  Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 