
Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber) of October – Commission v Poland
(Case C-311/10)
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 2007/46/EC – Approval of motor vehicles and their trailers, and of systems, components and separate technical units intended for such
         vehicles – Failure to transpose within the period prescribed – Incomplete transposition
      
1.                     Member States – Obligations – Implementation of directives – Failure to fulfil obligations – Defence based on difficulties
            of interpretation – Not permissible (Art. TFEU) (see para. 16)
2.                     Union law – Interpretation – Texts in several languages – Differences between the various language versions – General scheme
            and aims of the legislation in question taken into consideration (see para. 18)
3.                     Acts of the institutions – Directives – Implementation by Member States – Necessity of clear and precise transposition – Possible
            subsequent amendment to the annexes governing the technical aspects of and the implementing rules for the directive – No effect
            on the obligation to transpose the directive (Art. 288, third para., TFEU) (see paras 24-25, 77)
4.                     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Proof of failure – Burden of proof on the Commission – Presumptions – Not permissible
            – Failure to fulfil the obligation to inform placed on the Member States by the directive – Consequences (Art. 4(3) TFEU;
            Arts TFEU and TFEU) (see paras 30, 32-33, 52)
5.                     Acts of the institutions – Directives – Implementation by Member States – Transposition of a directive without legislative
            action – Conditions – Existence of a general legal context ensuring the full application of the directive (Art. 288, third
            para., TFEU) (see paras 40, 47)
6.                     Acts of the institutions – Directives – Implementation by Member States – Necessity of full transposition into national law
            (Art. 288, third para., TFEU) (see paras 48, 50)
Re: 
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Failure to adopt, within the period prescribed, the provisions necessary
                  to give effect to Directive 2007/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of September establishing a framework
                  for the approval of motor vehicles and their trailers, and of systems, components and separate technical units intended for
                  such vehicles (Framework Directive) (OJ L 263, p. 1)
               
Operative part
The Court:
1.
	Declares that, by failing to communicate to the European Commission the laws, regulations and administrative provisions implementing
                     Directive 2007/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of September establishing a framework for the approval
                     of motor vehicles and their trailers, and of systems, components and separate technical units intended for such vehicles,
                     the Republic of Poland has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of that directive; 
                  
2.
	Declares that, by failing to adopt, within the prescribed period, all the laws, regulations and administrative provisions
                     necessary to implement Directive 2007/46, the Republic of Poland has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of
                     that directive; 
                  
3.
	Orders the Republic of Poland to pay the costs.
Top  
 