
Case C-350/Kattner Stahlbau GmbH
v
Maschinenbau- und Metall- Berufsgenossenschaft
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Sächsisches Landessozialgericht)
(Competition – Articles EC, EC and EC – Compulsory affiliation to a body providing insurance against accidents at work and occupational diseases – Concept of an ‘undertaking’ – Abuse of dominant position – Freedom to provide services – Articles EC and EC – Restriction – Justification – Risk of serious harm to the financial equilibrium of the social security scheme)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Competition – Community rules – Undertaking – Meaning – Undertaking responsible for providing compulsory insurance against
            accidents at work and occupational diseases
(Arts EC and EC)
2.        Freedom to provide services – Restrictions – National legislation establishing a compulsory insurance scheme against accidents
            at work and occupational diseases – Whether justified by requirements in the general interest – Financial equilibrium of a
            branch of social security
(Arts EC and EC)
1.        A body to which undertakings in a particular branch of industry and a particular territory must be affiliated in respect of
         insurance against accidents at work and occupational diseases is not an undertaking within the meaning of Articles EC and
         EC, but fulfils an exclusively social function, where it operates within the framework of an insurance scheme which applies
         the principle of solidarity and is subject to State supervision. The fact that the body provides insurance services directly
         does not, of itself, affect the purely social nature of that function, in so far as it does not affect either the solidarity
         inherent in that scheme or State supervision of it. 
      
As regards the condition relating to the solidarity inherent in the insurance scheme, that condition is satisfied where the
         scheme is financed by contributions the rate of which is not systematically proportionate to the risk insured and the value
         of the benefits paid is not necessarily proportionate to the insured person’s earnings. Doubt is not cast on the solidarity
         inherent in the funding either by the fact that there is no ceiling in respect of contributions or by the fact that the scheme
         is implemented not by a single body but by several bodies on a sectoral and/geographic basis or, lastly, by the fact that
         those bodies may decide to lay down a uniform minimum contribution. 
      
As regards the condition relating to supervision by the State, the fact that employers’ liability insurance associations are
         given a degree of latitude, within the framework of a system of self-management, in order to lay down the factors that determine
         the amount of contributions and benefits cannot as such be capable of changing the nature of those associations’ activity
         in so far as that degree of latitude is established and strictly delimited by law and, in addition, those bodies are under
         State supervision in that regard. 
      
(see paras 44, 50-55, 61-62, 64-68, operative part 1)
2.        National legislation establishing a compulsory insurance scheme in respect of accidents at work and occupational diseases,
         which pursues a social objective, operates in a way that applies the principle of solidarity and is placed under State supervision,
         may constitute a restriction of the freedom to provide services, in that it hinders or renders less attractive, or even prevents,
         directly or indirectly, the exercise of that freedom by the providers of insurance services established in other Member States
         who wish to offer contracts of insurance covering such risks in the Member State concerned and by undertakings that are covered
         by the scheme who wish to approach such providers. However, such legislation reflects overriding requirements relating to
         the general interest intended to ensure the financial equilibrium of a branch of social security, since compulsory affiliation,
         in so far as it ensures that all undertakings covered by the relevant scheme are grouped together within risk communities,
         enables the principle of solidarity to be implemented. In those circumstances, Articles EC and EC do not preclude national
         legislation of that kind, to the extent that that scheme does not go beyond what is necessary to achieve the objective of
         ensuring the financial equilibrium of a branch of social security, which it is for the national court to verify. 
      
In that regard, the fact that the scheme offers minimal cover, so that, despite the fact that it makes affiliation compulsory,
         undertakings covered by the scheme may top up their cover by taking out supplementary insurance, assuming it is available
         on the market, is a factor militating in favour of proportionality.
      
(see paras 77, 82-89, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
March (*)
      
(Competition – Articles EC, EC and EC – Compulsory affiliation to a body providing insurance against accidents at work and occupational diseases – Concept of an ‘undertaking’ – Abuse of dominant position – Freedom to provide services – Articles EC and EC – Restriction – Justification – Risk of serious harm to the financial equilibrium of the social security scheme)
In Case C‑350/07,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, from the Sächsisches Landessozialgericht (Germany), made by decision
         of July 2007, received at the Court on July 2007, in the proceedings
      
Kattner Stahlbau GmbH
v
Maschinenbau- und Metall- Berufsgenossenschaft,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of A. Rosas, President of Chamber, A. Ó Caoimh (Rapporteur), J. Klučka, U. Lõhmus and P. Lindh, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Kattner Stahlbau GmbH, by R. Mauer, Rechtsanwalt,
–        Maschinenbau- und Metall- Berufsgenossenschaft, by H. Plagemann, Rechtsanwalt,
–        the German Government, by M. Lumma and J. Möller, acting as Agents,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by V. Kreuschitz and O. Weber, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on November 2008,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles EC and EC and Articles EC, EC
         and EC.
      
The reference was made in the context of proceedings brought by Kattner Stahlbau GmbH (‘Kattner’) against Maschinenbau- und
         Metall- Berufsgenossenschaft (Employers’ liability insurance association in the mechanical engineering and metal sector, ‘MMB’)
         regarding the compulsory affiliation of Kattner to MMB in respect of statutory insurance against accidents at work and occupational
         diseases.
      
 National legal framework
In Germany the statutory insurance scheme in respect of accidents at work and occupational diseases is governed by Book VII
         of the Code of Social Law (Sozialgesetzbuch VII), in the version resulting from the Law of August 1996, (BGBl. I, p. 1254,
         ‘SGB VII’), which entered into force on January 1997. Paragraph of SGB VII provides that the purpose of that insurance
         is:
      
‘(1)      to prevent, by all appropriate means, accidents at work and occupational diseases, together with all health risks associated
         with work, and
      
(2)      on the occurrence of accidents at work or occupational diseases, to restore, by all appropriate means, the health and the
         capacity to work of insured persons and to provide financial compensation to insured persons or their dependants.’
      
The order for reference and the observations submitted to the Court show that the scheme is based, in particular, on the following
         elements. 
      
 Compulsory affiliation
Within the framework of the said scheme, all undertakings must be affiliated, in respect of insurance against accidents at
         work and occupational diseases, to the Berufsgenossenschaft (employers’ liability insurance association) that covers their
         sector and their geographical area. The various employers’ liability insurance associations have the status of non-profit
         bodies governed by public law. According to the German Government and the Commission of the European Communities, employers’
         liability insurance associations operate at present. Each employers’ liability insurance association has several branches,
         reflecting the relevant sectors of activity. 
      
 Contributions
Paragraph 152(1) of SGB VII, entitled ‘Apportionment of liability’, provides:
      
‘Contributions shall be determined following the expiry of the calendar year in which claims for contributions have, in principle,
         arisen, on the basis of an apportionment of liability. Such an apportionment must cover the requirements of the preceding
         year, and shall include contributions which are necessary to provide an appropriate reserve. Apart from that, contributions
         may be levied only in order to provide funds for working capital.’
      
Paragraph of the SGB VII, entitled ‘Basis of calculation’, provides:
      
‘1. Contributions shall, save as otherwise provided below, be calculated by reference to funding requirements (liability in
         respect of apportionments), the wages and salaries of the insured persons and the categories of risk.
      
2. The wages and salaries of the insured persons shall be taken as the basis of contribution up to the amount of their maximum
         annual earnings.
      
3. Regulations may provide that there is to be a minimum basis of calculation, by reference to the minimum annual wage or
         salary for insured persons who have completed their 18th year. If the insured persons were not employed during the entire
         calendar year or were not employed on a full-time basis, a corresponding percentage of that amount shall be taken as the minimum
         basis. 
      
4. In calculating contributions, the accident risk in the undertaking may be disregarded in whole or in part, to the extent
         that expenditure in respect of pensions, death benefits and compensation:
      
(1)      is based on damage or injury caused by insured risks in those undertakings when that damage or injury has ceased or been extinguished
         prior to the fourth year preceding the year in which contributions fall to be apportioned, or
      
(2)      is based on damage or injury caused by insured risks which first occurred or first became apparent prior to the fourth year
         preceding the year in which contributions fall to be apportioned.
      
The total amount of expenditure which, in accordance with the first sentence of this subparagraph, is allocated to undertakings
         without reference being made to the level of accident risk may not exceed 30% of the total expenditure in respect of pensions,
         death benefits and compensation. The implementing provisions shall be determined by regulation.’
      
Paragraph of SGB VII, entitled ‘Scale of risks’, provides:
      
‘1. Undertakings responsible for providing accident insurance cover shall, acting autonomously, draw up a scale of risks.
         That scale of risks shall specify categories of risk so that contributions may be levied on a graduated basis. …
      
2. The scale of risks shall be divided into tariff positions, setting out categories of persons exposed to risk by reference
         to a risk comparison based on generally-accepted insurance principles. …
      
3. Categories of risk shall be calculated by reference to the relationship between benefits paid and wages or salaries.
…’
According to Kattner, Paragraph of SGB VII allows employers’ liability insurance associations to lay down a uniform minimum
         contribution in their statute.
      
Paragraph 176(1) of SGB VII, entitled ‘Adjustment obligation’, provides:
      
‘To the extent that
(1)      the pension liability cost of an employers’ liability insurance association is more than 4.times greater than that of the
         average pension liability cost of employers’ liability insurance associations,
      
(2)      the pension liability cost of an employers’ liability insurance association which allocates at least 20% and not more than
         30% of its expenditure on pensions, death benefits and compensation under Paragraph 153(4) to undertakings without reference
         being made to the level of accident risk is more than three times greater than the average pension liability cost of employers’
         liability insurance associations, or
      
(3)      the compensation liability cost of an employers’ liability insurance association is more than five times greater than the
         average compensation liability cost of employers’ liability insurance associations,
      
the employers’ liability insurance associations shall apportion the excess costs among themselves. Where the amount to be
         paid by way of adjustment under subparagraph (1)(2) exceeds the amount which the employers’ liability insurance association
         apportions to undertakings without reference being had to the level of accident risk in accordance with subparagraph (1)(2),
         it shall be restricted to the latter amount.’
      
 Benefits
Employees can draw benefits from the employers’ liability insurance association directly, without the employer having to incur
         civil liability (Paragraphs to of SGB VII). 
      
The list of benefits and the conditions that must be fulfilled for granting them are set out in Paragraphs to of SGB VII.
         The right to claim those benefits arises irrespective of the employer’s ability to pay contributions. According to Paragraph
         of SGB VII, only salaries between a set minimum and a set maximum are taken into consideration for the purpose of calculating
         benefits. 
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Kattner is a German private limited company which was established on November 2003; since it began trading on January
         2004, the company has been active in steel construction and the manufacture of staircases and balconies.
      
On January 2004, MMB informed Kattner that, under the provisions of SGB VII, MMB was the competent statutory provider of
         insurance against accidents at work and occupational diseases for Kattner and that, therefore, the latter had been registered
         as a member of MMB and, moreover, had been assigned risk categories. 
      
By letter of November 2004, Kattner, which intended to take out private insurance against the relevant risks, gave notice
         of cancellation of its compulsory affiliation to MMB with effect from the end of 2004. 
      
On November 2004, MMB informed Kattner that, since MMB was the competent statutory provider of insurance against accidents
         at work and occupational diseases for Kattner, opting out or cancelling the affiliation was legally impossible and that, therefore,
         Kattner’s request had to be declined. MMB confirmed that decision on April 2005.
      
On November 2005, the Sozialgericht Leipzig (Leipzig Social Court) dismissed the action brought by Kattner. 
      
Kattner brought an appeal before the Sächsisches Landessozialgericht (Higher Social Court of the Land of Saxony) and submitted
         before that court, first of all that compulsory affiliation to MMB restricts the freedom to provide services laid down in
         Articles EC and EC. In this respect, Kattner submitted a proposal by a Danish insurance company prepared to insure Kattner
         against accidents at work, occupational diseases and accidents on the way to and from work, on the same terms as MMB. Moreover,
         the benefits provided by the Danish company are the same as those provided under the German statutory scheme at issue in the
         main proceedings. Further, Kattner submits that MMB’s position as exclusive provider infringes Articles EC and EC. According
         to Kattner, there are no overriding grounds of public interest to justify the monopoly of German providers of insurance against
         accidents at work and occupational diseases in their respective fields.
      
In its order for reference, the Sächsisches Landessozialgericht explains that there are fundamental differences between the
         scheme at issue in the main proceedings and the Italian statutory insurance scheme in respect of accidents at work and occupational
         diseases at issue in Case C-218/Cisal [2002] ECR I‑691), so that the guidance given by the Court in Cisal does not enable it to respond to all the questions that arise in the case before it. 
      
According to the referring court, first, it is doubtful whether MMB is a body which is entrusted by law with the management
         of a scheme providing compulsory insurance against accidents at work and occupational diseases. In this respect, an essential
         difference between the Italian and the German schemes stems from the fact that the Istituto nazionale per l’assicurazione
         contro gli infortuni sul lavoro (INAIL) (National Institute for Insurance against Accidents at Work) involved in the Cisal case is a monopoly, whereas the German scheme is structured as an oligopoly. Moreover, MMB is not entrusted with the management
         of a scheme providing compulsory insurance but rather provides such insurance itself. MMB’s management activity is essentially
         similar to that of commercial entities, in particular to that of insurance companies. 
      
Moreover, the referring court takes the view that compulsory affiliation to the German scheme in respect of accidents at work
         and occupational diseases is not essential for the financial equilibrium of the scheme or for the application of the principle
         of solidarity. Given that the level of contributions is the result of rules adopted independently by each employers’ liability
         insurance association and that the scope of activity of such an association may be changed, the formation of sectoral or territorial
         monopolies which do not bear any relation to risk results in the same risk being subject to different tariffs, depending on
         arbitrarily created risk categories. In addition, there is no provision capping contribution rates in relation to high risks.
         Moreover, the minimum income from employment that may be taken into account to calculate contributions pursuant to Paragraph
         153(3) of SGB VII is not determined by that provision in a binding manner, but can instead be laid down in an insurer’s statute.
         The maximum income from employment referred to in Paragraph 153(2) of SGB VII, which is taken into account both for the calculation
         of benefits and of contributions, is likewise determined by the insurers’ statutes, in accordance with, respectively, Paragraphs
         et seq. of SGB VII and Paragraph 153(2) of SGB VII. Finally, most benefits depend on the level of income from employment
         of the insured person. It follows that the German scheme at issue in the main proceedings makes no arrangements for redistribution
         based on a socio-political objective. 
      
In those circumstances, the Sächsisches Landessozialgericht decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Is [MMB] an undertaking within the meaning of Articles [EC] and EC?
2.      Does the compulsory affiliation of [Kattner] to [MMB] infringe Community law?’
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 Admissibility
As regards the first question, MMB and the Commission submit that the referring court, first, seeks an interpretation of national
         law and, second, does not specify the circumstances in which an employers’ liability insurance association could constitute
         an undertaking within the meaning of Articles EC and EC. The Commission adds, as regards the second question, that the
         referring court has not indicated in sufficient detail which rules of Community law require interpretation. Moreover, MMB
         submits that the two questions referred cannot result in a useful answer for the referring court, as the latter may not terminate
         Kattner’s compulsory affiliation, since the first decision on affiliation of January has not been challenged.
      
As regards, first, the wording of the questions referred for a preliminary ruling, it must first of all be recalled that in
         proceedings brought under Article EC the Court has no jurisdiction to apply the rules of Community law to a specific case
         nor, consequently, to classify provisions of national law with respect to such a rule. It may, however, provide the national
         court with all the criteria for the interpretation of Community law which might be useful in assessing the effects of such
         provisions of national law (see, to that effect, Case 37/Coenen [1987] ECR 3589, paragraph 8, and Joined Cases C‑145/and C‑146/Fendt Italiana [2007] ECR I‑5869, paragraph 30). To that end, the Court may have to reformulate the questions referred to it (see, in particular,
         Case C‑45/Campina [2007] ECR I‑2089, paragraph 30, and Case C‑420/Jager [2008] ECR I‑1315, paragraph 46).
      
In the present case, while it is true that, with its first question, the referring court asks the Court to apply Articles
         EC and EC to the dispute in the main proceedings by deciding itself whether MMB is an undertaking within the meaning
         of those provisions and that it does not, in that respect, specify the circumstances that would be relevant for the purpose
         of such classification, there is nothing to stop the Court from reformulating the question with a view to providing the referring
         court with an interpretation of those provisions that would help it resolve the dispute before it. 
      
Moreover, according to case-law, where a question referred for a preliminary ruling merely refers to Community law, and does
         not state which provisions of Community law are in issue, the Court must extract from all the factors provided by the referring
         court, and in particular from the statement of grounds contained in the order for reference, the provisions of Community law
         requiring an interpretation, having regard to the subject-matter of the dispute (see, to that effect, in particular, Case
         204/Bekaert [1988] ECR 2029, paragraphs and 7).
      
In the present case, even though the wording of the second question does not state which provisions of Community law are to
         be interpreted, the order for reference makes it clear that the second question seeks to establish whether, as Kattner claims
         in the case in the main proceedings, compulsory affiliation to a employers’ liability insurance association such as MMB can
         constitute a restriction on the freedom to provide services prohibited by Articles EC and EC or an abuse prohibited
         by Article EC, in conjunction, if appropriate, with Article EC, so that the question may be reformulated to that effect.
      
As regards, second, the usefulness of the questions referred for the referring court, it must be pointed out that, in the
         context of the cooperation between the Court and the national courts provided for by Article EC, it is solely for the
         national court, before which the dispute has been brought and which must assume responsibility for the subsequent judicial
         decision, to determine in the light of the particular circumstances of the case both the need for a preliminary ruling in
         order to enable it to deliver judgment and the relevance of the questions which it submits to the Court. Consequently, where
         the questions submitted for a preliminary ruling concern the interpretation of Community law, the Court is, in principle,
         bound to give a ruling (see, in particular, C‑238/Asnef‑Equifax and Administración del Estado [2006] ECR I‑11125, paragraph 15, and the case-law cited).
      
However, in exceptional circumstances, the Court must examine the conditions in which the case was referred to it by the national
         court in order to assess whether it has jurisdiction. The spirit of cooperation which must prevail in preliminary ruling proceedings
         requires the national court for its part to have regard to the function entrusted to the Court of Justice, which is to contribute
         to the administration of justice in the Member States and not to give opinions on general or hypothetical questions. None
         the less, a reference from a national court may be refused only if it is quite obvious that the interpretation of Community
         law sought bears no relation to the actual facts of the main action or to its purpose, or where the problem is hypothetical
         or the Court does not have before it the factual or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions submitted
         to it (Asnef‑Equifax and Administración del Estado, paragraphs and and the case-law cited).
      
In the present case, the order for reference shows that the dispute in the main proceedings concerns the lawfulness of the
         compulsory affiliation of Kattner to MMB in respect of insurance against accidents at work and occupational diseases. In that
         context, the referring court asks, in particular, whether that compulsory affiliation is compatible with Articles EC and
         EC, on the one hand, and with Articles EC and EC on the other. 
      
In those circumstances, it cannot be regarded as obvious that the interpretation of Community law requested bears no relation
         to the actual facts or the purpose of the dispute before the referring court, which is clearly not hypothetical.
      
Therefore, the reference for a preliminary ruling must be considered to be admissible.
      
 Substance
 The first question
By its first question, the referring court essentially asks whether Articles EC and EC are to be interpreted to the
         effect that a body such as MMB, to which undertakings in a particular branch of industry and a particular territory must be
         affiliated in respect of insurance against accidents at work and occupational diseases, is an undertaking within the meaning
         of those two provisions.
      
According to consistent case-law, in the context of competition law, the concept of an undertaking covers any entity engaged
         in an economic activity, irrespective of its legal status and the way in which it is financed (see, in particular, Case C‑41/Höfner and Elser [1991] ECR I‑1979, paragraph 21, and Case C‑280/ETI and Others [2007] ECR I‑10893, paragraph 38).
      
In the present case, it must first be noted that employers’ liability insurance associations such as MMB are involved, as
         public law bodies, in the management of the German social security system and that, in this respect, they fulfil a social
         function, which is entirely non-profit-making (see, to that effect, Joined Cases C‑264/01, C‑306/01, C‑354/and C‑355/AOK Bundesverbandand Others [2004] ECR I‑2493, paragraphs 51).
      
As the Court held in respect of the Italian statutory insurance scheme in respect of accidents at work and occupational diseases,
         the covering of those risks has for a long time been part of the social protection which Member States afford to all or part
         of their population (Cisal, paragraph 32). 
      
According to settled case-law, Community law does not detract from the powers of the Member States to organise their social
         security systems (see, in particular, Case C‑158/Kohll [1998] ECR I‑1931, paragraph 17; Case C‑157/Smits and Peerbooms [2001] ECR I‑5473, paragraph 44; and Case C‑372/Watts [2006] ECR I‑4325, paragraph 92).
      
Moreover, a statutory insurance scheme in respect of accidents at work and occupational diseases such as the one at issue
         in the main proceedings, in so far as it provides for compulsory social protection for all workers, pursues a social objective
         (see, by analogy, Cisal, paragraph 34). 
      
According to Paragraph of SGB VII, the purpose of the scheme is, first, to prevent, by all appropriate means, accidents
         at work and occupational diseases, together with all health risks associated with work and, second, to restore, by all appropriate
         means, the health and the capacity to work of insured persons and to provide financial compensation to insured persons or
         their dependants.
      
Moreover, the submissions to the Court show that the scheme is intended to provide all the persons protected with cover against
         the risks of accidents at work and occupational diseases, irrespective of any fault which may have been committed by the victim
         or by the employer and therefore without any need to examine the question of the civil liability of the person drawing benefits
         in respect of the risk activity (see, by analogy, Cisal, paragraph 35).
      
Furthermore, the social aim of such a scheme is also highlighted by the fact that, as the documents before the Court show,
         benefits are paid even when the contributions due have not been paid, which obviously contributes to the protection of all
         workers against the economic consequences of accidents at work (see, by analogy, Cisal, paragraph 36).
      
However, as is clear from the case-law of the Court, the social aim of an insurance scheme is not in itself sufficient to
         preclude the activity in question from being classified as an economic activity (see, to that effect, Case C‑67/Albany [1999] ECR I‑5751, paragraph 86; Joined Cases C‑180/to C‑184/Pavlov and Others [2000] ECR I‑6451, paragraph 118; and Cisal, paragraph 37). 
      
It remains to be examined, in particular, whether that scheme can be regarded as applying the principle of solidarity and
         to what extent it is subject to supervision by the State, given that these are factors that are likely to preclude a given
         activity from being regarded as economic (see, to that effect, Cisal, paragraphs to 44).
      
–       Application of the principle of solidarity
As regards, in the first place, the application of the principle of solidarity, an overall assessment of the scheme at issue
         in the main proceedings shows, first, that it is, like the scheme at issue in Cisal (paragraph 39), financed by contributions the rate of which is not systematically proportionate to the risk insured. 
      
The level of contributions depends not only on the risk insured, but also, as is clear from Paragraph 153(1) to (3) of SGB
         VII, on the earnings of the insured persons, situated between a maximum amount and, where relevant, a minimum amount (see,
         by analogy, Cisal, paragraph 39). 
      
In addition, pursuant to Paragraphs 152(1) and 153(1) of SGB VII, the level of contributions depends also on the funding requirements
         resulting from benefits paid out by the relevant employers’ liability insurance association in the preceding calendar year.
         Taking into account those funding requirements allows for the risks connected with the activities of the members of an employers’
         liability insurance association to be shared by all of its members, and not just the branch of industry in which they are
         active, thus establishing a risk community at the level of the employers’ liability insurance association as a whole.
      
Furthermore, the risks that are taken into account in order to calculate the contributions are – subject to certain possible
         adjustments related to the activity of individual undertakings – within each employers’ liability insurance association those
         of the branch of industry to which the relevant members belong, through risk categories which have been laid down in accordance
         with Paragraph of SGB VII, so that those members constitute a risk community reflecting the risks incurred in that branch
         of industry. 
      
Moreover, according to Paragraph of SGB VII, employers’ liability insurance associations are under an obligation to apportion
         any excess costs amongst themselves where the expenditure of one association significantly exceeds the average expenditure
         of all the associations. It follows that the principle of solidarity is thus also applied amongst all branches of industry
         at the level of the country as a whole, with different employers’ liability insurance associations being grouped together
         in a risk community, which enables them to effect an equalisation of costs and risks between them (see, by analogy, Joined
         Cases C‑159/and C‑160/Poucet and Pistre [1993] ECR I‑637, paragraph 12, and AOK Bundesverband, paragraph 53).
      
The referring court does point out that, in contrast to the Italian scheme in question in Cisal, the German scheme at issue in the main proceedings, first, does not provide for contributions to be capped at a maximum
         amount and, second, is applied not by a single body with a monopoly, but by a group of bodies which, according to the referring
         court, constitute an oligopoly. 
      
However, in the context of an overall assessment, those two factors do not cast doubt on the solidarity inherent in the funding
         of a scheme such as the one at issue in the main proceedings, which is apparent from the findings in paragraphs to of
         this judgment.
      
As regards the first factor, it should be noted that, although a ceiling certainly contributes to the application of the principle
         of solidarity, especially where the balance of financing is borne by all undertakings in the same category (see, to that effect,
         Cisal, paragraph 39), the fact that there is no ceiling cannot, alone, have the effect of removing from a scheme that has all the
         abovementioned features its characteristic of solidarity. 
      
Furthermore, and in any event, since Paragraph 153(2) of SGB VII expressly provides that ‘[t]he wages and salaries of the
         insured persons shall be taken as the basis of contribution up to the amount of their maximum annual earnings’, it is for
         the referring court, whose order moreover refers expressly to that provision, to examine whether, as submitted by the German
         Government and in Kattner’s observations, that provision does not strengthen the characteristic of solidarity of the scheme
         at issue in the main proceedings, by indirectly capping the level of contributions even where the insured risk is high.
      
As regards the second aspect highlighted by the referring court, as stated in paragraph of the present judgment, Community
         law does not detract from the powers of the Member States to organise their social security systems. Where, in exercising
         those powers, a Member State chooses to divide the running of the social security system among several bodies on a sectoral
         and/geographic basis, that Member State effectively applies the principle of solidarity, even if it limits its scope of application.
         This is even more true where, as in the scheme at issue in the main proceedings, employers’ liability insurance associations
         equalise costs and risks between themselves at the level of the country as a whole.
      
Finally, contrary to Kattner’s claim, the principle of solidarity underlying the funding of a scheme such as that in the main
         proceedings cannot be affected either by the fact that employers’ liability insurance associations could, pursuant to Paragraph
         of SGB VII, decide to lay down a uniform minimum contribution. On the contrary, laying down such a uniform minimum contribution
         – even if, as Kattner submits, it reduced the funding requirements to be shared – is itself likely to contribute to the characteristic
         solidarity of that scheme. As regards insured persons whose earnings are lower than the earnings to which the minimum contribution
         corresponds, the existence of such a minimum contribution amounts to levying a contribution the amount of which is not only
         uniform for all those insured under the relevant employers’ liability insurance association but also independent of the risk
         insured and, therefore, of the branch of industry in which those insured persons are active. 
      
Second, it should be noted that, as the Court found in Cisal (paragraph 40), the value of the benefits paid by employers’ liability insurance associations such as MMB is not necessarily
         proportionate to the insured person’s earnings.
      
Even if the amount of earnings is taken into account in calculating the contribution, it is clear from the order for reference
         and the observations submitted to the Court that benefits in kind, such as benefits for accident prevention and retraining,
         are wholly independent of remuneration. Those benefits are significant, amounting, according to the referring court, to approximately
         12% of MMB’s total expenditure in and, according to MMB and the German Government, to as much as between 25% and 30%
         of that total. 
      
In addition, as regards cash payments intended to compensate in part for the loss of earnings following an accident at work
         or an occupational disease, it follows from the order for reference and the observations submitted to the Court that, pursuant
         to Paragraph of SGB VII, only salaries between a minimum and a maximum – respectively, ‘minimum annual earnings’ and ‘maximum
         annual earnings’ – are taken into consideration; however, this is for the referring court to confirm. Moreover, the German
         Government and the Commission submitted that the amount of the care allowance is entirely unrelated to contributions paid
         – which is also for the referring court to verify. 
      
In those circumstances, as in the context of the scheme at issue in Cisal, it appears that the payment of high contributions may give rise to capped benefits only and, conversely, the payment of
         relatively low contributions may afford entitlement to benefits calculated on the basis of higher earnings, as Kattner itself
         stated in its submissions. 
      
The absence of any direct link between the contributions paid and the benefits granted thus entails solidarity between better
         paid workers and those who, given their low earnings, would be deprived of proper social cover if such a link existed (see
         Cisal, paragraph 42).
      
–       Supervision by the State
As regards, in the second place, supervision by the State, according to the order for reference, although German law has entrusted
         employers’ liability insurance associations such as MMB with providing statutory insurance against accidents at work and occupational
         diseases, those associations may, in their statutes, decide, first, to take the minimum annual wage as the minimum basis to
         calculate contributions, in accordance with Paragraph 153(3) of SGB VII and, second, – as Kattner stressed in its submission
         – to raise the amount of maximum annual earnings which is taken as the basis for calculating contributions under Paragraph
         153(2) of SGB VII and benefits under Paragraph of SGB VII. Moreover, according to Kattner’s observations, which the German
         Government confirms in this respect, under Paragraph 157(1) of SGB VII, employers’ liability insurance associations autonomously
         draw up a scale of risks and categories of risk that are taken into account in calculating contributions.
      
However, the fact that employers’ liability insurance associations such as MMB are given that degree of latitude, within the
         framework of a system of self-management, in order to lay down the factors that determine the amount of contributions and
         benefits cannot as such change the nature of those associations’ activity (see, to that effect, AOK Bundesverband and Others, paragraph 56).
      
The documents before the Court show that – as the Advocate General found in point of his Opinion – that degree of latitude
         is established and strictly delimited by law, with the SGB VII laying down, first, the factors that must be taken into account
         in calculating the contributions payable under the statutory scheme at issue in the main proceedings and, second, an exhaustive
         list of benefits provided under that scheme, together with the arrangements for the grant of such benefits. 
      
In this respect, the observations submitted by Kattner, the German Government and the Commission indicate that the legal provisions
         applicable – to be verified, however, by the referring court – determine the minimum amount and the maximum amount of earnings
         to be taken into account in calculating, as the case may be, contributions and benefits, and that only the maximum amount
         can, where appropriate, be established by the statutes of the employers’ liability insurance associations.
      
In addition it appears – and this must also be verified by the referring court – that employers’ liability insurance associations
         are, as regards the content of their statutes, and in particular the setting of the amount of contributions and benefits under
         the statutory scheme at issue in the main proceedings, subject to control by the Federal State, which, according to the provisions
         of SGB VII, acts as a supervisory authority. 
      
Therefore, it is clear from the foregoing that, under a statutory insurance scheme such as that at issue in the main proceedings,
         the amount of contributions and the amount of benefits, which are the two essential elements of such a scheme, appear – subject
         to verification to be carried out by the referring court –, first, to apply the principle of solidarity, which entails that
         benefits are not strictly proportionate to contributions and, second, to be subject to State control (see, by analogy, Cisal, paragraph 44).
      
In those circumstances, and subject to verification by the referring court of those two factors relating to the principle
         of solidarity and supervision by the State, it must be held that, in participating in the management of one of the traditional
         branches of social security, in this case insurance against accidents at work and occupational diseases, a body such as MMB
         fulfils an exclusively social function, so that its activity is not an economic activity for the purposes of competition law;
         accordingly that body does not constitute an undertaking within the meaning of Articles EC and EC (see, to that effect, Cisal, paragraph 45).
      
That conclusion is not undermined by the fact, noted by the referring court, that, in contrast to the situation that prevailed
         under the Italian scheme at issue in Cisal, an employers’ liability insurance association such as MMB does not manage the statutory insurance scheme concerned, but
         provides insurance services directly. As the Advocate General observed in substance in point of his Opinion, since Community
         law does not detract from the powers of the Member States to organise their social security systems, that mere circumstance
         does not, of itself, affect the purely social nature of the function performed by such an association, in so far as it does
         not affect either the solidarity inherent in that scheme or State supervision of it, as is clear from the foregoing analysis.
      
Consequently, the answer to the first question referred for a preliminary ruling must be that Articles EC and EC are
         to be interpreted to the effect that a body such as the employers’ liability insurance association at issue in the main proceedings,
         to which undertakings in a particular branch of industry and a particular territory must be affiliated in respect of insurance
         against accidents at work and occupational diseases, is not an undertaking within the meaning of those provisions, but fulfils
         an exclusively social function, where such a body operates within the framework of a scheme which applies the principle of
         solidarity and is subject to State supervision, which it is for the referring court to verify.
      
 The second question
By its second question, the referring court asks, essentially, whether Articles EC and EC, on the one hand, and Articles
         EC and EC on the other, must be interpreted to the effect that they preclude national legislation such as that at issue
         in the main proceedings, pursuant to which undertakings in a particular branch of industry and a particular territory must
         be affiliated to a body such as MMB. 
      
In that regard, it should firstly be observed that, in the light of the answer to the first question, there is no need to
         respond to the second question in so far as it concerns the interpretation of Articles EC and EC, since those two provisions
         can only apply if there is an ‘undertaking’.
      
As regards the interpretation of Articles EC and EC, it should be noted that, as previously stated in paragraph of
         this judgment, since Community law does not detract from the powers of the Member States to organise their social security,
         in the absence of harmonisation at Community level it is for the legislation of the Member State concerned to determine the
         conditions governing the right or duty to be insured with a social security scheme (see, in particular, Kohll, paragraph 18, Smits and Peerbooms, paragraph 45, and Watts, paragraph 92).
      
The Commission and, in effect, the German Government, take the view that that case-law shows that the introduction of compulsory
         affiliation to a social security scheme, such as that provided for by the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings,
         falls within the powers of the Member States alone, so that that legislation is not covered by Articles EC and EC. There
         is no restriction on freedom to provide services going beyond compulsory affiliation, since only the method of financing a
         social security scheme rather than the provision of benefits once the social risk insured against has occurred is in issue.
      
That contention cannot be accepted. 
      
While it is true that, according to the consistent case-law cited in paragraph of this judgment, in the absence of Community
         harmonisation, it is for the legislation of each Member State to determine, in particular, the conditions concerning the requirement
         to be insured with a social security scheme and, consequently, the method of financing that scheme, the Member States must
         nevertheless comply with Community law when exercising those powers (see, in particular, Kohll, paragraph 19, Smits and Peerbooms, paragraph 46). It follows that that power of the Member States is not unlimited (Case C‑103/Derouin [2008] ECR I-0000, paragraph 25).
      
Consequently, the fact that national legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings concerns only the financing
         of a branch of social security, that is to say, insurance against accidents at work and occupational diseases, by providing
         for compulsory affiliation of undertakings covered by the scheme at issue to the employers’ liability insurance associations
         entrusted by the law with providing such insurance, does not exclude the application of the EC Treaty rules, in particular
         those relating to freedom to provide services (see C‑18/Terhoeve [1999] ECR I‑345, paragraph 35).
      
Accordingly, the system of compulsory affiliation laid down in the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings must
         be compatible with the provisions of Articles EC and EC. 
      
It is therefore necessary to examine whether, as Kattner submitted before the referring court and in its observations to the
         Court, the putting in place by a Member State of a statutory insurance scheme such as that at issue in the main proceedings,
         which provides for compulsory affiliation of undertakings, in respect of insurance against accidents at work and occupational
         diseases, to employers’ liability insurance associations such as MMB, is likely to constitute a restriction to freedom to
         provide services within the meaning of Article EC. It must accordingly be ascertained, first, whether it restricts the
         ability of insurance companies established in other Member States to offer their insurance services relating to some or all
         of the risks in question on the market of the first Member State and, second, whether it discourages undertakings established
         in that first Member State, in their capacity as recipients of services, from taking out insurance with those insurance companies.
         
      
In this respect, it must be recalled that, according to the case-law, the freedom to provide services requires not only the
         elimination of all discrimination on grounds of nationality against providers of services who are established in another Member
         State, but also the abolition of any restriction, even if it applies without distinction to national providers of services
         and to those of other Member States, which is liable to prohibit, impede or render less advantageous the activities of a provider
         of services established in another Member State where he lawfully provides similar services (see, to that effect, in particular,
         Case C‑205/Analir and Others [2001] ECR I‑1271, paragraph 21; Joined Cases C‑202/and C‑94/Cipolla and Others [2006] ECR I‑11421, paragraph 56; and Case C‑208/ITC [2007] ECR I‑181, paragraph 55).
      
Furthermore, according to settled case-law, Article EC precludes the application of any national rules which have the effect
         of making the provision of services between Member States more difficult than the provision of services purely within one
         Member State (Kohll, paragraph 33, and Smits and Peerbooms, paragraph 61).
      
In the present case, it may well be doubted, as the Advocate General pointed out in substance in point of his Opinion,
         whether, the risks covered by the statutory insurance scheme at issue in the main proceedings, or at least some of them, could
         be insured with private insurance companies, given that those do not, as a rule, operate in accordance with a system that
         incorporates the elements of solidarity set out in paragraphs to of this judgment. 
      
In addition, since the statutory insurance scheme at issue in the main proceedings, as indicated in paragraphs and of
         this judgment, provides only for capped benefits and, consequently, minimal cover, undertakings covered by that scheme are
         at liberty, as the referring court points out and as Kattner admits, to enter into complementary contracts of insurance with
         private insurance companies established both in Germany and in other Member States (see, by analogy, Case C‑355/Freskot [2002] ECR I‑5263, paragraphs 62).
      
However, since, as the facts of the case in the main proceedings show, the statutory insurance scheme at issue in the main
         proceedings appears also to be intended to cover risks that may be insured with insurance companies that do not operate in
         accordance with the principle of solidarity, such a scheme may constitute a restriction of the freedom of companies established
         in other Member States, who wish to offer contracts of insurance covering such risks in the Member State concerned, to provide
         services, in that it hinders or renders less attractive, or even prevents, directly or indirectly, the exercise of that freedom
         (see, to that effect, Freskot, paragraph 63).
      
Moreover, such a scheme in addition is apt to deter, or even prevent, undertakings that are covered by it from approaching
         such providers of insurance services established in Member States other than the Member State in which they are affiliated,
         and might also constitute an obstacle to freedom to provide services for those undertakings (see, by analogy, Joined Cases
         286/and 26/Luisi and Carbone [1984] ECR 377, paragraph 16; Kohll, paragraph 35, and Smits and Peerbooms, paragraph 69).
      
Nevertheless, such a restriction may be justified where it reflects overriding requirements relating to the public interest,
         is suitable for securing the attainment of the objective which it pursues and does not go beyond what is necessary in order
         to attain it (see, in particular, Case C‑398/SETTG [1997] ECR I‑3091, paragraph 21; Cipolla and Others, paragraph 61, and Case C‑250/United Pan‑Europe Communications Belgium and Others [2007] ECR I‑11135, paragraph 39).
      
In this respect, it must be noted that, according to the Court’s case-law, the risk of seriously undermining the financial
         equilibrium of the social security system may constitute an overriding reason in the public interest capable of justifying
         an obstacle to the principle of freedom to provide services (see, in particular, Kohll, paragraph 41; Smits and Peerbooms, paragraph 72, and Case C‑444/Stamatelaki [2007] ECR I‑3185, paragraph 30).
      
As the observations submitted to the Court show, compulsory affiliation to a statutory insurance scheme such as that laid
         down in the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings seeks to ensure the financial equilibrium of one of the
         traditional branches of social security, in this case, insurance against accidents at work and occupational diseases. 
      
Such compulsory affiliation, in so far as it ensures that all undertakings covered by the relevant scheme are grouped together
         within risk communities, enables that scheme – which, as is apparent from paragraph of this judgment, pursues a social
         objective – to operate in a way that applies the principle of solidarity, which is characterised, in particular, by funding
         through contributions the amount of which is not strictly proportionate to the risks insured and by the granting of benefits
         the amount of which is not strictly proportionate to contributions.
      
In those circumstances, national legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings, inasmuch as it makes affiliation
         compulsory, can be justified on an overriding ground of public interest, namely the objective of ensuring the financial equilibrium
         of a branch of social security, such compulsory affiliation being a suitable means of securing the attainment of that objective.
      
As regards the question whether such legislation does not go beyond what is necessary to achieve the desired objective, the
         information in the file before the Court indicates, as previously stated in paragraph of this judgment, that the statutory
         scheme at issue in the main proceedings offers minimal cover, so that, despite the fact that it makes affiliation compulsory,
         undertakings covered by the scheme may top up their cover by taking out supplementary insurance, assuming it is available
         on the market. That is a factor militating in favour of the proportionality of a statutory insurance scheme such as that at
         issue in the main proceedings (see, to that effect, Freskot, paragraph 70). 
      
Moreover, as regards the scope of cover such as that provided by that statutory insurance scheme, it is conceivable that,
         as MMB submits, if compulsory affiliation were to be applied only in respect of certain benefits, such as those aimed at prevention,
         as Kattner surmises in its submissions, undertakings employing, for example, young employees in good health engaged in non-dangerous
         activities would seek more advantageous insurance terms from private insurers. The progressive departure of those ‘good’ risks
         would leave employers’ liability insurance associations such as MMB with an increasing share of ‘bad’ risks, thereby increasing
         the cost of benefits, particularly for undertakings with older employees engaged in dangerous activities; those associations
         could no longer offer pensions at an acceptable cost to such undertakings. Such a situation would arise particularly in a
         case where, as in the main proceedings, the statutory insurance scheme at issue, inasmuch as it applies the principle of solidarity,
         is characterised, in particular, by the absence of a strictly proportionate link between contributions and risks insured (see,
         by analogy, Albany, paragraphs and 109).
      
It is for the referring court to verify whether the statutory insurance scheme at issue in the main proceedings necessary,
         having regard to its objective of ensuring the financial equilibrium of social security, by taking into account all the facts
         of the case before it as well as the guidance provided in paragraphs and of this judgment. 
      
Consequently, the answer to the second question must be that Articles EC and EC are to be interpreted to the effect
         that they do not preclude national legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings, pursuant to which undertakings
         in a particular branch of industry and a particular territory must be affiliated to a body such as the employers’ liability
         insurance association at issue in the main proceedings, to the extent that that scheme does not go beyond what is necessary
         to achieve the objective of ensuring the financial equilibrium of a branch of social security, which it is for the referring
         court to verify.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Articles EC and EC are to be interpreted to the effect that a body such as the employers’ liability insurance association
            at issue in the main proceedings, to which undertakings in a particular branch of industry and a particular territory must
            be affiliated in respect of insurance against accidents at work and occupational diseases, is not an undertaking within the
            meaning of those provisions, but fulfils an exclusively social function, where such a body operates within the framework of
            a scheme which applies the principle of solidarity and is subject to State supervision, which it is for the referring court
            to verify.
2.      Articles EC and EC are to be interpreted to the effect that they do not preclude national legislation such as that at
            issue in the main proceedings, pursuant to which undertakings in a particular branch of industry and a particular territory
            must be affiliated to a body such as the employers’ liability insurance association at issue in the main proceedings, to the
            extent that that scheme does not go beyond what is necessary to achieve the objective of ensuring the financial equilibrium
            of a branch of social security, which it is for the referring court to verify.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 