
Case C-33/Agrana Zucker GmbH
v
Bundesministerium für Land- und Forstwirtschaft, Umwelt und Wasserwirtschaft
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Verwaltungsgerichtshof)
(Sugar – Temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry – Article of Regulation (EC) No 320/– Calculation of the temporary restructuring amount – Inclusion of the part of the quota subject to a preventive withdrawal – Principles of proportionality and non-discrimination)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar – Temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry –
            Calculation of the temporary restructuring amount
(Council Regulation No 320/2006, Art. 11; Commission Regulation No 493/2006, as amended by Regulation No 1542/2006, Art. 3)
2.        Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar – Temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry –
            Calculation of the temporary restructuring amount
(Council Regulation No 320/2006, Art. 11)
1.        Article of Regulation No 320/establishing a temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry in the Community
         and amending Regulation No 1290/on the financing of the common agricultural policy must be interpreted as meaning that
         the part of the sugar quota allocated to an undertaking, which has been subject to a preventive withdrawal pursuant to Article
         of Regulation No 493/laying down transitional measures within the framework of the reform of the common organisation
         of the markets in the sugar sector, and amending Regulations No 1265/and No 314/2002, as amended by Regulation No 1542/2006,
         is to be included in the basis for the calculation of the temporary amount. The basis for the calculation of the temporary
         amount owed by an undertaking consists of the total number of tonnes of sugar quota allocated to that undertaking. 
      
The only exemption from the requirement to pay the temporary amount laid down in Regulation No 320/is – as provided in
         the second subparagraph of Article 11(1) of the regulation – for quotas renounced by the undertaking in accordance with Article
         3(1) of that regulation. 
      
In the regard, in the first place, the renunciation of a quota in terms of Article 3(1) of Regulation No 320/is, within
         the framework of the reform of the common organisation in the market in sugar, an instrument which is quite distinct from
         withdrawal from the market within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 318/on the common organisation of the markets
         in the sugar sector, and from preventive withdrawal within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 493/2006, the nature
         and purpose of which are different. In the second place, as the renouncing of a quota, withdrawal from the market and preventive
         withdrawal all form part of the same set of measures seeking to reform the common organisation of the markets in the sugar
         sector, it follows that it was by design that the Community legislature did not lay down, in Article of Regulation No 320/2006,
         an exemption from the temporary amount for quantities of sugar withdrawn from the market such as that provided for in that
         article in respect of quotas which have been renounced.
      
(see paras 19-21, 25-26, operative part 1)
2.        The fixing of the temporary amount on the basis of the quota allocated, including, where necessary, the part of the quota
         which was subject to a withdrawal from the market, is not manifestly inappropriate to attain the objective pursued by Regulation
         No 320/establishing a temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry in the Community and amending Regulation
         No 1290/on the financing of the common agricultural policy and, therefore, cannot be held to be contrary to the principle
         of proportionality. 
      
Moreover, the inclusion, in the basis for calculating the temporary amount, of the quantity of sugar which was subject to
         a preventive withdrawal cannot be considered to be contrary to the principle of non-discrimination. Admittedly, the fixing
         of the temporary amount provided for in Article of Regulation No 320/will result in different treatment for undertakings
         which may be in a similar situation but are established in different Member States. Nevertheless, such treatment of undertakings
         appears to be objectively justified. As the division of the quotas between undertakings and the management of those quotas
         are ensured by the Member States, the renouncing of quotas is also organised by each Member State and will vary from one Member
         State to another. In that context, the object of applying a coefficient which varies depending on the Member State concerned,
         as provided for in Article 3(2) of Regulation No 493/laying down transitional measures within the framework of the reform
         of the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector, is to take into account the special efforts which Member States
         have made to renounce quotas definitively and, in so doing, to contribute to reducing production at an equal rate in all the
         Member States in order to achieve balanced production throughout the Community.
      
(see paras 43, 50-52)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
June (*)
      
(Sugar – Temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry – Article of Regulation (EC) No 320/– Calculation of the temporary restructuring amount – Inclusion of the part of the quota subject to a preventive withdrawal – Principles of proportionality and non-discrimination)
In Case C‑33/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Verwaltungsgerichtshof (Austria), made by decision of November 2007, received at the Court on January 2008, in the proceedings
      
Agrana Zucker GmbH
v
Bundesministerium für Land- und Forstwirtschaft, Umwelt und Wasserwirtschaft,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, K. Schiemann, P. Kūris (Rapporteur), L. Bay Larsen and C. Toader,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        the Lithuanian Government, by D. Kriaučiūnas, acting as Agent,
–        the Council of the European Union, by M. Moore and Z. Kupčová, acting as Agents, 
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by F. Erlbacher and B. Doherty, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on February 2009,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation and the validity of Article of Council Regulation (EC)
         No 320/of February establishing a temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry in the Community
         and amending Regulation (EC) No 1290/on the financing of the common agricultural policy (OJ L 58, p. 42).
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings brought by Agrana Zucker GmbH (‘Agrana Zucker’) against a decision of
         the Bundesminister für Land- und Forstwirtschaft, Umwelt und Wasserwirtschaft (Federal Minister for Agriculture, Forestry,
         the Environment and Water Management) of April relating to the temporary restructuring amount (‘the temporary amount’)
         for the financial year 2006/07. 
      
 Legal context
Within the framework of the reform of the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector which took place during 2006,
         the Council of the European Union adopted Regulation (EC) No 318/of February on the common organisation of the
         markets in the sugar sector (OJ L 58, p. 1) and Regulation No 320/of the same date establishing a temporary scheme
         for the restructuring of the sugar industry. In accordance with Article of Regulation No 318/2006, the Commission of the
         European Communities adopted Regulation No 493/of March laying down transitional measures within the framework
         of the reform of the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector, and amending Regulations (EC) No 1265/and
         (EC) No 314/(OJ L 89, p. 11).
      
 Regulation No 318/Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 318/states as follows: 
      
‘New market tools to be managed by the Commission should be introduced. Firstly, if market prices fall below the reference
         price for white sugar, it should be possible for operators, under conditions to be determined by the Commission, to benefit
         from a private storage scheme. Secondly, to maintain the structural balance of the markets in sugar at a price level close
         to the reference price, it should be possible for the Commission to decide to withdraw sugar from the market for as long as
         it takes for the market to rebalance.’
      
Article of Regulation No 318/provides: 
      
‘1.      In order to preserve the structural balance of the market at a price level which is close to the reference price, taking into
         account the commitments of the Community resulting from agreements concluded in accordance with Article of the Treaty,
         a percentage, common to all Member States, of quota sugar … may be withdrawn from the market until the beginning of the following
         marketing year.
      
…
2.      The withdrawal percentage referred to in paragraph shall be determined by October of the marketing year concerned at
         the latest on the basis of expected market trends during that marketing year.
      
3.      Each undertaking provided with a quota shall store at its own expense during the period of withdrawal the quantities of sugar
         corresponding to the application of the percentage referred to in paragraph to its production under quota for the marketing
         year concerned.
      
The sugar quantities withdrawn during a marketing year shall be treated as the first quantities produced under quota for the
         following marketing year. However, taking into account the expected sugar market trends, it may be decided, in accordance
         with the procedure referred to in Article 39(2), to consider, for the current and/or the following marketing year, all or
         part of the withdrawn sugar … as: 
      
–        surplus sugar … available to become industrial sugar,
or
–        temporary quota production of which a part may be reserved for export respecting commitments of the Community resulting from
         agreements concluded under Article of the Treaty. 
      
…’ 
 Regulation No 320/Recitals 1, 2, and in the preamble to Regulation No 320/state, inter alia, as follows: 
      
‘(1)      ... To bring the Community system of sugar production and trading in line with international requirements and ensure its competitiveness
         in the future it is necessary to launch a profound restructuring process leading to a significant reduction of unprofitable
         production capacity in the Community. To this end, as a precondition for the implementation of a functioning new common market
         organisation for sugar a separate and autonomous temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry in the Community
         should be established …
      
(2)      A temporary restructuring fund should be set up in order to finance the restructuring measures for the Community sugar industry
         …
      
…
(4)      The restructuring measures provided for by this Regulation should be financed by raising temporary amounts from those sugar,
         isoglucose and inulin syrup producers which will eventually benefit from the restructuring process. As this amount falls outside
         the scope of the charges traditionally known in the framework of the common market organisation for sugar, the proceeds resulting
         from its collection should be considered as “assigned revenue” as provided for by Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1605/of June on the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities …
      
(5)      An important economic incentive for sugar undertakings with the lowest productivity to give up their quota production in the
         form of an adequate restructuring aid should be introduced. To this effect, a restructuring aid should be set up that creates
         an incentive to abandon sugar quota production and renounce the quotas concerned … The aid should be available during four
         marketing years with the aim to reduce production to the extent necessary to reach a balanced market situation in the Community.’
      
Under Article of Regulation No 320/2006, as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 2011/of December (OJ L 384, p. 1): 
      
‘1.      Any undertaking producing sugar … to which a quota has been allocated by July 2006, or by January in the case of
         Bulgaria and Romania, shall be entitled to a restructuring aid per tonne of quota renounced, provided that during one of the
         marketing years 2006/07, 2007/08, 2008/and 2009/it: 
      
(a)      renounces the quota assigned by it to one or more of its factories and fully dismantles the production facilities of the factories
         concerned; 
      
         or
(b)      renounces the quota assigned by it to one or more of its factories, partially dismantles the production facilities of the
         factories concerned and does not use the remaining production facilities of the factories concerned for the production of
         products covered by the common market organisation for sugar;
      
         or
(c)      renounces a part of the quota assigned by it to one or more of its factories and does not use the production facilities of
         the factories concerned for refining raw sugar.
      
…’
Article of Regulation No 320/provides:  
      
‘1.      A temporary … amount shall be paid per marketing year per tonne of quota by those undertakings to which a quota has been allocated
         ...
      
Quotas that have been renounced by an undertaking as from a given marketing year in accordance with Article 3(1) shall not
         be subject to the payment of the temporary … amount for this marketing year and subsequent marketing years.
      
2.      The temporary … amount for sugar … shall be set at:
–        EUR 126.per tonne of quota for the marketing year 2006/07,
–        EUR 173.per tonne of quota for the marketing year 2007/08,
–        EUR 113.per tonne of quota for the marketing year 2008/09.
…
3.      Member States shall be liable to the Community for the temporary … amount to be collected on their territory.
…
5.      The totality of the temporary … amounts to be paid in accordance with paragraph shall be allocated by the Member State among
         the undertakings on its territory according to the allocated quota during the marketing year concerned.
      
…’
 Regulation No 493/The transitional measures provided for in Regulation No 493/2006, as amended  by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1542/of
         October (OJ L 283, p. 24), (‘Regulation No 493/2006’) include ‘preventive withdrawal’.
      
In that regard, recital in the preamble to Regulation No 493/states: 
      
‘In order to improve the market balance in the Community without creating new stocks of sugar in the 2006/marketing year,
         provision should be made for a transitional measure to reduce eligible production under quota in respect of that marketing
         year. A threshold should be fixed above which the production under quota of each undertaking is considered withdrawn within
         the meaning of Article of Regulation … No 318/or, at the request of the undertaking, as production in excess of the
         quota within the meaning of Article of that Regulation. In view of the transition between the two regimes, this threshold
         should be obtained by a combination, in equal parts, of the method laid down in Article of Regulation (EC) No 1260/and that laid down in Article of Regulation … No 318/and take into account the special efforts made by some Member
         States within the framework of the restructuring fund set up by … Regulation … No 320/...’ 
      
Article of Regulation No 493/sets out the transitional provisions concerning preventive withdrawal as follows:
      
‘1.      For each undertaking, the share of the production of sugar … in the 2006/marketing year which is produced under the quota
         allocated in accordance with the quotas laid down in Annex IV and which exceeds the threshold established in accordance with
         paragraph of this Article shall be considered withdrawn within the meaning of Article of Regulation … No 318/or,
         at the request of the undertaking concerned submitted before January 2007, shall be considered fully or partially to be
         produced in excess of the quota within the meaning of Article of that Regulation.
      
2.      For each undertaking, the threshold mentioned in paragraph shall be calculated by multiplying its quota mentioned in paragraph
         by the sum of the following coefficients: 
      
(a)       the coefficient laid down for the Member State in Annex I;
(b)      the coefficient obtained by dividing the sum of the quotas renounced in the 2006/marketing year in the Member State concerned
         under Article of Regulation … No 320/by the quota fixed for that Member State in Annex IV to this Regulation. The Commission
         shall fix this coefficient not later than October 2006.
      
However, where the sum of the coefficients exceeds 1.0000, the threshold shall be equal to the quota referred to in paragraph
         1.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
In 2006, the competent administrative authority allocated to Agrana Zucker a quota of 812.tonnes for sugar production
         for the marketing years 2006/to 2014/15. That administrative authority set, pursuant to Article of Regulation No 493/2006,
         a production threshold of 565.tonnes for the marketing year 2006/07, thereby imposing a preventive withdrawal of 246.tonnes on that undertaking. 
      
By decision of the Agrarmarkt Austria (supervisory body) of January 2007, Agrana Zucker was requested to pay the first
         instalment of the temporary amount for the marketing year 2006/totalling EUR 812.42.
      
Since it objected that the temporary amount was calculated on the basis of the quota which had been allocated to it, and therefore
         included, in that basis, the 246.tonnes of withheld sugar which it could not sell as an amount of sugar produced under
         quota, Agrana Zucker appealed against that decision of the Agrarmarkt Austria to the Bundesminister für Land- und Forstwirtschaft,
         Umwelt und Wasserwirtschaft. The latter dismissed the appeal by decision of April 2007. That decision is the subject-matter
         of the proceedings before the referring court.
      
It is apparent from the order for reference that Agrana Zucker is claiming in the main proceedings that the taking into account,
         in the calculation of the temporary amount, of the quantity of sugar which was subject to withdrawal from the market infringes
         the principles of proportionality and of non-discrimination as enshrined in Article 34(2) EC.
      
It is in those circumstances that the Verwaltungsgerichtshof (Administrative Court) decided to stay proceedings and to refer
         the following questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Must Article of … Regulation … No 320/… be interpreted as meaning that even a sugar quota which cannot be fully utilised
         as a consequence of a preventive withdrawal in accordance with Article of … Regulation … No 493/… must be included
         in the calculation of the temporary … amount?
      
 (2)      In the event that the first question is answered in the affirmative: 
Is Article of Regulation No 320/compatible with primary law, in particular with the principle of non-discrimination
         derived from Article EC and the principle of the protection of legitimate expectations?’
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 The first question
By its first question, the referring court asks, in essence, whether Article of Regulation No 320/must be interpreted
         as meaning that the part of the sugar quota allocated to an undertaking, which has been subject to a preventive withdrawal
         pursuant to Article of Regulation No 493/2006, is to be included in the basis for the calculation of the temporary amount.
      
It should be recalled that the first subparagraph of Article 11(1) of Regulation No 320/provides that a temporary amount
         is to be paid per marketing year per tonne of quota by those undertakings to which a quota has been allocated. 
      
It follows from that provision that the basis for the calculation of the temporary amount owed by an undertaking consists
         of the total number of tonnes of sugar quota allocated to that undertaking for the marketing year in question.
      
The only exemption from the requirement to pay the temporary amount laid down in Regulation No 320/is – as provided in
         the second subparagraph of Article 11(1) of the regulation – for quotas renounced by the undertaking in accordance with Article
         3(1) of that regulation. These are quotas which – during the marketing years referred to in that provision – are renounced
         by an undertaking which totally or partially dismantles its production facilities or does not use them and which may, on that
         basis, benefit from restructuring aid per tonne of quota renounced. 
      
In that regard, it should be observed, in the first place, that the renunciation of a quota in terms of Article 3(1) of Regulation
         No 320/is, within the framework of the reform of the common organisation of the market in sugar, an instrument which
         is quite distinct from withdrawal from the market within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 318/2006, and from preventive
         withdrawal within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 493/2006, the nature and purpose of which are different. 
      
As the Advocate General pointed out in points to of her Opinion, an undertaking’s renunciation of a quota together with
         the dismantling or non-use of its production facilities is definitive. As is apparent from, inter alia, recitals and in
         the preamble to Regulation No 320/2006, the renunciation mechanism is one of the means of restructuring the sugar sector with
         a view to reducing unprofitable production capacity in the Community and is the subject of an economic incentive in the form
         of restructuring aid intended for those undertakings with the lowest productivity, so that they give up their quota production.
      
By contrast, a market withdrawal decided on by the Commission is temporary. The quantities of sugar involved are, according
         to Article 19(1) of Regulation No 318/2006, to be withdrawn from the market until the beginning of the following marketing
         year and can be stored or disposed of out of quota. As is apparent from that provision, and recital in the preamble to
         that regulation, that instrument seeks to maintain the structural balance of the market at a price level close to the reference
         price, taking into account the international obligations of the Community. 
      
The same is true for preventive withdrawal under Article of Regulation No 493/which, according to recital in the
         preamble to that regulation, constitutes a transitional measure seeking to improve the market balance in the Community without
         creating new stocks of sugar in the marketing year 2006/07.
      
In the second place, as the renouncing of a quota, withdrawal from the market and preventive withdrawal all form part of the
         same set of measures seeking to reform the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector, it follows that it was
         by design that the Community legislature did not lay down, in Article of Regulation No 320/2006, an exemption from the
         temporary amount for quantities of sugar withdrawn from the market such as that provided for in that article in respect of
         quotas which have been renounced. 
      
In the light of those considerations, the answer to the first question is that Article of Regulation No 320/must be
         interpreted as meaning that the part of the sugar quota allocated to an undertaking, which has been subject to a preventive
         withdrawal pursuant to Article of Regulation No 493/2006, is to be included in the basis for the calculation of the temporary
         amount.
      
 The second question
The second question concerns the validity of Article of Regulation No 320/2006. Although the question refers to the principle
         of the protection of legitimate expectations, it appears that the considerations set out in the order for reference concern
         only the principles of proportionality and non-discrimination. It is therefore necessary to assess the validity of Article
         with regard to those two principles. 
      
 The validity of Article of Regulation No 320/with regard to the principle of proportionality 
It is apparent from the order for reference that the applicant in the main proceedings claims, in essence, that fixing the
         temporary amount owed by an undertaking on the basis of the quota which has been allocated to it, including the part of the
         quota which was subject to a withdrawal from the market, has the effect of imposing disproportionate burdens on that undertaking,
         since the net price of the sugar produced under quota is, as a result, much lower than the reference price. Furthermore, as
         the part of the quota withdrawn from the market during the marketing year 2006/is transferred to the following marketing
         year, it will again be included in the calculation of the temporary amount undertaken for the following year.
      
The method for fixing the temporary amount is thus contrary to the purpose of the reform of the sugar market, namely the consolidation
         of those businesses capable of facing competition effectively. It is, moreover, contrary to the principle of proportionality
         and to recital in the preamble to Regulation No 320/2006, according to which the restructuring measures are to be financed
         by raising temporary amounts from those sugar producers which will eventually benefit from the restructuring process.
      
The Lithuanian Government is also of the opinion that the inclusion – in the basis for the calculation of the temporary amount
         – of that part of the quota which is subject to a withdrawal from the market has the effect of causing the undertakings in
         question to bear an unjustified and disproportionate financial burden and, therefore, an unjustifiable burden of charges which
         prevents them from benefiting from the restructuring process. It considers that the reasoning followed in Joined Cases C‑5/and C‑23/to C‑36/Zuckerfabrik Jülich and Others [2008] ECR I‑may also be adopted in the present case.
      
In that regard, it should be recalled that the principle of proportionality, which is one of the general principles of Community
         law, requires that acts adopted by Community institutions do not exceed the limits of what is appropriate and necessary in
         order to attain the legitimate objectives pursued by the legislation in question; where there is a choice between several
         appropriate measures, recourse must be had to the least onerous, and the disadvantages caused must not be disproportionate
         to the aims pursued (Case C‑310/Spain v Council [2006] ECR I­‑7285, paragraph and the case-law cited). 
      
As regards judicial review of the implementation of that principle, bearing in mind the wide discretion enjoyed by the Community
         legislature where the common agricultural policy is concerned, the lawfulness of a measure adopted in that sphere can be affected
         only if the measure is manifestly inappropriate in terms of the objective which the competent institution is seeking to pursue
         (Spain v Council, paragraph and the case-law cited). 
      
What must be ascertained is therefore not whether the measure adopted by the legislature was the only measure possible or
         the best measure possible but whether it was manifestly inappropriate (Spain v Council, paragraph and the case-law cited). 
      
In the present case, it is apparent from recital in the preamble to Regulation No 320/that the Council considered it
         necessary, in order to bring the Community system of sugar production and trading into line with international requirements
         and ensure its competitiveness in the future, to launch a profound restructuring process leading to a significant reduction
         of unprofitable production capacity in the Community. To that end, it established, in that regulation, a separate and autonomous
         temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry in the Community.
      
Within the framework of that temporary scheme, Regulation No 320/established, as set out in recital in the preamble
         to that regulation, an economic incentive, in the form of restructuring aid, intended for undertakings with the lowest productivity,
         to give up their quota production. To that effect, that regulation provides, in Article 3, for a restructuring aid available
         for four marketing years, namely 2006/to 2009/10, with the aim of reducing production to the extent necessary to reach
         a balanced market situation in the Community.
      
In order to finance the restructuring measures laid down in Regulation No 320/2006, the Council set up a temporary restructuring
         fund and, in particular, decided that, as is stated in recital in the preamble to that regulation, the financing for those
         measures would be ensured by raising temporary amounts from those sugar, isoglucose and inulin syrup producers which will
         eventually benefit from the restructuring process. The proceeds resulting from its collection are considered to be ‘assigned
         revenue’ within the meaning of Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1605/of June on the Financial Regulation applicable
         to the general budget of the European Communities (OJ L 248, p. 1).
      
Thus, the temporary amount provided for in Article of Regulation No 320/has as its aim the self-financing, by producers,
         of the temporary restructuring scheme for the sugar industry in the Community, which implies a budgetary balance between the
         expenses incurred and the revenue raised during the four marketing years in question.
      
In reply to a written question from the Court, the Commission produced a table of predicted expenses and revenues for the
         temporary restructuring fund for the period running from to 2013, and the balance sheet for the marketing year 2006/07.
         These show, first, that the predicted revenues and expenses are to be balanced over a period of three years, with the excess
         revenue received in the year 2006/having to finance the predicted expenses for the following years and, second, that the
         expenses recorded at the end of the first year slightly exceeded the predicted expenses.
      
That information confirms that fixing the temporary amount owed by a sugar producer on the basis of the quota which has been
         attributed to it, and not on the basis of the quota which it could actually have marketed following the withdrawal of a part
         of that quota from the market is not manifestly inappropriate to attain the objective of Regulation No 320/2006, as described
         in paragraph of this judgment. 
      
In that regard, the measure in question can be distinguished from that at issue in Zuckerfabrik Jülich and Others, in which the Court held that the method of calculating contributions evaluated in paragraphs to of that judgment went
         beyond what was necessary to attain the objective of Council Regulation (EC) No 1260/of June on the common organisation
         of the markets in the sugar sector (OJ L 178, p. 1), which sought to make producers meet in full, in a fair yet efficient
         way, the cost of disposing of surpluses of Community production in accordance with the principle of self‑financing. 
      
Conversely, to subtract that part of the quota which was subject to a withdrawal from the market from the basis for calculating
         the temporary amount for a given marketing year would disrupt the planned budgetary balance, while damaging the stability
         and predictability of revenue. Therefore, such a rule would compromise the self-financing of the restructuring measures intended
         by the Community legislature, and, consequently, the functioning and aim of the temporary restructuring scheme for the sugar
         industry established by Regulation No 320/2006.
      
Furthermore, as regards the burdens which the system imposes on the undertakings which are subject to it, it must be emphasised
         that the scheme is temporary, that arrangements for preventive withdrawal are unique in their application, and that those
         undertakings can expect to benefit, first, from the renouncing of quotas which the Community legislature sought to encourage
         and, second, from the support for the price of quota sugar permitted by a withdrawal from the market, in particular, by preventive
         withdrawal. That benefit is capable of offsetting the disadvantages which that scheme gives rise to, including the fact that
         the quantity of sugar withdrawn from the market in the course of a marketing year is still subject to the temporary amount
         applicable to a quota allocated for the following marketing year if that quantity is carried forward and not sold as industrial
         sugar or out of quota on the world market. 
      
It follows from all of the foregoing that the fixing of the temporary amount on the basis of the quota allocated, including,
         where necessary, the part of the quota which was subject to a withdrawal from the market, is not manifestly inappropriate
         to attain the objective pursued and, therefore, cannot be held to be contrary to the principle of proportionality.
      
 The validity of Article of Regulation No 320/with regard to the principle of non-discrimination 
It is apparent from the order for reference that the applicant in the main proceedings claims that the inclusion, in the basis
         for the calculation of the temporary amount, of the quantity of sugar which was subject to preventive withdrawal infringes
         the principle of non-discrimination as enshrined in Article 34(2) EC. The applicant argues, in essence, that taking the amount
         of sugar thus withdrawn into account affects, in a discriminatory way – on account of the method for calculating the production
         threshold laid down in Article of Regulation No 493/– the undertakings in Member States in which a small number of
         quotas have been renounced for the marketing year 2006/compared with those undertakings in Member States which have, on
         the contrary, definitively abandoned a large number of quotas for that year. The first group of undertakings are disadvantaged
         compared with the second because the former will obtain – for the quantity of quota sugar which they still have after the
         preventive withdrawal – a much lower net price than that obtained by the latter. 
      
The Lithuanian Government notes also that such a method for fixing the temporary amount is capable of creating an unjustified
         difference in treatment between the undertakings which did not withdraw from the market, since the burden of the temporary
         amount is divided differently between sugar producers which are in a similar position, but established in different Member
         States, on the basis of factors which do not depend on them.
      
In that regard, it should be noted that the Court has consistently held that the second subparagraph of Article 34(2) EC,
         which prohibits all discrimination in the context of the common agricultural policy, is merely a specific expression of the
         general principle of equal treatment, which requires that comparable situations not be treated differently and different situations
         not be treated alike unless such treatment is objectively justified (Case C‑313/Franz Egenberger [2006] ECR I‑6331, paragraph and the case-law cited). 
      
In the present circumstances, as is apparent from recital in the preamble to Regulation No 493/2006, preventive withdrawal
         constitutes – in the context of transitional measures established by that regulation to ensure the transition in the sugar
         sector from the old regime under Regulation No 318/to the regime established by Regulation No 493/– a transitional
         measure intended to reduce eligible production under quota for the marketing year 2006/07, in order to improve the market
         balance in the Community without creating new sugar stocks during that year. In order to give effect to that transition, Article
         of that regulation sets a threshold beyond which the production under quota of each undertaking is to be considered to be
         withdrawn for the purposes of Article of Regulation No 318/2006.
      
That threshold is, according to Article 3(2) of Regulation No 493/2006, to be calculated by multiplying the quota allocated
         to the undertaking by the sum of two coefficients, the second of which depends on the total quotas which have been renounced
         for the marketing year 2006/in the Member State concerned under Article of Regulation No 320/2006.
      
It follows that the size of the preventive withdrawal imposed on undertakings for that marketing year will vary, inter alia,
         depending on the Member State in which they are established. Therefore, the part of the temporary amount which they are to
         pay, which corresponds to the part of their quota which was subject to such a preventive withdrawal, will also be larger or
         smaller depending on the Member State in which they are established. 
      
To that extent, the fixing of the temporary amount provided for in Article of Regulation No 320/will result in different
         treatment for undertakings which may be in a similar situation but are established in different Member States.
      
Nevertheless, such treatment of undertakings appears to be objectively justified. As the division of the quotas between undertakings
         and the management of those quotas are ensured by the Member States, the renouncing of quotas is also organised by each Member
         State and will vary from one Member State to another. In that context, as is apparent from recital in the preamble to Regulation
         No 493/2006, the object of applying a coefficient which varies depending on the Member State concerned, as provided for in
         Article 3(2) of that regulation, is to take into account the special efforts which Member States have made to renounce quotas
         definitively and, in so doing, to contribute to reducing production at an equal rate in all the Member States in order to
         achieve balanced production throughout the Community. 
      
It follows that the inclusion, in the basis for calculating the temporary amount, of the quantity of sugar which was subject
         to a preventive withdrawal cannot be considered to be contrary to the principle of non-discrimination.
      
In the light of all of the foregoing, the reply to the second question is that an examination of that question has not revealed
         anything which might affect the validity of Article of Regulation No 320/2006. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 320/of February establishing a temporary scheme for the restructuring
            of the sugar industry in the Community and amending Regulation (EC) No 1290/on the financing of the common agricultural
            policy must be interpreted as meaning that the part of the sugar quota allocated to an undertaking, which has been subject
            to a preventive withdrawal pursuant to Article of Commission Regulation (EC) No 493/of March laying down transitional
            measures within the framework of the reform of the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector, and amending Regulations
            (EC) No 1265/and (EC) No 314/2002, as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1542/of October 2006, is to be
            included in the basis for the calculation of the temporary amount.
2.      Examination of the second question has not revealed anything which might affect the validity of Article of Regulation No
            320/2006. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 