
Judgment of the Court (First Chamber) of April – Ferrero Deutschland v OHIM
(Case C‑108/P)
Appeal – Community trade mark – Regulation (EC) No 40/– Article 8(1)(b) – Likelihood of confusion – Application for Community word mark FERRO – Opposition by the proprietor of the earlier national word mark FERRERO – Evidence of the enhanced distinctiveness of the earlier mark
1.                     Community trade mark – Definition and acquisition of the Community trade mark – Relative grounds for refusal – Opposition
            by the proprietor of an earlier identical or similar mark registered for identical or similar goods or services – Likelihood
            of confusion with the earlier mark (Council Regulation No 40/94, Art. 8(1)(b)) (see paras 35-37)
2.                     Community trade mark – Definition and acquisition of the Community trade mark – Relative grounds for refusal – Opposition
            by the proprietor of an earlier identical or similar mark registered for identical or similar goods or services – Likelihood
            of confusion with the earlier mark (Council Regulation No 40/94, Art. 8(1)(b)) (see paras 57-59)
Re: 
Appeal against the judgment of the Court of First Instance (Third Chamber) of December in Case T-310/Ferrero Deutschland 
v 
OHIM and Cornu 
against the decision of the Fourth Board of Appeal of OHIM of March (Case R 540/2002-4) relating to opposition proceedings
                  between Ferrero OHG mbh and Cornu SA Fontain – Interpretation of Article 8(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EC) No 40/of December (OJ L 11, p. 1) – Likelihood of confusion between two trade marks – Weak degree of similarity between the
                  goods – Distinctiveness of the earlier mark.
               
Operative part
The Court:
1.
	Sets aside the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities of December in Case T‑310/Ferrero
                     Deutschland v OHIM– Cornu (FERRO);
                  
2.
	Annuls the decision of the Fourth Board of Appeal of the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and
                     Designs) (OHIM) of March (Case R 540/2002‑4);
                  
3.
	Orders the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM) and Cornu SA Fontain to pay the
                     costs of the appeal;
                  
4.
	Orders Ferrero Deutschland GmbH to bear its own costs in relation to the proceedings at first instance, except for those relating
                     to the intervention of Cornu SA Fontain;
                  
5.
	Orders the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM) to bear its own costs in relation
                     to the proceedings at first instance, except for those relating to the intervention of Cornu SA Fontain;
                  
6.
	Orders Cornu SA Fontain to bear its own costs and to pay the costs incurred by Ferrero Deutschland GmbH and the Office for
                     Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM) in relation to its intervention.
                  
Top  
 