
Case C-353/Proceedings brought by 
Stefan Grunkin and Dorothee Regina Paul
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Amtsgericht Flensburg)
(Right to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States – Private international law relating to surnames – Applicable law determined by nationality alone − Minor child born and resident in one Member State with the nationality of
         another Member State – Non-recognition in the Member State of which he is a national of the surname acquired in the Member State of birth and residence)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Community law – Principles – Equal treatment – Discrimination on grounds of nationality – National conflict of law rules –
            Determination of surname
(Art. EC)
2.        Citizens of the European Union – Right of free movement and residence in the territory of the Member States – National conflict
            of law rules – Determination of surname
(Art. EC)
1.        Where a child, who is a national of one Member State and is lawfully resident in the territory of a second Member State, and
         his parents have only the nationality of the first Member State and, in respect of the conferring of a surname, the conflicts
         rule of the first Member State refers to the domestic substantive law on surnames, the determination of that child’s surname
         in that Member State in accordance with its legislation cannot constitute discrimination on grounds of nationality within
         the meaning of Article EC.
      
(see paras 16-18, 20)
2.        Article EC precludes the authorities of a Member State, in applying national law which uses nationality as the sole connecting
         factor for the determination of surnames, from refusing to recognise a child’s surname, as determined and registered in a
         second Member State in which the child – who, like his parents, has only the nationality of the first Member State – was born
         and has been resident since birth. Having to use a surname, in the Member State of which the person concerned is a national,
         that is different from that conferred and registered in the Member State of birth and residence is liable to hamper the exercise
         of the right, established in Article EC, to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States. In that regard,
         a discrepancy in surnames is liable to cause serious inconvenience for the person concerned, inter alia, in both the public
         and the private spheres on account of the fact that, as he has only one nationality, he will be issued with a passport by
         the State of which he is a national and which alone has the competence to do so, in a name that is different from the name
         he was given in the State of birth and residence. In that regard, the child concerned risks having to dispel doubts concerning
         his identity and suspicions of misrepresentation caused by the difference between the two surnames every time he has to prove
         his identity in the Member State of residence. Furthermore, in relation to attestations, certificates and diplomas or any
         other document establishing a right, any difference in surnames is likely to give rise to doubts as to the authenticity of
         the documents submitted, or the veracity of their content.
      
In view of the fact that the person concerned will bear a different name every time he crosses the border between the two
         Member States concerned, the connecting factor of nationality, which seeks to ensure that a person’s surname may be determined
         with continuity and stability, will result in an outcome contrary to that sought, in such a way that it cannot justify that
         refusal. The objective of preserving relationships between members of an extended family, however legitimate that objective
         may be in itself, also does not warrant having such importance attached to it as to justify such a refusal. Furthermore, the
         considerations of administrative convenience which led the Member State whose nationality the person concerned possesses to
         prohibit double-barrelled surnames cannot suffice to justify such an obstacle to freedom of movement, particularly because
         the prohibition in question does not appear to be absolute in view of the legislation of the Member State concerned.
      
(see paras 22-23, 25-28, 31-32, 36-37, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Right to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States – Private international law relating to surnames – Applicable law determined by nationality alone − Minor child born and resident in one Member State with the nationality of
         another Member State – Non-recognition in the Member State of which he is a national of the surname acquired in the Member State of birth and residence)
      
In Case C‑353/06,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Amtsgericht Flensburg (Germany) made by decision of August
         2006, received at the Court on August 2006, in the proceedings
      
Stefan Grunkin,
Dorothee Regina Paul,
other parties:
Leonhard Matthias Grunkin-Paul,
Standesamt Niebüll,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, P. Jann (Rapporteur), C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas, K. Lenaerts and M. Ilešič, Presidents
         of Chambers, G. Arestis, A. Borg Barthet, J. Malenovský, J. Klučka, U. Lõhmus, E. Levits and C. Toader, Judges,
      
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: H. von Holstein, Deputy Registrar,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on December 2007,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Mr Grunkin, by himself,
–        the German Government, by M. Lumma and J. Kemper, acting as Agents,
–        the Belgian Government, by L. Van den Broeck, acting as Agent,
–        the Greek Government, by E.-M. Mamouna, G. Skiani and O. Patsopoulou, acting as Agents,
–        the Spanish Government, by M. Sampol Pucurull and J. Rodríguez Cárcamo, acting as Agents,
–        the French Government, by G. de Bergues and J.-C. Niollet, acting as Agents,
–        the Lithuanian Government, by D. Kriaučiūnas, acting as Agent,
–        the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster, acting as Agent,
–        the Polish Government, by E. Ośniecka-Tamecka, acting as Agent,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by D. Maidani, S. Gruenheid and W. Bogensberger, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 2008,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles EC and EC.
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between Mr Grunkin and Ms Paul, and the Standesamt Niebüll (Registry Office,
         Niebüll) regarding the latter’s refusal to recognise the surname of their son Leonhard Matthias, as determined and registered
         in Denmark, and to enter that surname in the family register established for them at that registry office.
      
 German legal context
 Private international law 
Article 10(1) of the Law introducing the Civil Code (Einführungsgesetz zum Bürgerlichen Gesetzbuch) (‘the EGBGB’) provides:
      
‘A person’s name falls to be determined by the law of the State of his or her nationality.’
 Civil law
As regards the determination of the surname of a child whose parents bear different surnames, Paragraph of the German
         Civil Code (Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch) (‘the BGB’) provides:
      
‘(1)      If the parents do not share a married surname but have joint custody of the child, they shall, by declaration before a registrar,
         choose either the father’s or the mother’s surname at the time of the declaration to be the surname given to the child at
         birth. …
      
(2)      If the parents have not made that declaration within a period of one month following the child’s birth, the Familiengericht
         [Family Court] shall transfer the right to determine the child’s surname to one of the parents. Subparagraph shall apply
         mutatis mutandis. The court may lay down a time-limit for the exercise of that right. If the right to choose the child’s surname has not been
         exercised on the expiry of that period, the child shall bear the surname of the parent to whom the right was transferred.
      
(3)      Where a child is born outside German territory, the court shall not transfer the right to choose the child’s surname in accordance
         with subparagraph unless either a parent or the child so requests or unless it is necessary to record the child’s surname
         on a German registration or identity document.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
Leonhard Matthias Grunkin-Paul was born on June in Denmark to Dr Paul and Mr Grunkin, who were at that time married
         and who are both of German nationality. Their child also has German nationality and has lived in Denmark since he was born.
      
In accordance with a certificate issued by the competent Danish authority attesting to that name (‘navnebevis’), the child
         was given, pursuant to Danish law, the surname Grunkin-Paul, which was also entered on his Danish birth certificate.
      
The German registry office refused to recognise the surname of the child as it had been determined in Denmark on the ground
         that, under Article of the EGBGB, the surname of a person falls to be determined by the law of the State of his or her
         nationality, and that German law does not allow a child to bear a double-barrelled surname composed of the surnames of both
         the father and mother. The appeals brought by Leonhard Matthias’ parents against that refusal were dismissed.
      
The child’s parents, who have divorced in the meantime, did not use a common married name and refused to determine the surname
         of their child in accordance with Paragraph 1617(1) of the BGB.
      
The Standesamt Niebüll brought the matter before the Amtsgericht Niebüll for a decision on the transfer of the right to determine
         young Leonhard Matthias’s surname to one of his parents in accordance with Paragraph 1617(2) and (3) of the BGB. The Amtsgericht
         Niebüll stayed proceedings and made a reference for a preliminary ruling to the Court of Justice under Article EC. In
         its judgment in Case C-96/Standesamt Stadt Niebüll [2006] ECR I-3561, the Court found that the Amtsgericht Niebüll, before which the matter had been brought in the context
         of non-contentious proceedings, exercised administrative authority without at the same time being called on to decide a dispute,
         with the result that it could not be regarded as exercising a judicial function. On that basis, the Court held that it had
         no jurisdiction to answer the question referred.
      
On April the parents of Leonhard Matthias applied to the competent authority to have him registered in the family
         register held in Niebüll with the surname Grunkin-Paul. By decision of May 2006, the Standesamt Niebüll refused that registration
         on the ground that it was not possible under the German law relating to surnames.
      
On May 2006, the parents of the child applied to the Amtsgericht Flensburg for an order that the Standesamt Niebüll recognise
         their son’s surname as determined and registered in Denmark and enter him in the family register under the name of Leonhard
         Matthias Grunkin‑Paul.
      
The national court states that it cannot order the Standesamt Niebüll to register a surname which is not allowed under German
         law, but it nevertheless has doubts as to whether it is compatible with Community law for a citizen of the Union to be required
         to bear a different surname in different Member States.
      
In those circumstances the Amtsgericht Flensburg decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following question to the Court
         for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘In light of the prohibition on discrimination set out in Article EC and having regard to the right to the freedom of movement
         for every citizen of the Union laid down by Article EC, is the German provision on the conflict of laws contained in Article
         of the EGBGB valid, in so far as it provides that the law relating to names is governed by nationality alone?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
By its question, the national court asks essentially whether Articles EC and EC preclude the competent authorities of
         a Member State from refusing to recognise a child’s surname, as determined and registered in a second Member State in which
         the child – who, like his parents, has only the nationality of the first Member State – was born and has been resident since
         birth.
      
 The scope of the EC Treaty
It must be pointed out at the outset that the situation of the child Leonhard Matthias falls within the scope of the EC Treaty.
      
Although, as Community law stands at present, the rules governing a person’s surname are matters coming within the competence
         of the Member States, the latter must none the less, when exercising that competence, comply with Community law unless what
         is involved is an internal situation which has no link with Community law (see Case C‑148/Garcia Avello [2003] ECR I-11613, paragraphs and 26, and the case-law cited).
      
The Court has already held that such a link with Community law does exist in regard to children who are nationals of one Member
         State and are lawfully resident in the territory of another Member State (see Garcia Avello, paragraph 27).
      
Therefore, the child Leonhard Matthias can rely, in principle, as regards the Member State of which he is a national, on the
         right conferred by Article EC not to be discriminated against on grounds of nationality and on the right, established in
         Article EC, to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States.
      
 Article EC 
With regard to Article EC, the Court would, however, point out that, as was submitted by all the Member States which made
         observations to the Court and by the Commission of the European Communities, the child Leonhard Matthias is not, in Germany,
         being discriminated against on grounds of nationality.
      
Since the child and his parents have only German nationality and, in respect of the conferring of a surname, the German conflicts
         rule refers to the German substantive law on surnames, the determination of that child’s surname in Germany in accordance
         with German legislation cannot constitute discrimination on grounds of nationality.
      
 Article EC 
National legislation which places certain of the nationals of the Member State concerned at a disadvantage simply because
         they have exercised their freedom to move and to reside in another Member State is a restriction on the freedoms conferred
         by Article 18(1) EC on every citizen of the Union (see Case C-406/De Cuyper [2006] ECR I-6947, paragraph 39, and Case C-499/Nerkowska [2008] ECR I-0000, paragraph 32). 
      
Having to use a surname, in the Member State of which the person concerned is a national, that is different from that conferred
         and registered in the Member State of birth and residence is liable to hamper the exercise of the right, established in Article
         EC, to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States.
      
The Court has already held, as regards children with the nationality of two Member States, that a discrepancy in surnames
         is liable to cause serious inconvenience for those concerned at both professional and private levels resulting from, inter
         alia, difficulties in benefiting, in the Member State of which they are nationals, from the legal effects of diplomas or documents
         drawn up in the surname recognised in another Member State of which they are also nationals. (Garcia Avello, point 36).
      
Such serious inconvenience may likewise arise in a situation such as that of the main proceedings. It matters little in that
         regard whether the discrepancy in surnames is the result of the dual nationality of the persons concerned or of the fact that,
         in the State of birth and residence, the connecting factor for determination of a surname is residence whilst, in the State
         of which those persons are nationals, it is nationality.
      
As the Commission observes, many everyday dealings, in both the public and the private spheres, require proof of identity,
         which is usually provided by a passport. As the child Leonhard Matthias has only German nationality, the issuing of that document
         falls within the competence of the German authorities alone. If those authorities refuse to recognise the surname as determined
         and registered in Denmark, the child will be issued with a passport by those authorities in a name that is different from
         the name he was given in Denmark.
      
Consequently, every time the child concerned has to prove his identity in Denmark, the Member State in which he was born and
         has been resident since birth, he risks having to dispel doubts concerning his identity and suspicions of misrepresentation
         caused by the difference between the surname he has always used on a day-to-day basis, which appears in the registers of the
         Danish authorities and on all official documents issued in his regard in Denmark, such as, inter alia, his birth certificate,
         and the name in his German passport.
      
Furthermore, the number of documents, for instance attestations, certificates and diplomas, on which there is a difference
         in the surname of the child concerned is likely to increase with the passing years, in so far as the child has strong links
         with both Denmark and Germany. It is apparent from the file that, although he lives mainly with his mother in Denmark, the
         child regularly stays in Germany on visits to his father, who settled there after the couple divorced.
      
Every time the surname used in a specific situation does not correspond to that on the document submitted as proof of a person’s
         identity, inter alia with a view to obtaining benefits or an entitlement of some sort or to prove that examinations have been
         passed or skills acquired, or the surname in two documents submitted together is not the same, such a difference in surnames
         is likely to give rise to doubts as to the person’s identity and the authenticity of the documents submitted, or the veracity
         of their content.
      
An obstacle to freedom of movement such as that resulting from the serious inconvenience described in paragraphs to of this judgment could be justified only if it was based on objective considerations and was proportionate to the legitimate
         aim pursued (see, to that effect, Case C‑318/Commission v Germany [2007] ECR I-6957, paragraph 133, and the case-law cited).
      
In order to justify using nationality as the sole connecting factor for the determination of surnames, the German Government
         and some of the other Governments that submitted observations to the Court maintain inter alia that that connecting factor
         constitutes an objective criterion which makes it possible to determine a person’s surname with certainty and continuity,
         to ensure that siblings have the same surname and to preserve relationships between members of an extended family. Moreover,
         that criterion is intended to ensure that all persons of a particular nationality are treated in the same way and that the
         surnames of persons of the same nationality are determined in an identical manner.
      
None of the grounds put forward in support of the connecting factor of nationality for determination of a person’s surname,
         however legitimate those grounds may be in themselves, warrants having such importance attached to it as to justify, in circumstances
         such as those of the case in the main proceedings, a refusal by the competent authorities of a Member State to recognise the
         surname of a child as already determined and registered in another Member State in which that child was born and has been
         resident since birth.
      
In so far as the connecting factor of nationality seeks to ensure that a person’s surname may be determined with continuity
         and stability, in circumstances such as those in the main proceedings, as was pointed out by the Commission, that connecting
         factor will result in an outcome contrary to that sought. Every time the child crosses the border between Denmark and Germany,
         he will bear a different name.
      
As regards the objective of ensuring that siblings have the same name, it is sufficient to point out that such an issue does
         not arise in the case in the main proceedings.
      
It should further be noted that the connecting factor of nationality under German private international law for the determination
         of a person’s surname is not without exception. It is not disputed that the German conflict rules relating to the determination
         of a child’s surname permit the connecting factor of the habitual residence of one of the parents where that habitual residence
         is in Germany. Therefore, a child who, like his parents, does not have German nationality may nevertheless have conferred
         on him in Germany a surname formed in accordance with German legislation if one of his parents has his habitual residence
         there. A situation similar to that of the child Leonhard Matthias could therefore also arise in Germany. 
      
The German Government also submits that its national legislation does not allow double-barrelled surnames for practical reasons.
         It must be possible to limit the length of surnames. The German legislature has ensured that the next generation of a family
         will not be forced to give up a part of a surname. What one generation would gain in freedom if double-barrelled surnames
         were accepted, the next generation would lose. The latter would no longer have the same possibilities of combining names as
         the preceding generation.
      
However, such considerations of administrative convenience cannot suffice to justify an obstacle to freedom of movement as
         was found in paragraphs to of this judgment.
      
Furthermore, as is apparent from the order for reference, German law does not wholly preclude the possibility of conferring
         double-barrelled surnames on children of German nationality. As the German Government confirmed at the hearing, where one
         of the parents has the nationality of another State, the parents may choose to form the child’s surname in accordance with
         the law of that State.
      
In addition, it must be pointed out that no specific reason was cited before the Court that might possibly preclude recognition
         of the child Leonhard Matthias’s surname, as conferred and registered in Denmark, for instance that that name was contrary
         to public policy in Germany.
      
In view of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the question referred to the Court must be that, in circumstances such
         as those of the case in the main proceedings, Article EC precludes the authorities of a Member State, in applying national
         law, from refusing to recognise a child’s surname, as determined and registered in a second Member State in which the child
         – who, like his parents, has only the nationality of the first Member State – was born and has been resident since birth.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:
In circumstances such as those of the case in the main proceedings, Article EC precludes the authorities of a Member State,
            in applying national law, from refusing to recognise a child’s surname, as determined and registered in a second Member State
            in which the child – who, like his parents, has only the nationality of the first Member State – was born and has been resident
            since birth.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 