
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-72/Commission of the European CommunitiesvPortuguese Republic
«(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directives 92/43/EEC and 79/409/EEC – Conservation of natural habitats and wild birds)»
Opinion of Advocate General Alber delivered on March I - Judgment of the Court, June I - Summary of the Judgment
Acts of the institutions – Directives – Implementation by the Member States – Need for full transposition – Provision requiring monitoring reports to be drawn up and forwarded to the Commission – Provision not necessarily requiring specific implementing measures(Council Directive 79/409, Art. 12(1))Each of the Member States to which a directive is addressed is obliged to adopt, within the framework of its national legal
         system, all the measures necessary to ensure that the directive is fully effective, in accordance with the objective it pursues.
         In order to concern only the relations between Member States and the Commission Article 12(1) of Directive 79/on the conservation
         of wild birds, which requires the Member States to draw up every three years a report on the implementation of national provisions
         taken under that directive and forward it to the Commission so that it can check that the directive has been complied with
         by the Member States, need not necessarily require the adoption of specific implementing measures in national law.see paras 19-JUDGMENT OF THE COURTJune (1)
((Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations – Directives 92/43/EEC and 79/409/EEC – Conservation of natural habitats and wild birds))
In Case C-72/02, 
            
 Commission of the European Communities,  represented by A. Caeiros, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, 
v
 Portuguese Republic,  represented by L. Fernandes, M. Telles Romão and M. João Lois, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
defendant, 
APPLICATION for a declaration that, by failing to implement in national law:
            
─
Article 3(3), Article 10, Article and Article 12(4) of Council Directive 92/43/EEC of May on the conservation of
            natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora (OJ L 206, p. 7), and 
            
─
Article 7, Article and Article of Council Directive 79/409/EEC of April on the conservation of wild birds (OJ
            L 103, p. 1), and 
            
by failing to implement correctly:
            
─
Article 1, Article 6(1) to (4) and Article 12(1)(d) of Directive 92/43, and 
            
─
Article 2, Article 4(1) and (4) and Article of Directive 79/409, 
            
the Portuguese Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of Directive 92/and Article of Directive
            79/409,
            
THE COURT,,
composed of: G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias, President, J.-P. Puissochet, M. Wathelet, R. Schintgen and C.W.A. Timmermans (Presidents of Chambers), C. Gulmann (Rapporteur), D.A.O. Edward, A. La Pergola, P. Jann, V. Skouris, F. Macken, N. Colneric, S. von Bahr, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues and A. Rosas, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: S. Alber, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2003, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on March 2002, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         under Article EC in which it sought a declaration that, by failing to implement in national law: 
         
─
Article 3(3), Article 10, Article and Article 12(4) of Council Directive 92/43/EEC of May on the conservation of
         natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora (OJ L 206, p. 7), and 
         
─
Article 7, Article and Article of Council Directive 79/409/EEC of April on the conservation of wild birds (OJ
         L 103, p. 1), and 
         
by failing to implement correctly:
         
─
Article 1, Article 6(1) to (4) and Article 12(1)(d) of Directive 92/43, and 
         
─
Article 2, Article 4(1) and (4) and Article of Directive 79/409, 
         
the Portuguese Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of Directive 92/and Article of Directive
         79/409. 
         
Legal background
Directive 79/Article of Directive 79/provides that Member States are to  
         take the requisite measures to maintain the population of [all species of naturally occurring birds in the wild state in the
         European territory of the Member States to which the Treaty applies] at a level which corresponds in particular to ecological,
         scientific and cultural requirements, while taking account of economic and recreational requirements, or to adapt the population
         of these species to that level. 
         
            
Article 4(1) of Directive 79/requires the Member States to take special conservation measures in respect of the species
         of bird mentioned in Annex I to that directive and, in particular, classify the most suitable territories as special protection
         areas for their conservation.  Article 4(4) requires Member States to take appropriate steps to avoid certain harmful effects
         in the special protection areas. 
         
            
Article of Directive 79/prohibits, subject to derogations, the marketing of the species of birds protected by the directive.
          Article sets out the rules applicable to the hunting of wild birds.  Article of the directive prohibits the use of all
         non-selective methods of catching wild birds. 
         
            
Article of the directive provides: 1. Member States shall forward to the Commission every three years, starting from the date of expiry of the time limit referred
         to in Article 18(1), a report on the implementation of national provisions taken thereunder.2. The Commission shall prepare every three years a composite report based on the information referred to in paragraph 1.
          That part of the draft report covering the information supplied by a Member State shall be forwarded to the authorities of
         the Member State in question for verification.  The final version of the report shall be forwarded to the Member States.
         
            
Under Article of Directive 79/the Member States are to bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions
         necessary to comply with the directive within two years of its notification and communicate to the Commission the texts of
         the main provisions of national law which they adopt in the field governed by the directive.  The directive was notified to
         the Member States on April 1979. 
         
            
As regards the Portuguese Republic, notification of Directive 79/is deemed to have taken place on accession, pursuant
         to Article of the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Kingdom of Spain and the Portuguese Republic and the
         adjustments to the Treaties (OJ L 302, p. 23).  Under Article of that Act of Accession, in conjunction with Annex
         XXXVI thereof, the Portuguese Republic was to take all the measures necessary to comply with the directive on its accession
         to the European Communities. 
         Directive 92/Article of Directive 92/defines the main terms used in it. 
         
            
Article 3(1) and (3) of Directive 92/provides: 1. A coherent European ecological network of special areas of conservation shall be set up under the title Natura 2000.  This
         network, composed of sites hosting the natural habitat types listed in Annex I and habitats of the species listed in Annex
         II, shall enable the natural habitat types and the species' habitats concerned to be maintained or, where appropriate, restored
         at a favourable conservation status in their natural range....3. Where they consider it necessary, Member States shall endeavour to improve the ecological coherence of Natura by maintaining,
         and where appropriate developing, features of the landscape which are of major importance for wild fauna and flora, as referred
         to in Article 10.
         
            
Article of Directive 92/concerns the measures necessary for the protection of the special conservation areas.  Article
         of the directive concerns measures to improve the ecological coherence of the Natura network.  Article of the directive
         concerns surveillance of the conservation status of the natural habitats and species of Community interest.  Article 12(1)(d)
         and (4) of the directive deals with the protection of certain animal species. 
         
            
Under Article 23(1) of Directive 92/the Member States are to bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions necessary to comply with the directive within two years of its notification and inform the Commission thereof immediately.
          The directive was notified to the Member States on June 1992. 
         Pre-litigation procedure
            
By letter of April 2000, the Commission sent the Portuguese Government its observations concerning Decree-Law No 140/of April (the  
         Decree-Law), which had been notified to it by way of implementation in national law of Directives 79/and 92/43.  In that letter
         it stated that the Decree-Law did not implement Article 3(3), Article 10, Article and Article 12(4) of Directive 92/43,
         or Article 7, Article and Article of Directive 79/409, and that it implemented Article 1, Article 6(1) to (4) and Article
         12(1)(d) of Directive 92/and Article 2, Article 4(1) and (4) and Article of Directive 79/incorrectly.  Accordingly,
         the Commission gave the Portuguese Republic formal notice that it should submit its observations in that regard within two
         months of its receipt of that letter. 
         
            
On June the Portuguese Government informed the Commission that a working group made up of technicians from the Instituto
         da Conservação da Natureza (Institute of Nature Conservation) had been set up to consider the various issues raised by the
         Commission in connection with the Decree-Law and to prepare a draft amendment to that legislation. 
         
            
On January the Commission sent a reasoned opinion to the Portuguese Republic pursuant to Article EC reiterating
         the failures and deficiencies set out in the letter of formal notice and requesting that Member State to adopt the measures
         necessary to comply with that opinion within a period of two months from the date of its notification.  
         
            
The Portuguese authorities replied on May in a letter informing the Commission that examination of the new legislation
         implementing the directives in question in national law was at its final stage and its adoption by the Council of Ministers
         was scheduled for that month. 
         
            
Taking the view that the Portuguese Republic had not adopted, within the period prescribed in the reasoned opinion, the measures
         necessary to comply with it, the Commission brought this action. 
         The action
            
As regards the claims made by the Commission other than that alleging failure to implement Article of Directive 79/409,
         it is not disputed that Article 3(3), Article 10, Article and Article 12(4) of Directive 92/and Article and Article
         of Directive 79/have not been implemented in Portuguese law.  Nor is it disputed that Article 1, Article 6(1) to (4)
         and Article 12(1)(d) of Directive 92/and Article 2, Article 4(1) and (4) and Article of Directive 79/were not correctly
         implemented in national law by the Portuguese authorities.  Accordingly, the action brought by the Commission must be held
         to be well founded, in so far as it concerns those provisions. 
         The alleged failure to implement Article of Directive 79/It should be recalled that, according to settled case-law, each of the Member States to which a directive is addressed is
         obliged to adopt, within the framework of its national legal system, all the measures necessary to ensure that the directive
         is fully effective, in accordance with the objective it pursues (see in particular Case C-336/Commission  v  
          Italy  [1999] ECR I-3771, paragraph 19, Case C-97/Commission  v  
          France  [2001] ECR I-2053, paragraph 9, and Case C-478/Commission  v  
          Sweden  [2002] ECR I-4147, paragraph 15).  
         
            
Article 12(1) of Directive 79/requires the Member States to draw up every three years a report on the implementation of
         national provisions taken under that directive and forward it to the Commission so that it can check that the directive has
         been complied with by the Member States.  That provision thus concerns only the relations between those Member States and
         the Commission. 
         
            
In the present case, the Commission has not established that compliance with that obligation requires the adoption of specific
         implementing measures in national law. 
         
            
For the rest, it must be observed that, in its reply to a written question put by the Court, the Commission stated that, in
         the past, the Portuguese Republic drew up and forwarded the reports required under Article 12(1) of Directive 79/on the
         implementation of the national provisions taken pursuant to the directive. 
         
            
Therefore, the claim alleging failure to implement Article of Directive 79/must be rejected. 
         
            
Accordingly, it must be held that, by failing to implement in national law: 
         
─
Article 3(3), Article 10, Article and Article 12(4) of Directive 92/43, and 
         
─
Article and Article of Directive 79/409, and 
         
by failing to implement correctly:
         
─
Article 1, Article 6(1) to (4) and Article 12(1)(d) of Directive 92/43, and 
         
─
Article 2, Article 4(1) and (4) and Article of Directive 79/409, 
         
the Portuguese Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EC Treaty.
         
            
The remainder of the application must be dismissed. 
         
Costs
            
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party's pleadings.  Since the Commission has asked that the Portuguese Republic be ordered to
         pay the costs and the latter has been essentially unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the costs.  
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT
hereby:  
         
1.
 Declares that by failing to implement in national law: 
            
─
Article 3(3), Article 10, Article and Article 12(4) of Council Directive 92/43/EEC of May on the conservation of
            natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora, and 
            
─
Article and Article of Council Directive 79/409/EEC of April on the conservation of wild birds, and 
            
by failing to implement correctly: 
            
─
Article 1, Article 6(1) to (4) and Article 12(1)(d) of Directive 92/43, and 
            
─
Article 2, Article 4(1) and (4) and Article of Directive 79/409, 
            
the Portuguese Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EC Treaty; 2. Dismisses the remainder of the application;
            
            
3.
 Orders the Portuguese Republic to pay the costs. 
            
Rodríguez Iglesias
Puissochet 
Wathelet 
Schintgen
Timmermans 
Gulmann 
Edward
La Pergola 
Jann 
Skouris
Macken 
Colneric 
von Bahr
Cunha Rodrigues 
Rosas 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on June 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: Portuguese.
Top  
 