
Case C-478/Budĕjovický Budvar, národní podnik
v
Rudolf Ammersin GmbH
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Handelsgericht Wien)
(Bilateral agreements between Member States – Protection in a Member State of a geographical indication of provenance of another Member State – Designation ‘Bud’ – Use of the mark ‘American Bud’ – Articles EC and EC – Regulation (EC) No 510/– Community system of protection of geographical indications and of designations of origin – Accession of the Czech Republic – Transitional measures – Regulation (EC) No 918/– Scope of the Community system – Exhaustive nature)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Free movement of goods – Exceptions – Protection of industrial and commercial property – Protection of a designation as a
            simple and indirect geographical indication of source – Conditions
(Arts EC and EC)
2.        Free movement of goods – Exceptions – Protection of industrial and commercial property – Protection of a designation protected
            under a bilateral treaty between Member States as a geographical indication or designation of origin – Conditions
(Art. EC)
3.        Agriculture – Uniform legislation – Protection of geographical indications and designations of origin for agricultural products
            and foodstuffs – Uniform and exhaustive system of protection
(Council Regulation No 510/2006)
1.        In order to determine whether a designation which is not a geographical name can be considered to constitute a simple and
         indirect indication of geographical provenance, protection of which under the bilateral treaties concluded between Member
         States is capable of being justified on the basis of the criteria laid down in Article EC, the national court must ascertain
         whether, according to factual circumstances and perceptions prevailing in the Member State of origin, that designation, even
         if it is not in itself a geographical name, is at least capable of informing the consumer that the product bearing that indication
         comes from a particular place or region of that Member State. However, if such an examination were to show that the designation
         at issue is not at least capable of evoking the geographical provenance of the product, its protection cannot be justified
         on the grounds of protection of industrial and commercial property within the meaning of Article EC and would in principle
         run counter to Article EC unless it could be justified on another basis.
      
The national court must, in addition, ascertain, also in the light of factual circumstances and perceptions prevailing in
         the Member State of origin, whether that designation has not, either at the time of the entry into force of the bilateral
         instruments at issue or subsequently, become generic in that Member State, it being established that the aim of the system
         of protection introduced by those instruments falls within the sphere of the protection of industrial and commercial property
         within the meaning of Article EC. 
      
In the absence of any Community provision in that regard, it is for the national court to decide, in accordance with its own
         national law, whether a consumer survey should be commissioned for the purpose of clarifying the factual circumstances and
         perceptions prevailing in the Member State of origin in order to ascertain whether a designation can be classified as a simple
         and indirect indication of geographical source and has not become generic in that Member State. It is also in the light of
         that national law that the national court, if it finds it necessary to commission a consumer survey, must determine, for the
         purposes of making the necessary assessments, the percentage of consumers that would be sufficiently significant.
      
(see paras 82-84, 89, 94, operative part 1)
2.        Article EC does not lay down specific requirements as to the quality and the duration of the use made in the Member State
         of origin of a designation protected under bilateral treaties concluded between Member States in order for its protection
         to be justified in the light of that article. Whether such requirements apply in the context of the dispute in the main proceedings
         must be determined by the national court in the light of the applicable national law, in particular the system of protection
         laid down by those bilateral instruments concluded between the Member States concerned. 
      
(see paras 91, 93-94, operative part 1)
3.        The Community system of protection laid down by Regulation No 510/on the protection of geographical indications and designations
         of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs is exhaustive in nature, with the result that that regulation precludes
         the application of a system of protection laid down by agreements between two Member States, such as bilateral treaties, which
         confers on a designation, recognised under the law of a Member State as constituting a designation of origin, protection in
         another Member State where that protection is actually claimed despite the fact that no application for registration of that
         designation of origin has been made in accordance with that regulation.
      
The aim of Regulation No 510/is not to establish, alongside national rules which may continue to exist, an additional
         system of protection for qualified geographical indications, like, for example, that introduced by Regulation No 40/on
         the Community trade mark, but to provide a uniform and exhaustive system of protection for such indications.
      
(see paras 114, 129, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
September (*)
      
(Bilateral agreements between Member States – Protection in a Member State of a geographical indication of provenance of another Member State – Designation ‘Bud’ – Use of the mark ‘American Bud’ – Articles EC and EC – Regulation (EC) No 510/– Community system of protection of geographical indications and of designations of origin – Accession of the Czech Republic – Transitional measures – Regulation (EC) No 918/– Scope of the Community system – Exhaustive nature)
In Case C‑478/07,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Handelsgericht Wien (Austria), made by decision of September
         2007, received at the Court on October 2007, in the proceedings
      
Budĕjovický Budvar, národní podnik
v
Rudolf Ammersin GmbH,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans (Rapporteur), A. Rosas and K. Lenaerts, Presidents of Chambers,
         P. Kūris, E. Juhász, L. Bay Larsen and P. Lindh, Judges,
      
Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,
Registrar: K. Sztranc-Sławiczek, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on December 2008,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Budĕjovický Budvar, národní podnik, by C. Petsch, Rechtsanwalt,
–        Rudolf Ammersin GmbH, by C. Hauer, B. Goebel and C. Schulte, Rechtsanwälte,
–        the Czech Government, by T. Boček and M. Smolek, acting as Agents,
–        the Greek Government, by I. Chalkias and K. Marinou, acting as Agents,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by B. Doherty, B. Schima and M. Vollkommer, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on February 2009,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles EC and EC, of the Act concerning the
         conditions of accession of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the
         Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and
         the Slovak Republic and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union is founded (OJ L 236, p. 33; ‘the
         Act of Accession’), of Commission Regulation (EC) No 918/of April introducing transitional arrangements for the
         protection of geographical indications and designations of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs in connection with
         the accession of the Czech Republic, Estonia, Cyprus, Latvia, Lithuania, Hungary, Malta, Poland, Slovenia and Slovakia (OJ
         L 163, p. 88) and of Council Regulation (EC) No 510/of March on the protection of geographical indications
         and designations of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs (OJ L 93, p. 12). 
      
The reference was made in proceedings between Budĕjovický Budvar, národní podnik (‘Budvar’), a brewery established in the
         town of Česke Budĕjovice (Czech Republic), and Rudolf Ammersin GmbH (‘Ammersin’), a firm established in Vienna (Austria) which
         distributes beverages, with regard to Budvar’s application to prohibit Ammersin from marketing under the mark ‘American Bud’
         beer produced by the brewery Anheuser-Busch Inc. (‘Anheuser-Busch’), established in Saint Louis (United States), on the ground
         that, by virtue of bilateral agreements between the Czech Republic and the Republic of Austria, the use of the designation
         ‘Bud’ in that Member State is reserved for beer produced in the Czech Republic.
      
 Legal context
 International law
Article of the Lisbon Agreement for the Protection of Appellations of Provenance and their International Registration, adopted
         on October 1958, revised at Stockholm on July and amended on September (United Nations Treaty Series, Vol. 828, No 172, p. 205; ‘the Lisbon Agreement’), provides:
      
‘(1)      The countries to which this Agreement applies form a Special Union within the framework of the Union for the Protection of
         Industrial Property.
      
(2)      They undertake to protect on their territories, in accordance with the terms of this Agreement, the appellations of origin
         of products of the other countries of the Special Union, recognised and protected as such in the country of provenance and
         registered at the International Bureau of Intellectual Property … referred to in the Convention establishing the World Intellectual
         Property Organisation [WIPO]’.
      
Under Article of the Lisbon Agreement:
      
‘(1)      In this Agreement “appellation of origin” means the geographical name of a country, region or locality which serves to designate
         a product originating therein, the quality and characteristics of which are due exclusively or essentially to the geographical
         environment, including natural and human factors.
      
(2)      The country of origin is the country whose name, or the country in which is situated the region or locality whose name, constitutes
         the appellation of origin which has given the product its reputation.’ 
      
The appellation of origin BUD (appellation of origin No 598) was registered with WIPO on March for beer, pursuant
         to the Lisbon Agreement. 
      
 Community law
 The Act of Accession
Article of the Act of Accession states:
      
‘The acts listed in Annex II to this Act shall be adapted as specified in that Annex.’
In Annex II to the Act of Accession, entitled ‘List referred to in Article of the Act of Accession’, point of Part A
         of Chapter provides:
      
‘R 1107: Commission Regulation (EC) No 1107/of June on the registration of geographical indications and designations
         of origin under the procedure laid down in Article of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2081/92: (OJ [1996] L 148, … p. 1), as
         amended by: 
      
…
–        R 1829: Commission Regulation (EC) No 1829/of [October] (OJ [2002] L 277, … p. 10).
(a)      In Article 1, the following subparagraph is added:
“The names ‘Budějovické pivo’, ‘Českobudějovické pivo’ and ‘Budějovický měšťanský var’ shall be registered as protected geographical
         indications (PGI) and listed in the Annex in accordance with specifications submitted to the Commission. This is without prejudice
         to any beer trademark or other rights existing in the European Union on the date of accession.”
      
(b)      In the Annex, Part B, the following is inserted under the heading “Beer”:
“CZECH REPUBLIC:
–        Budějovické pivo (PGI)
–        Českobudějovické pivo (PGI)
–        Budějovický měšťanský var (PGI)”.’ 
 Regulation (EEC) No 2081/The seventh recital in the preamble to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2081/of July on the protection of geographical
         indications and designations of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs (OJ L 208, p. 1) states:
      
‘… there is diversity in the national practices for implementing registered designations of origin and geographical indications;
         whereas a Community approach should be envisaged; whereas a framework of Community rules on protection will permit the development
         of geographical indications and designations of origin since, by providing a more uniform approach, such a framework will
         ensure fair competition between the producers of products bearing such indications and enhance the credibility of the products
         in the consumers’ eyes.’
      
Articles to of Regulation No 2081/lay down the procedure for registration of the geographical indications and designations
         of origin referred to in Article thereof, known as the ‘normal procedure’. In accordance with Article 5(4) of that regulation,
         the application for registration is to be sent to the Member State in which the geographical area is located. Pursuant to
         the first subparagraph of Article 5(5) thereof, that State is to check that the application is justified and forward the application
         to the Commission of the European Communities. 
      
Since examination of an application for registration by the Commission takes a certain amount of time and since, pending a
         decision on registration of a designation, it is appropriate to permit the Member State to grant temporary national protection,
         Council Regulation (EC) No 535/of March amending Regulation (EEC) No 2081/(OJ L 83, p. 3) inserted the
         following text after the first subparagraph of Article 5(5) of Regulation No 2081/92:
      
‘That Member State may, on a transitional basis only, grant on the national level a protection in the sense of the present
         Regulation to the name forwarded in the manner prescribed, and, where appropriate, an adjustment period, as from the date
         of such forwarding; … 
      
Such transitional national protection shall cease on the date on which a decision on registration under this Regulation is
         taken. … 
      
The consequences of such national protection, where a name is not registered under this Regulation, shall be the sole responsibility
         of the Member State concerned. 
      
The measures taken by Member States under the second subparagraph shall produce effects at national level only; they shall
         have no effect on intra-Community trade.’ 
      
Article of Regulation No 2081/sets up a registration procedure, known as the ‘simplified procedure’, applicable to the
         registration of names already in existence on the date of entry into force of that regulation. It provides, inter alia, that
         within six months of the entry into force of Regulation No 2081/92, Member States are to inform the Commission of the names
         they wish to register under that procedure.
      
In order to take account, inter alia, of the fact that the first proposal for registration of geographical indications and
         designations of origin which the Commission was to draw up pursuant to Article 17(2) of Regulation No 2081/was not submitted
         to the Council of the European Union until March 1996, when most of the transitional period of five years provided for by
         Article 13(2) of that regulation had already elapsed, Regulation No 535/97, which entered into force on March 1997, replaced
         Article 13(2) with the following:
      
‘By way of derogation from paragraph 1(a) and (b), Member States may maintain national systems that permit the use of names
         registered under Article for a period of not more than five years after the date of publication of registration, provided
         that:
      
–        the products have been marketed legally using such names for at least five years before the date of publication of this Regulation,
–        the undertakings have legally marketed the products concerned using those names continuously during the period referred to
         in the first indent,
      
–        the labelling clearly indicates the true origin of the product.
However, this derogation may not lead to the marketing of products freely within the territory of a Member State where such
         names were prohibited.’
      
Article 1(15) of Council Regulation (EC) No 692/of April amending Regulation (EEC) No 2081/(OJ L 99, p. 1)
         provides: 
      
‘Article 13(2) and Article shall be deleted. However, the provisions of these Articles shall continue to apply to registered
         names or to names for which a registration application was made by the procedure provided for in Article before this Regulation
         entered into force.’
      
 Regulation No 510/Regulation No 2081/92, as most recently amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 806/of April (OJ L 122, p. 1),
         was repealed pursuant to Article of Regulation No 510/2006. That regulation entered into force on the day of its publication
         in the Official Journal of the European Union, namely, March 2006.
      
Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 510/states:
      
‘Provision should be made for a Community approach to designations of origin and geographical indications. A framework of
         Community rules on a system of protection permits the development of geographical indications and designations of origin since,
         by providing a more uniform approach, such a framework ensures fair competition between the producers of products bearing
         such indications and enhances the credibility of the products in the consumer’s eyes.’
      
Pursuant to recital in the preamble to that regulation:
      
‘The names already registered under … Regulation … No 2081/… on the date of entry into force of this Regulation should
         continue to be protected under this Regulation and automatically included in the register. …’
      
Article 1(1) and (2) of that regulation, entitled ‘Scope’, provides:
      
‘1.      This Regulation lays down the rules on the protection of designations of origin and geographical indications for agricultural
         products intended for human consumption listed in Annex I to the Treaty and for foodstuffs listed in Annex I to this Regulation
         and for agricultural products listed in Annex II to this Regulation.
      
…
2.      This Regulation shall apply without prejudice to other specific Community provisions.’ 
Annex I to that regulation, entitled ‘Foodstuffs referred to in Article 1(1)’, mentions ‘Beers’ in its first indent.
      
Article 2(1) and (2) of Regulation No 510/2006, entitled ‘Designation of origin and geographical indication’, provides:
      
‘1.      For the purpose of this Regulation:
(a)      “designation of origin” means the name of a region, a specific place or, in exceptional cases, a country, used to describe
         an agricultural product or a foodstuff:
      
–        originating in that region, specific place or country, 
–        the quality or characteristics of which are essentially or exclusively due to a particular geographical environment with its
         inherent natural and human factors, and
      
–        the production, processing and preparation of which take place in the defined geographical area;
(b)      “geographical indication” means the name of a region, a specific place or, in exceptional cases, a country, used to describe
         an agricultural product or a foodstuff:
      
–        originating in that region, specific place or country, and
–        which possesses a specific quality, reputation or other characteristics attributable to that geographical provenance, and
–        the production, processing and preparation of which take place in the defined geographical area.
2.      Traditional geographical or non-geographical names designating an agricultural product or a foodstuff which fulfil the conditions
         referred to in paragraph shall also be considered as designations of origin or geographical indications.’
      
Article 4(1) of that regulation provides:
      
‘To be eligible for a protected designation of origin (PDO) or a protected geographical indication (PGI), an agricultural
         product or foodstuff shall comply with a product specification.’
      
Articles to of Regulation No 510/lay down the procedure for the registration of geographical indications and designations
         of origin referred to in Article of that regulation. In accordance with Article 5(4) thereof, where the registration application
         relates to a geographical area in a given Member State, the application is to be addressed to that Member State. Under Article 5(5)
         of that regulation, the Member State is to initiate a national objection procedure and then take a decision on that application.
         In the event of a favourable decision, that Member State is to forward to the Commission the documents referred to in Article
         5(7) thereof for a final decision taken following the procedure governed by Articles and of Regulation No 510/which
         includes, inter alia, an objection procedure. 
      
Under Article 5(6) of that regulation:
      
‘The Member State may, on a transitional basis only, grant protection under this Regulation at national level to the name,
         and, where appropriate, an adjustment period, with effect from the date on which the application is lodged with the Commission.
      
The adjustment period provided for in the first subparagraph may be granted only on condition that the undertakings concerned
         have legally marketed the products in question, using the names concerned continuously for at least the past five years and
         have made that point in the national objection procedure referred to in the first subparagraph of paragraph 5.
      
Such transitional national protection shall cease on the date on which a decision on registration under this Regulation is
         taken.
      
The consequences of such transitional national protection, where a name is not registered under this Regulation, shall be
         the sole responsibility of the Member State concerned.
      
The measures taken by Member States under the first subparagraph shall produce effects at national level only, and they shall
         have no effect on intra-Community or international trade.’
      
Article 13(1) of that regulation provides:
      
‘1.      Registered names shall be protected against: 
(a)      any direct or indirect commercial use of a registered name in respect of products not covered by the registration in so far
         as those products are comparable to the products registered under that name or in so far as using the name exploits the reputation
         of the protected name;
      
(b)      any misuse, imitation or evocation, even if the true origin of the product is indicated or if the protected name is translated
         or accompanied by an expression such as “style”, “type”, “method”, “as produced in”, “imitation” or similar; 
      
…’.
 Regulation No 918/Recitals to of Regulation No 918/state:
      
‘(2)      Article 5(5) of Regulation (EEC) No 2081/provides, however, that geographical indications and designations of origin may
         be given transitional national protection by Member States from the date on which applications for registration of such names
         are sent to the Commission. The consequences of such national protection in cases where a name is not registered at Community
         level are entirely the responsibility of the Member State concerned.
      
(3)      Following the accession of the Czech Republic, Estonia, Cyprus, Latvia, Lithuania, Hungary, Malta, Poland, Slovenia and Slovakia,
         the geographical indications and designations of origin of these countries (hereinafter “the new Member States”) may therefore
         be registered at Community level under Article of Regulation (EEC) No 2081/and protected under Article 13.
      
(4)      In order to facilitate the submission of applications to the Commission from the new Member States and ensure continuing protection
         of the relevant geographical indications and designations of origin, provision should be made for these Member States to uphold
         the national protection existing on April until a decision has been taken under Article of Regulation (EEC) No 2081/92,
         provided that an application for registration under that Regulation has been sent to the Commission by October 2004.’
      
Article of Regulation No 918/provides:
      
‘The national protection of geographical indications and designations of origin within the meaning of Regulation (EEC) No 2081/existing in the Czech Republic, Estonia, Cyprus, Latvia, Lithuania, Hungary, Malta, Poland, Slovenia and Slovakia on April
         may be upheld by those Member States until October 2004.
      
Where an application for registration under Regulation (EEC) No 2081/is forwarded to the Commission by October 2004,
         such protection may be upheld until a decision has been taken in accordance with Article of that Regulation.
      
The consequences of such national protection in cases where the name is not registered at Community level are entirely the
         responsibility of the Member State concerned.’
      
 National law
 The bilateral convention
On June 1976, the Republic of Austria and the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic concluded an agreement on the protection
         of indications of source, designations of origin and other designations referring to the source of agricultural and industrial
         products (‘the bilateral convention’).
      
Following approval and ratification, the bilateral convention was published in the Bundesgesetzblatt für die Republik Österreich of February (BGBl. No 75/1981). Pursuant to Article 16(2) thereof, the bilateral convention came into force on February for an indefinite period.
      
Article of the bilateral convention provides:
      
‘Each of the contracting States undertakes to take all the necessary measures to ensure effective protection against unfair
         competition in the course of trade for indications of source, designations of origin and other designations referring to the
         source of the agricultural and industrial products in the categories referred to in Article and listed in the agreement
         provided for in Article 6, and the names and illustrations referred to in Articles 3, and 8(2). 
      
Under Article of the bilateral convention:
      
‘Indications of source, designations of origin and other designations referring to the source within the meaning of this agreement
         mean all indications which relate directly or indirectly to the source of a product. Such an indication generally consists
         of a geographical designation. However, it may also consist of other information, if in the relevant consumer circles of the
         country of origin this is perceived, in connection with the product thus designated, as a reference to the country of production.
         In addition to the indication of source from a particular geographical area, the abovementioned designations may also contain
         information on the quality of the product concerned. These particular features of the product shall be determined solely or
         predominantly by geographical or human influences.’ 
      
Article 3(1) of the bilateral convention provides:
      
‘... the Czechoslovak designations listed in the agreement provided for in Article shall in the Republic of Austria be reserved
         exclusively for Czechoslovak products.’ 
      
Point of Article 5(1)B of the bilateral convention refers to beers as one of the categories of Czech products concerned
         by the protection established by that convention.
      
Under Article of the bilateral convention:
      
‘Designations of the individual products meeting the conditions laid down in Articles and which enjoy protection under
         the agreement and which are therefore not generic names will be listed in an agreement to be concluded between the Governments
         of the two contracting States’. 
      
Article of the bilateral convention is worded as follows:
      
‘1.      If the names and designations protected under Articles 3, 4, 6, and 8(2) of this agreement are used contrary to those provisions
         commercially for products, in particular for their presentation or packaging, or on invoices, waybills or other business documents
         or in advertisements, then all judicial and administrative measures for acting against unfair competition or otherwise suppressing
         prohibited designations which are available under the legislation of the contracting State in which protection is claimed
         shall be applied in accordance with the conditions laid down in that legislation and with Article 9.
      
2.      Where a risk of confusion in commerce exists, paragraph is also to be applied if the designations protected under the agreement
         are used in modified form or for products other than those to which they are allocated in the agreement referred to in Article 6.
         
      
3.      Paragraph is also to be applied if the designations protected under the agreement are used in translation or with a reference
         to the actual source or with additions such as “style”, “type”, “as produced in”, “imitation” or the like.
      
4.      Paragraph does not apply to translations of designations from one of the contracting States where the translation is a colloquial
         word in the language of the other contracting State.’ 
      
 The bilateral agreement
In accordance with Article of the bilateral convention, an agreement on its application (‘the bilateral agreement’ and,
         together with the bilateral convention, ‘the bilateral instruments at issue’) was concluded on June 1979. 
      
Annex B to the bilateral agreement states:
      
‘Czechoslovak designations for agricultural and industrial products
…
B      Food and agriculture (except wine)
…
2.      Beer
Czech Socialist Republic
…
Bud
Budĕjovické pivo
Budĕjovické pivo Budvar
Budĕjovické Budvar
…’.
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
The dispute in the main proceedings has already given rise to the judgment in Case C‑216/Budĕjovický Budvar [2003] ECR I‑13617, by which the Court, hearing a reference for a preliminary ruling made by the same national court as in
         the present case, held: 
      
‘Article EC and … Regulation … No 2081/…, as amended by … Regulation … No 535/…, do not preclude the application of
         a provision of a bilateral agreement between a Member State and a non-member country under which a simple and indirect indication
         of geographical source from that non-member country is accorded protection in the importing Member State, whether or not there
         is any risk of consumers being misled, and the import of a product lawfully marketed in another Member State may be prevented.
         
      
Article EC precludes the application of a provision of a bilateral agreement between a Member State and a non-member country
         under which a name which in that country does not directly or indirectly refer to the geographical source of the product that
         it designates is accorded protection in the importing Member State, whether or not there is any risk of consumers being misled,
         and the import of a product lawfully marketed in another Member State may be prevented.
      
The first paragraph of Article EC is to be interpreted as permitting a court of a Member State, subject to the findings
         to be made by that court having regard inter alia to the criteria set out in this judgment, to apply the provisions of bilateral
         agreements such as those at issue in the main proceedings, concluded between that State and a non-member country and according
         protection to a name from the non-member country, even where those provisions prove to be contrary to the EC Treaty rules,
         on the ground that they concern an obligation resulting from agreements concluded before the date of the accession of the
         Member State concerned to the European Union. Pending the success of one of the methods referred to in the second paragraph
         of Article EC in eliminating any incompatibilities between an agreement predating that accession and the Treaty, the first
         paragraph of that article permits that State to continue to apply such an agreement in so far as it contains obligations which
         remain binding on that State under international law.’
      
In paragraphs to of the judgment in Budĕjovický Budvar, the dispute in the main proceedings was summarised as follows:
      
‘Budvar markets beer, in particular under the names Budějovický Budvar and Budweiser Budvar, and exports a beer called “Budweiser
         Budvar”, in particular to Austria.
      
Ammersin markets inter alia a beer called American Bud, produced by the brewery Anheuser-Busch, which it buys from Josef Sigl
         KG (“Josef Sigl”), a company established in Obertrum (Austria) which is the sole Austrian importer of that beer. 
      
By act of July 1999, Budvar brought proceedings before the national court requesting that Ammersin be ordered to refrain
         from using on Austrian territory, in the course of its commercial activities, the name Bud, or similar designations likely
         to cause confusion, for beer or similar goods or in connection with such goods, save where Budvar products were concerned.
         In addition, Budvar also sought the suppression of all designations conflicting with that prohibition, the rendering of accounts
         and publication of the judgment. The action was accompanied by an application for interim measures. 
      
Budvar’s action in the main proceedings is essentially based on two different pleas in law. 
First of all, Budvar submits that the name American Bud, which is registered as a trade mark in favour of Anheuser-Busch,
         bears a similarity, likely to cause confusion within the meaning of the legislation on unfair competition, to its own priority
         trade marks protected in Austria, namely Budweiser, Budweiser Budvar and Bud.
      
Second, Budvar asserts that the use of the designation American Bud for a beer from a State other than the Czech Republic
         is contrary to the provisions of the bilateral convention because, pursuant to Article of that convention, the designation
         Bud, referred to in Annex B to the bilateral agreement, is a protected designation and is therefore reserved exclusively for
         Czech products. 
      
On October 1999, the national court granted the interim measures sought by Budvar. 
The appeal brought by Ammersin before the Oberlandesgericht Wien (Higher Regional Court, Vienna) (Austria) against those measures
         was not successful and leave to appeal to the Oberster Gerichtshof (Supreme Court) (Austria) was refused. Now that the interlocutory
         proceedings have ended, the Handelsgericht Wien is hearing the main application.
      
The national court observes that before bringing the action in the main proceedings, Budvar had already brought an action
         before the Landesgericht Salzburg (Regional Court, Salzburg) (Austria) which was identical with regard to both its purpose
         and its legal basis, but which was directed against Josef Sigl.
      
In that parallel case, the Landesgericht Salzburg ordered the interim measures sought by the claimant, and the Oberlandesgericht
         Linz (Higher Regional Court, Linz) (Austria) dismissed the appeal brought against that order. By order of February 2000,
         the Oberster Gerichtshof dismissed the appeal brought on a point of law against the order made in the initial appeal proceedings,
         and upheld the interim measures. 
      
The national court states that the order of the Oberster Gerichtshof is essentially based on the following considerations.
         
      
The Oberster Gerichtshof, which confined its examination to the plea related to the bilateral convention, held that the injunction
         sought against Josef Sigl, the defendant, could constitute an obstacle to the free movement of goods for the purposes of Article EC. 
      
However, it held that that obstacle is compatible with Article EC because the protection of the designation Bud provided
         for in the bilateral convention constitutes protection of industrial and commercial property within the meaning of Article EC. 
      
According to the national court, the Oberster Gerichtshof held that the designation Bud is “a simple geographical indication
         or ... an indirect reference to source”, in other words an indication for which it is not necessary to respect the guarantees
         associated with designations of origin – such as production in compliance with the quality or manufacturing standards adopted
         and monitored by the authorities, or the specific product characteristics. Moreover, the designation Bud enjoys “absolute
         protection”, that is to say, irrespective of whether there is any risk of confusion or of consumers being misled.
      
In the light of the arguments submitted to it, the national court considers that there is reasonable doubt as to the correct
         answers to the questions of Community law raised in the main proceedings, in particular because it is not possible to ascertain
         from the Court’s case-law whether “simple” indications of geographical source, which do not carry any risk of consumers being
         misled, also come within the scope of the protection of industrial and commercial property within the meaning of Article EC.’ 
      
In the order for reference, the national court summarises the developments which have taken place since delivery of the judgment
         in Budĕjovický Budvar as follows.
      
By a judgment of December 2004, the national court dismissed Budvar’s action, holding that the designation ‘Bud’ is not
         an indication of provenance since the Czech public would not associate the designation ‘Bud’ with a particular place in the
         Czech Republic and it had never been used in that country to designate a place. The national court concluded therefrom that
         protection of that designation by the bilateral instruments at issue was incompatible with Article EC. That judgment was
         upheld by a judgment of the Oberlandesgericht Wien of March 2005.
      
However, by a decision of November 2005, the Oberster Gerichtshof set aside the decisions of the previous courts and remitted
         the case to the national court for a fresh decision after further proceedings.
      
In the view of the Oberster Gerichtshof, whether the designation ‘Bud’ designated a region or place in the Czech Republic
         must be considered together with the criteria for a simple or indirect indication of provenance.
      
In the light of paragraphs and of the judgment in Budĕjovický Budvar, it should be ascertained whether the designation ‘Bud’ is at least capable of informing the consumer that the product bearing
         it came from a particular place, a particular region or a particular country. The question to be asked is thus whether consumers
         understand that designation, linked with beer, as a simple or indirect geographical designation of provenance. The national
         court has not yet considered that question. 
      
Next, by a judgment of March 2006, the national court, basing its finding primarily on the results of a consumer survey
         submitted by Anheuser-Busch, once again dismissed Budvar’s action on the ground that Czech consumers do not understand ‘Bud’,
         in connection with beer, as an indication of provenance. 
      
However, the Oberlandesgericht Wien (Higher Regional Court of Vienna) (Austria), by judgment of July 2006, set aside that
         judgment and once again remitted the case to the Handelsgericht Wien (Commercial Court of Vienna) (Austria), on the ground,
         essentially, that that court at first instance had to conduct further proceedings, since it had not allowed an application
         by Budvar for evidence to be taken by obtaining an opinion of a court expert after carrying out a survey of the relevant group
         of the public, which survey was to be limited to the questions: 
      
–        whether Czech consumers associate the designation ‘Bud’ with beer;
–        whether Czech consumers, if there is a connection – be it spontaneous or provided by the expert – between the designation
         ‘Bud’ and beer, understand that designation as an indication that the beer comes from a particular place, a particular region
         or a particular country, and
      
–        if the answer to the preceding question is in the affirmative, with which place, region or country they mentally associate
         the designation ‘Bud’ in connection with beer. 
      
The national court regards it as necessary to ask the Court of Justice afresh for a preliminary ruling.
      
First, as demonstrated by the course of the proceedings after delivery of the judgment in Budĕjovický Budvar, uncertainties remain as regards the scope of that judgment.
      
The question arises first of all whether paragraphs and of that judgment are to be understood as meaning that, in order
         to determine whether a designation can be considered to constitute a simple and indirect indication of provenance likely to
         be compatible with Article EC, all that matters is whether the designation ‘Bud’, according to the factual circumstances
         and perceptions prevailing in the Czech Republic, designates a region or place in that State, or whether it must be ascertained
         whether that designation in conjunction with the product bearing it, in the present case beer, is capable of informing consumers
         that the product bearing it comes from a particular place, a particular region or a particular country, without it being necessary
         for that designation in itself, according to those factual circumstances and perceptions, to designate, as such, a particular
         region, a particular place or a particular State.
      
Next, uncertainty remains as to the method to be used by the national court to determine whether, in the light of the criteria
         which it is to apply, the designation at issue constitutes a simple and indirect indication of provenance. The question arises
         in particular whether a consumer survey is necessary and the degree of assent required.
      
Finally, the national court takes the view that, in the light of the reference at paragraph of the judgment in Budĕjovický Budvar to the factual circumstances in the Czech Republic, the question arises whether specific requirements must be laid down as
         to both the quality and the duration of the use made of the designation ‘Bud’. In particular, the question should be raised
         whether that designation has been used as a geographical indication or as a trade mark. According to the national court, it
         is established in that regard that no undertaking established in the Czech Republic other than Budvar has used the designation
         ‘Bud’ and that it was used as a trade mark and not as an indication of provenance.
      
Secondly, according to the national court, the factual and legal context of the dispute in the main proceedings has undergone
         fundamental changes compared to that which existed when that court made its reference for a preliminary ruling to the Court
         which gave rise to the judgment in Budĕjovický Budvar.
      
In that regard, the national court takes the view that, in the circumstances in the country of origin, namely, the Czech Republic,
         the designation ‘Bud’ is protected as a designation of origin. Following registration of that designation with WIPO under
         the Lisbon Agreement, that protection was extended to other States which are also parties to that Agreement. 
      
The conditions under which that designation of origin is protected correspond to those from which designations of origin,
         as defined in Article 2(1)(a) of Regulation No 510/2006, benefit. It is therefore no longer permissible to take the view that
         the designation ‘Bud’ constitutes a simple and indirect indication of provenance which falls outside the scope of that regulation.
      
That is confirmed by the Act of Accession since that Act protects three indications of provenance concerning beer produced
         in the town of Česke Budĕjovice, namely ‘Budějovické pivo’, ‘Českobudějovické pivo’ and ‘Budějovický měšťanský’, designating
         a strong beer called ‘Bud Super Strong’.
      
In the light of those new circumstances, two questions arise. 
      
In the first place, the question, on which the Court has not yet ruled, arises whether Regulation No 510/is definitive
         in the sense that it precludes protection laid down by national law or a bilateral agreement on designations, such as the
         designation of origin ‘Bud’, registration of which has not been sought in accordance with that regulation but which in principle
         falls within the material scope thereof (the ‘exhaustive’ nature of Regulation No 510/2006). 
      
The national court takes the view that Regulation No 918/2004, since it provides for a transitional period of protection during
         which national protection of designations of origin and geographical indications may be maintained, is plainly exhaustive
         in nature.
      
Nevertheless, if it were found that Regulation No 510/is not exhaustive in nature, the national court takes the view
         that it remains necessary to ascertain whether, in any event, that regulation precludes the extension of that protection to
         other Member States since the view would have to be taken that it is exhaustive in nature as regards cross-border protection
         within the European Union. 
      
In the second place, the question arises whether the protection granted by the Act of Accession to beer produced in the town
         of Česke Budĕjovice bearing the geographical indications ‘Budějovické pivo’, ‘Českobudějovické pivo’ and ‘Budějovický měšťanský’,
         protected under Regulation No 510/2006, is exhaustive in nature. If it is exhaustive in nature, that would mean that the existence
         of that protection precludes the maintenance of another designation such as ‘Bud’, which also designates beer produced in
         that town and which is protected as a designation of origin under national law.
      
Even if it were not accepted that that protection is exhaustive in nature, it should still be ascertained whether the existence
         of the protection of those three designations precludes, at the very least, extension of national protection of another geographical
         indication such as ‘Bud’ to other Member States by way of bilateral agreements concluded between Member States.
      
In those circumstances, since it took the view that resolution of the dispute before it depended on the interpretation of
         Community law, the Handelsgericht Wien decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court for a
         preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      In its judgment [in Budĕjovický Budvar] the Court of Justice defined the requirements for the compatibility with Article EC of the protection of a designation
         as a geographical indication which in the country of origin is the name neither of a place nor of a region, namely that such
         a designation must:
      
–      according to the factual circumstances and
–      perceptions prevailing in the Czech Republic, designate a region or a place in that State,
–      and that its protection must be justified there on the basis of the criteria laid down in Article EC.
Do those requirements mean:
–      that the designation as such must fulfil a specific geographical indication function referring to a particular place or a
         particular region, or does it suffice that the designation is capable, in conjunction with the product bearing it, of informing
         consumers that the product bearing it comes from a particular place or a particular region in the country of origin; 
      
–      that the three conditions are conditions to be examined separately and to be satisfied cumulatively; 
–      that a consumer survey is to be carried out for ascertaining perceptions in the country of origin, and, if so, that a low,
         medium or high degree of recognition and association is required in order for protection to be available; 
      
–      that the designation must actually have been used as a geographical indication by several undertakings, and not just one undertaking,
         in the country of origin and that use as a trade mark by a single undertaking precludes protection? 
      
(2)      Does the fact that a designation has not been notified or its registration applied for either within the six-month period
         provided for in Regulation No 918/or otherwise in terms of Regulation No 510/mean that existing national protection,
         or in any case protection that has been extended bilaterally to another Member State, becomes void if the designation is a
         qualified geographical indication, within the meaning of Regulation No 510/2006, under the national law of the State of origin?
      
(3)      Does the fact that, in the context of the Act of Accession … a new Member State, the protection of several qualified geographical
         indications for a foodstuff has been claimed by that Member State in accordance with Regulation No 510/mean that national
         protection, or in any case protection that has been extended bilaterally to another Member State, for another designation
         for the same product may no longer be maintained, and Regulation No 510/[is exhaustive in its effect] to that extent?’
      
 The questions referred
 The first question
 Admissibility
According to Budvar, it is necessary to ask whether the first question is not hypothetical and therefore inadmissible since,
         in the view of the national court, the basis of that question, that is to say, the fact that the word ‘Bud’ as protected by
         the bilateral instruments at issue constitutes a simple and indirect geographical designation of provenance which is not a
         designation falling within the scope of Regulation No 2081/– which, moreover, is the view already adopted by the Oberster
         Gerichtshof and therefore accepted by the Court as forming the national legal basis on which the first question referred in
         Budĕjovický Budvar was predicated (see paragraphs 41, and of that judgment) – can no longer be accepted. 
      
As has already been stated in paragraphs and of the present judgment, the national court takes the view that its starting
         point must now be the premiss that, in the Czech Republic, the designation ‘Bud’ is protected as a qualified geographical
         indication, that is to say, a designation of origin falling within the scope of Regulation No 510/2006, which scope is identical
         in that regard to that of Regulation No 2081/92, since it is on that basis that the designation was registered with WIPO under
         the Lisbon Agreement and only qualified designations of origin can be so registered.
      
In that regard, it should nevertheless be borne in mind that, according to settled case‑law, questions on the interpretation
         of Community law referred by a national court in the factual and legislative context which that court is responsible for defining,
         and the accuracy of which is not a matter for the Court to determine, enjoy a presumption of relevance. The Court may refuse
         to rule on a question referred by a national court only where it is quite obvious that the interpretation of Community law
         that is sought bears no relation to the actual facts of the main action or its purpose, where the problem is hypothetical,
         or where the Court does not have before it the factual or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions
         submitted to it (see, inter alia, Case C‑333/Régie Networks [2008] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and the case‑law cited).
      
The spirit of cooperation which must prevail in preliminary ruling proceedings requires the national court for its part to
         have regard to the function entrusted to the Court of Justice, which is to contribute to the administration of justice in
         the Member States and not to give opinions on general or hypothetical questions (see, inter alia, Case C‑350/Kattner Stahlbau [2009] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and the case-law cited). 
      
In that regard, the new approach adopted by the national court, namely, that the designation ‘Bud’, as protected by the bilateral
         instruments at issue, must be classified as a designation of origin, an interpretation of national law which forms the basis
         of the second and third questions referred in the present reference for a preliminary ruling, constitutes a premiss which,
         it is true, is significantly different from that which underlay the first question referred in Budĕjovický Budvar and is also reflected in the first question referred in the present reference for a preliminary ruling, that is to say, whether
         what is involved is a simple and indirect indication of geographical provenance.
      
However, the possibility cannot be ruled out that, in reality, those are two distinct and, a priori, possible theories and
         that, at this stage, the national court does not wish definitively to discard that of a simple and indirect indication of
         geographical provenance, with the result that it referred the first question in order to allow for the possibility that it
         might, none the less, accept that theory. 
      
In addition, classification as a designation of origin of the designation ‘Bud’ as protected by the bilateral instruments
         at issue raises a question which concerns only national law and which can be challenged before the higher courts, which, moreover,
         have given decisions in the past, some of which expressly adopted a different classification.
      
In those circumstances, it must be held that it has not been established that the first question is hypothetical in nature.
         Accordingly, the presumption of relevance enjoyed by references for a preliminary ruling has not been rebutted by the doubts
         expressed by Budvar.
      
It follows that the first question referred for a preliminary ruling is admissible.
      
 Substance
By its first question, the national court asks, essentially, for paragraph of the judgment in Budĕjovický Budvar to be clarified.
      
As a preliminary point, it should be noted that the first question concerns the protection of the designation ‘Bud’ as a simple
         and indirect indication of geographical provenance pursuant to the bilateral instruments at issue, which were concluded on
         June and June between the Republic of Austria and the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic. Those bilateral instruments
         were therefore concluded well before the accession of the Czech Republic to the European Union. Accordingly, the main proceedings
         do not involve the situation of bilateral instruments concluded at a time when the States in question were actually Member
         States. 
      
In order to answer that question, it is necessary to place paragraph of the judgment in Budĕjovický Budvar in the context of the Court’s analysis, of which that paragraph forms an integral part. 
      
In that regard, it must be borne in mind that, in paragraph of the judgment in Budĕjovický Budvar, the Court observed that the first question referred in that case dealt with the hypothesis that the name ‘Bud’ constitutes
         a simple and indirect indication of geographical provenance, that is to say, a name in respect of which there is no direct
         link between a specific quality, reputation or other characteristic of the product and its specific geographical origin, so
         that it does not come within the scope of Article 2(2)(b) of Regulation No 2081/(see Case C‑312/Warsteiner Brauerei [2000] ECR I-9187, paragraphs and 44), and which, moreover, is not in itself a geographical name but is at least capable
         of informing the consumer that the product bearing that indication comes from a particular place, region or country (see Case
         C‑3/Exportur [1992] ECR I-5529, paragraph 11).
      
On the basis of that hypothesis, the Court examined whether absolute protection, that is to say, irrespective of whether there
         is any risk of confusion, of a simple and indirect indication of geographical provenance such as that conferred on the designation
         ‘Bud’ by the bilateral instruments at issue can, since it is likely to constitute a restriction on the free movement of goods
         (Budĕjovický Budvar, paragraph 97), be justified under Community law. 
      
In paragraph of the judgment in Budĕjovický Budvar, the Court recalled, in relation to the protection of an indication of source granted under a bilateral agreement of essentially
         the same kind as the one at issue in the main proceedings, that the aim of such an agreement, which is to prevent the producers
         of a contracting State from using the geographical names of another State and thereby taking advantage of the reputation of
         the products of undertakings established in the regions or places indicated by those names, is to ensure fair competition,
         since such an objective may be regarded as falling within the sphere of the protection of industrial and commercial property
         within the meaning of Article EC, provided that the names in question have not, either at the time of the entry into force
         of that agreement or subsequently, become generic in the country of origin (see Exportur, paragraph 37, and Case C‑87/Consorzio per la tutela del formaggio Gorgonzola [1999] ECR I‑1301, paragraph 20).
      
In paragraph of the judgment in Budĕjovický Budvar, the Court held that, as is clear from, in particular, Articles 1, and of the bilateral convention, that objective forms
         the basis of the system of protection established by the bilateral instruments at issue.
      
It was in the light of those considerations that the Court held, in paragraph of the judgment in Budĕjovický Budvar, that, if the findings of the national court show that according to factual circumstances and perceptions prevailing in the
         Czech Republic the name ‘Bud’ designates a region or a place located on the territory of that State and its protection is
         justified there on the basis of the criteria laid down in Article EC, that does not preclude such protection from being
         extended to the territory of a Member State such as, in this case, the Republic of Austria.
      
With regard, first, to the reference at paragraph of that judgment to factual circumstances and perceptions prevailing
         in the Czech Republic, that expression is to be understood in the particular context of the mechanism for protection of the
         designation ‘Bud’ under the bilateral instruments at issue, which rests in the fact that that mechanism, like, for example,
         that at issue in Exportur, is based on an extension of the protection provided in the Member State of origin, in the present case the Czech Republic,
         to the importing Member State, here the Republic of Austria.
      
Such a mechanism is distinguished by the fact, derogating from the principle of territoriality, that the protection conferred
         is determined by the law of the Member State of origin and by factual circumstances and perceptions in that State (Exportur, paragraphs 12, and 38). 
      
Accordingly, whether the designation ‘Bud’ constitutes a simple and indirect indication of geographical provenance must be
         ascertained by the national court in the light of those circumstances and perceptions prevailing in the Czech Republic. 
      
In particular, as the Court noted at paragraph of the judgment in Budĕjovický Budvar, a simple designation of geographical provenance is indirect if it is not in itself a geographical name but is at least capable
         of informing the consumer that the product bearing that indication comes from a particular place, region or country. 
      
It must therefore be found that, in order to determine whether a designation can be considered to constitute a simple and
         indirect indication of geographical provenance, protection of which under the bilateral instruments at issue is capable of
         being justified on the basis of the criteria laid down in Article EC, the national court must ascertain whether, according
         to factual circumstances and perceptions prevailing in the Czech Republic, that designation, even if it is not in itself a
         geographical name, is at least capable of informing the consumer that the product bearing that indication comes from a particular
         place or region of that Member State.
      
However, if such an examination were to show that the designation at issue is not at least capable of evoking the geographical
         provenance of the product, its protection cannot be justified on the grounds of protection of industrial and commercial property
         within the meaning of Article EC and would in principle run counter to Article EC unless it could be justified on another
         basis (Budĕjovický Budvar, paragraphs to 111).
      
Secondly, with regard to the reference at paragraph of the judgment in Budĕjovický Budvar to the fact that protection of the designation ‘Bud’ must be justified on the basis of the criteria laid down in Article
         EC, it follows from the above that the national court must, in addition, ascertain, also in the light of factual circumstances
         and perceptions prevailing in the Czech Republic, whether, as mentioned in paragraph of that judgment, the designation
         at issue in the main proceedings has not, either at the time of the entry into force of the bilateral instruments at issue
         or subsequently, become generic in that Member State, the Court having already held, in paragraphs and of that judgment,
         that the aim of the system of protection introduced by those instruments falls within the sphere of the protection of industrial
         and commercial property within the meaning of Article EC. 
      
Furthermore, it can also be stated that, if, after the national court has reached a view on the matters referred to in paragraphs
         and of the present judgment, it proves to be the case that, according to factual circumstances and perceptions prevailing
         in the Czech Republic, the designation ‘Bud’ at issue in the main proceedings is at least capable of informing the consumer
         that the product bearing that indication comes from a particular place or region of that Member State and that, according
         to those circumstances and perceptions, that designation has not, either at the time of the entry into force of the bilateral
         instruments at issue or subsequently, become generic in that Member State, it would follow that Articles EC and EC do
         not preclude national protection of such a simple and indirect indication of geographical source, nor, moreover, the extension
         of that protection by way of a bilateral agreement to the territory of another Member State (see, to that effect, Budĕjovický Budvar, paragraphs and and the case-law cited).
      
By the third part of the first question, which it is appropriate to consider at this point, the national court asks the Court
         whether, in the context of the assessment to be undertaken by that court, a consumer survey should be carried out for ascertaining
         perceptions prevailing in the Czech Republic and, in addition, asks what degree of recognition and association should be required.
      
In that regard, it is established that, on those points, Community law does not lay down any particular provision.
      
In the absence of Community rules governing the matter, it is for the domestic legal system of each Member State to designate
         the courts and tribunals having jurisdiction and to lay down the detailed procedural rules governing actions for safeguarding
         rights which individuals derive from the direct effects of Community law, provided that such rules are not less favourable
         than those governing similar domestic actions (the principle of equivalence) and that they do not render practically impossible
         or excessively difficult the exercise of rights conferred by Community law (the principle of effectiveness) (see, inter alia,
         Case C‑2/Kempter [2008] ECR I‑411, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Accordingly, in the absence of any Community provision in that regard, it is for the national court to decide, in accordance
         with its own national law, whether a consumer survey should be commissioned for the purpose of clarifying the factual circumstances
         and perceptions prevailing in the Czech Republic in order to ascertain whether the designation ‘Bud’ can be classified as
         a simple and indirect indication of geographical source and has not become generic in that Member State. It is also in the
         light of that national law that the national court, if it finds it necessary to commission a consumer survey, must determine,
         for the purposes of making the necessary assessments, the percentage of consumers that would be sufficiently significant (see,
         by analogy, Case C‑210/GutSpringenheide and Tusky [1998] ECR I‑4657, paragraphs and 36). 
      
Finally, by the fourth part of the first question, which it is appropriate to consider last, the national court asks whether
         it follows from paragraph of the judgment in Budĕjovický Budvar and, in particular, from the reference there to the factual circumstances and perceptions prevailing in the Czech Republic,
         that specific requirements must be laid down as to both the quality and the duration of the use made of a designation, so
         as to mean that that designation must actually have been used as a geographical indication in the Member State of origin by
         a number of undertakings and not, as is the case of the designation at issue in the main proceedings, solely as a trade mark
         by a single undertaking.
      
In that regard, it must be noted that paragraph of the judgment in Budĕjovický Budvar, particularly if put back into the context of the reasoning behind the answer to the first question referred in that case
         (see paragraphs to of the present judgment), does not provide support for the view that Article EC contains specific
         requirements as to both the quality and the duration of the use made of a designation in the Member State of origin for its
         protection to be justified on the basis of the protection of industrial and commercial property within the meaning of that
         article.
      
It is apparent from paragraph 54, read together with paragraphs to 101, of the judgment in Budĕjovický Budvar that Article EC does not preclude the extension conferred by the bilateral instruments at issue of the specific protection
         provided for the designation ‘Bud’ to the territory of another Member State than the Czech Republic since the aim of that
         protection falls within the sphere of the protection of industrial and commercial property within the meaning of that article,
         provided, however, that it be ascertained that, according to the factual circumstances and perceptions prevailing in the Czech
         Republic, that designation can be classified as a simple and indirect indication of geographical provenance and has not become
         generic in that Member State. 
      
Accordingly, Article EC, as interpreted in paragraph of the judgment in Budĕjovický Budvar, does not lay down specific requirements as to the quality and the duration of the use made of a designation in the Member
         State of origin for its protection to be justified in the light of that article. Whether such requirements apply in the context
         of the dispute in the main proceedings must be determined by the national court in the light of the applicable national law,
         in particular the system of protection laid down by the bilateral instruments at issue.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the first question is that it follows from paragraph of the judgment in Budĕjovický Budvar that:
      
–        in order to determine whether a designation can be considered to constitute a simple and indirect indication of geographical
         provenance protection of which under the bilateral instruments at issue is capable of being justified on the basis of the
         criteria laid down in Article EC, the national court must ascertain whether, according to factual circumstances and perceptions
         prevailing in the Czech Republic, that designation, even if it is not in itself a geographical name, is at least capable of
         informing the consumer that the product bearing that indication comes from a particular place or region of that Member State;
      
–        the national court must, in addition, ascertain, once again in the light of factual circumstances and perceptions prevailing
         in the Czech Republic, whether, as stated in paragraph of that judgment, the designation at issue in the main proceedings
         has not, either at the time of the entry into force of the bilateral instruments at issue or subsequently, become generic
         in that Member State, the Court having already held, in paragraphs and of that judgment, that the aim of the system
         of protection introduced by those instruments falls within the sphere of the protection of industrial and commercial property
         within the meaning of Article EC; 
      
–        in the absence of any Community provision in that regard, it is for the national court to decide, in accordance with its own
         national law, whether a consumer survey should be commissioned for the purpose of clarifying factual circumstances and perceptions
         prevailing in the Czech Republic in order to ascertain whether the designation ‘Bud’ at issue in the main proceedings can
         be classified as a simple and indirect indication of geographical provenance and has not become generic in that Member State.
         It is also in the light of that national law that the national court, if it finds it necessary to commission a consumer survey,
         must determine, for the purposes of making the necessary assessments, the percentage of consumers that would be sufficiently
         significant; and
      
–        Article EC does not lay down specific requirements as to the quality and the duration of the use made of a designation
         in the Member State of origin for its protection to be justified in the light of that article. Whether such requirements apply
         in the context of the dispute in the main proceedings must be determined by the national court in the light of the applicable
         national law, in particular the system of protection laid down by the bilateral instruments at issue.
      
 The second question
By its second question, the national court asks, essentially, whether the Community system of protection laid down by Regulation
         No 510/is exhaustive in nature, with the result that that regulation precludes the application of a system of protection
         laid down by agreements between two Member States, such as the bilateral instruments at issue, which confers on a designation,
         recognised under the law of a Member State as constituting a designation of origin, protection in another Member State where
         that protection is actually claimed despite the fact that no application for registration of that designation of origin has
         been made in accordance with that regulation. 
      
 Preliminary observations
As a preliminary point, it should be noted, first, as has been stated in paragraphs and of the present judgment, that,
         according to the national court, the present question concerns the theory that, in the Czech Republic, the designation ‘Bud’
         is protected as a designation of origin and not as a simple indication of geographical provenance.
      
Secondly, since the Court delivered its judgment in Budĕjovický Budvar, the Czech Republic has acceded to the European Union.
      
It follows that, since the bilateral instruments at issue now concern two Member States, their provisions cannot apply in
         the relations between those States if they are found to be contrary to the rules of the Treaty, in particular the rules on
         the free movement of goods (see, to that effect, Case C‑469/Ravil [2003] ECR I‑5053, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In addition, it must be pointed out that Article EC does not apply to such agreements since no third country is party
         to them (Case 235/Matteucci [1988] ECR 5589, paragraph 21).
      
Thirdly, it must be recalled that, according to the national court, it is as an appellation of origin that that designation
         has been registered and remains protected under the Lisbon Agreement. 
      
In that regard, unlike the Czech Republic, the Republic of Austria is not a party to that Agreement, with the result that
         the protection provided under that Agreement cannot be claimed in that Member State. 
      
Accordingly, the question whether the fact that Regulation No 510/is exhaustive in nature precludes protection of the
         designation at issue in the main proceedings under the Lisbon Agreement does not arise in the main proceedings.
      
Since the definition of the concept of appellation of origin laid down in Article 2(1) of the Lisbon Agreement is essentially
         identical to that of a designation of origin in Article 2(1)(a) of Regulation No 510/2006, in the view of the national court
         it follows that the designation ‘Bud’ constitutes a designation of origin within the meaning of that regulation.
      
It is common ground that, to date, no application for registration of that designation has been made under Regulation No 510/2006.
         Nor is it disputed that no application for registration of that designation has been sent to the Commission pursuant to Regulation
         No 2081/under the transitional arrangements introduced by Regulation No 918/concerning designations of origin and
         geographical indications existing in the ten States which became Member States of the European Union at the time of its enlargement
         in 2004.
      
Accordingly, the second question is based on the premiss that the protection of the designation ‘Bud’ claimed in the Republic
         of Austria by Budvar on the basis of the bilateral instruments at issue is based on the extension to that Member State of
         the protection of that designation as an existing appellation of origin in the Czech Republic, a designation which also corresponds
         to the definition of a designation of origin within the meaning of Regulation No 510/2006.
      
The question therefore arises more precisely whether Regulation No 510/is exhaustive in nature so that it precludes such
         national protection and, consequently, also precludes extension of that protection under the bilateral instruments at issue
         to the territory of another Member State.
      
 Answer of the Court
In accordance with settled case-law, the aim of Regulation No 2081/is to ensure uniform protection within the Community
         of the geographical designations which it covers; it introduced a requirement of Community registration in respect of those
         designations so that they could enjoy protection in every Member State (see, to that effect, inter alia, Budĕjovický Budvar, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
That aim is apparent from the seventh recital in the preamble to Regulation No 2081/(Joined Cases C‑129/and C‑130/Chiciak and Fol [1998] ECR I‑3315, paragraphs and 26), which is essentially identical to the sixth recital in the preamble to Regulation
         No 510/2006, which states: 
      
‘Provision should be made for a Community approach to designations of origin and geographical indications. A framework of
         Community rules on a system of protection permits the development of geographical indications and designations of origin since,
         by providing a more uniform approach, such a framework ensures fair competition between the producers of products bearing
         such indications and enhances the credibility of the products in the consumer’s eyes.’
      
The Court has also held that Community legislation displays a general tendency to enhance the quality of products within the
         framework of the common agricultural policy, in order to promote the reputation of those products through inter alia the use
         of designations of origin which enjoy special protection. In respect of agricultural products, that tendency manifested itself,
         in particular, in the adoption of Regulation No 2081/92, which, according to its preamble, is intended, inter alia, to meet
         consumers’ expectations as regards products of quality and an identifiable geographical origin and to enable producers, in
         conditions of fair competition, to secure higher incomes in return for a genuine effort to improve quality (see, to that effect,
         Ravil, paragraph 48, and Case C‑108/Consorzio del Prosciutto di Parma and Salumficio S. Rita [2003] ECR I‑5121, paragraph 63).
      
Designations of origin fall within the scope of industrial and commercial property rights. The applicable rules protect those
         entitled to use them against improper use of those designations by third parties seeking to profit from the reputation which
         they have acquired. They are intended to guarantee that the product bearing them comes from a specified geographical area
         and displays certain particular characteristics. They may enjoy a high reputation amongst consumers and constitute for producers
         who fulfil the conditions for using them an essential means of attracting custom. The reputation of designations of origin
         depends on their image in the minds of consumers. That image in turn depends essentially on particular characteristics and
         more generally on the quality of the product. It is on the latter, ultimately, that the product’s reputation is based. For
         consumers, the link between the reputation of the producers and the quality of the products also depends on their being assured
         that products sold under the designation of origin are authentic (Ravil, paragraph 49, and Consorzio del Prosciutto di Parma and Salumficio S. Rita, paragraph 64). 
      
It follows from this that Regulation No 510/2006, adopted on the basis of Article EC, constitutes an instrument of the
         common agricultural policy essentially intended to assure consumers that agricultural products bearing a geographical indication
         registered under that regulation have, because of their provenance from a particular geographical area, certain specific characteristics
         and, accordingly, offer a guarantee of quality due to their geographical provenance, with the aim of enabling agricultural
         operators to secure higher incomes in return for a genuine effort to improve quality and of preventing improper use of those
         designations by third parties seeking to profit from the reputation which those products have acquired by their quality. 
      
If the Member States were permitted to allow their producers to use, within their national territories, one of the indications
         or symbols which are reserved, under Article of Regulation No 510/2006, for designations registered under that regulation,
         on the basis of a national right which could meet less strict requirements than those laid down in that regulation for the
         products in question, the risk is that that assurance of quality, which constitutes the essential function of rights conferred
         pursuant to Regulation No 510/2006, could not be guaranteed. That also carries the risk, in the internal market, of jeopardising
         the aim of fair competition between producers of products bearing those indications or symbols and, in particular, would be
         liable to harm rights which ought to be reserved for producers who have made a genuine effort to improve quality in order
         to be able to use a geographical indication registered under that regulation. 
      
That risk of damage to the central aim of ensuring the quality of the agricultural products concerned is all the more important
         since, as the Advocate General observed in point of his Opinion, unlike in the case of trade marks, no Community measure
         has been adopted in tandem, harmonising any national systems. 
      
The conclusion must be drawn that the aim of Regulation No 510/is not to establish, alongside national rules which may
         continue to exist, an additional system of protection for qualified geographical indications, like, for example, that introduced
         by Council Regulation (EC) No 40/of December on the Community trade mark (OJ L 11, p. 1), but to provide a
         uniform and exhaustive system of protection for such indications.
      
A number of characteristics of the system of protection as laid down by Regulations No 2081/and No 510/also support
         the view that that system is exhaustive in nature. 
      
First, unlike other Community systems for the protection of industrial and commercial property rights, such as those of the
         Community trade mark under Regulation No 40/or plant variety rights under Council Regulation (EC) No 2100/of July
         on Community plant variety rights (OJ L 227, p. 1), the registration procedure under Regulations No 2081/and
         No 510/is based on powers shared between the Member State concerned and the Commission, since the decision to register
         a designation may be taken by the Commission only if the Member State concerned has submitted to it an application for that
         purpose and such an application may be made only if the Member State has checked that it is justified (Case C‑269/Carl Kühne and Others [2001] ECR I‑9517, paragraph 53).
      
The national registration procedures are therefore incorporated in the Community decision-making procedure and constitute
         an essential part thereof. They cannot exist outside the Community system of protection. 
      
With regard to the Community registration procedure, it is also indicative that Article 5(6) of Regulation No 510/2006, a
         provision essentially identical to Article 5(5) of Regulation No 2081/as inserted in that regulation by Regulation No 535/97,
         provides that, on its sole responsibility, a Member State may grant transitional national protection until a decision on the
         application for registration is adopted. 
      
In that regard, the Court has held, furthermore, that it follows from that provision that, under the system introduced by
         Regulation No 2081/92, where Member States have the power to adopt decisions, even of a provisional nature, which derogate
         from the provisions of the regulation, that power is derived from express rules (Chiciak and Fol, paragraph 32).
      
As the Advocate General observed in point of his Opinion, a provision of that kind would be meaningless if the Member
         States were able in any event to retain their own systems of designations of origin and geographical indications within the
         meaning of Regulations No 2081/and No 510/and have them coexist with those regulations.
      
Secondly, the fact that the system of protection laid down in Regulations No 2081/and No 510/is exhaustive in nature
         is also evidenced by the transitional arrangements for existing national designations such as the Czech designation ‘Bud’
         at issue in the main proceedings.
      
Thus, Article of Regulation No 2081/introduced a so-called ‘simplified’ registration procedure for national designations
         legally protected in the Member State which sought their registration or, in Member States where there was no system of protection,
         validated through use (Case C‑66/Bigi [2002] ECR I‑5917, paragraph 28).
      
It was provided that, if their registration was sought within six months, their national protection could, on certain conditions,
         be maintained for a transitional period of five years in accordance with Article 13(2) of that regulation, which period was
         subsequently extended by an additional period of five years by Regulation No 535/97.
      
Since that specific system for the transitional protection of existing national designations had been repealed by Article 1(15)
         of Regulation No 692/2003, the Commission, by Regulation No 918/2004, laid down transitional provisions regarding the protection
         of designations of origin and geographical indications existing in the States which became Member States of the European
         Union at the time of its enlargement, based on those laid down for the old Member States. 
      
Those provisions are especially relevant to the present case since, according to the national court, the designation ‘Bud’
         existed at that time as a geographical designation in the Czech Republic. 
      
Regulation No 918/provided that the national protection of geographical indications and designations of origin within
         the meaning of Regulation (EEC) No 2081/existing in the new Member States on April could be maintained for months. However, as the simplified procedure no longer existed, that regulation provided that where an application for registration
         had been sent within that six-month period, that national protection could be maintained until the Commission had adopted
         a decision in accordance with Article of Regulation No 2081/92.
      
Consequently, that regulation confirms, in respect of the new Member States, what was already the case for the old Member
         States, that is to say, that the national protection of existing qualified geographical indications is permitted only if the
         conditions in the rules of the transitional legislation specifically laid down in respect of such indications are met, including
         the condition that an application for registration be submitted within six months, which the Czech authorities neglected to
         do with regard to the designation ‘Bud’ at issue in the main proceedings.
      
Those particular systems and, especially, the express authorisation granted, on certain conditions, to the Member States to
         maintain, on a transitional basis, the national protection of existing qualified geographical indications would be difficult
         to understand if the Community system of protection of such indications were not exhaustive in nature, implying that the Member
         States retained in any event an unlimited capacity to maintain such national rights.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the second question is that the Community system of protection laid down by Regulation
         No 510/is exhaustive in nature, with the result that that regulation precludes the application of a system of protection
         laid down by agreements between two Member States, such as the bilateral instruments at issue, which confers on a designation,
         recognised under the law of a Member State as constituting a designation of origin, protection in another Member State where
         that protection is actually claimed despite the fact that no application for registration of that designation of origin has
         been made in accordance with that regulation. 
      
Having regard to that answer to the second question, there is no longer any need to answer the third question.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      It follows from paragraph of the judgment of November in Case C‑216/Budĕjovický Budvar that:
–        in order to determine whether a designation can be considered to constitute a simple and indirect indication of geographical
            provenance, protection of which under the bilateral instruments at issue is capable of being justified on the basis of the
            criteria laid down in Article EC, the national court must ascertain whether, according to factual circumstances and perceptions
            prevailing in the Czech Republic, that designation, even if it is not in itself a geographical name, is at least capable of
            informing the consumer that the product bearing that indication comes from a particular place or region of that Member State;
–        the national court must, in addition, ascertain, once again in the light of factual circumstances and perceptions prevailing
            in the Czech Republic, whether, as stated in paragraph of that judgment, the designation at issue in the main proceedings
            has not, either at the time of the entry into force of the bilateral instruments at issue in the main proceedings or subsequently,
            become generic in that Member State, the Court of Justice of the European Communities having already held, in paragraphs and of that judgment, that the aim of the system of protection introduced by those instruments falls within the sphere
            of the protection of industrial and commercial property within the meaning of Article EC; 
–        in the absence of any Community provision in that regard, it is for the national court to decide, in accordance with its own
            national law, whether a consumer survey should be commissioned for the purpose of clarifying the factual circumstances and
            perceptions prevailing in the Czech Republic in order to ascertain whether the designation ‘Bud’ at issue in the main proceedings
            can be classified as a simple and indirect indication of geographical provenance and has not become generic in that Member
            State. It is also in the light of that national law that the national court, if it finds it necessary to commission a consumer
            survey, must determine, for the purposes of making the necessary assessments, the percentage of consumers that would be sufficiently
            significant; and
–        Article EC does not lay down specific requirements as to the quality and the duration of the use made of a designation
            in the Member State of origin for its protection to be justified in the light of that article. Whether such requirements apply
            in the context of the dispute in the main proceedings must be determined by the national court in the light of the applicable
            national law, in particular the system of protection laid down by the bilateral instruments at issue in the main proceedings.
2.      The Community system of protection laid down by Council Regulation (EC) No 510/of March on the protection of
            geographical indications and designations of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs is exhaustive in nature, with
            the result that that regulation precludes the application of a system of protection laid down by agreements between two Member
            States, such as the bilateral instruments at issue in the main proceedings, which confers on a designation, which is recognised
            under the law of a Member State as constituting a designation of origin, protection in another Member State where that protection
            is actually claimed, despite the fact that no application for registration of that designation of origin has been made in
            accordance with that regulation.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 