
Avis juridique important
|
61986JJudgment of the Court (Fourth Chamber) of December 1990.  -  J. Cholay and société "Bizon's Club" v Société des auteurs, compositeurs et éditeurs de musique (SACEM).  -  Reference for a preliminary ruling: Cour d'appel de Paris - France.  -  Copyright management - Disparities between national laws.  -  Case C-270/86.  
European Court reports Page I-Pub.RJ Page Pub somm 
Summary
Parties
Operative part
Keywords
++++Free movement of goods - Industrial and commercial property - Copyright - National legislation permitting the charging, on the public use of imported sound recordings, in addition to the performance royalty, of a supplementary reproduction royalty not provided for in the legislation of the Member State of origin - Permissibility  ( EEC Treaty, Arts and )  
Summary
Articles and of the EEC Treaty, on a true construction, do not preclude the application of national legislation allowing a national copyright-management society to charge a royalty called a "supplementary mechanical reproduction fee", in addition to a performance royalty, on the public performance of sound recordings, even where such a supplementary fee is not provided for in the Member State where those sound recordings were lawfully placed on the market .  ( In this judgment the Court answers a question on Articles and of the Treaty in the same terms as in Case 402/Basset v Sacem [1987] ECR 1747, in which substantially the same question was referred to it .)  
Parties
In Case C-270/86,  REFERENCE to the Court pursuant to Article of the EEC Treaty by the Cour d' appel, Paris, for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending before that court between  J . Cholay,  Société "Bizon' s Club"  and  Société des auteurs, compositeurs et éditeurs de musique ( Sacem ),  on the interpretation of Articles and of the said Treaty,  THE COURT ( Fourth Chamber ),  composed of : M . Díez de Velasco, President of Chamber, C . N . Kakouris and P . J . G . Kapteyn, Judges,  Advocate General : C . O . Lenz  Registrar : J . A . Pompe, Deputy Registrar,  ( The grounds of the judgment are not reproduced .)  in answer to the question submitted to it by the Cour d' appel, Paris, by judgment of April 1986, as interpreted by judgment of January 1987, hereby rules :  
Operative part
Articles and of the EEC Treaty, on a true construction, do not preclude the application of national legislation allowing a national copyright-management society to charge a royalty called a "supplementary mechanical reproduction fee", in addition to a performance royalty, on the public performance of sound recordings, even where such a supplementary fee is not provided for in the Member State where those sound recordings were lawfully placed on the market . 
Top  
 