
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-135/Commission of the European CommunitiesvFederal Republic of Germany
«(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 98/56/EC – Marketing of propagating material of ornamental plants – Failure to transpose within the prescribed period – Difficulties of interpretation)»
Opinion of Advocate General Geelhoed delivered on November I - Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), March I - Summary of the Judgment
Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Pre-litigation procedure – Reasoned opinion – Contents – Commission's failure to adopt a position on the alleged difficulties of interpretation of a directive – Member State not permitted to rely on those difficulties to defer transposition of that directive(Art. EC)In the context of an action for failure to implement a directive, it is, in principle, for the Commission to set out, in its
         reasoned opinion, its assessment of the observations of the Member State in question set out in its response to the letter
         of formal notice.However, in failing to adopt a position on the alleged difficulties of interpretation surrounding a term in a provision of
         the directive which has not been transposed by that State and, in any event, failing to define that term in the course of
         the pre-litigation procedure, the Commission did not engender any uncertainty in that State as to the extent of its obligations
         to transpose and therefore did not prevent it from putting an end to the alleged infringement.First, the Commission is not empowered to determine conclusively, by reasoned opinions formulated pursuant to Article EC or other statements of its position in the course of such proceedings, the rights and duties of a Member State or to afford
         that State guarantees concerning the compatibility of a given line of conduct with Community law. Second, a Member State cannot
         rely on difficulties in interpreting a directive in order to delay transposing it until after the prescribed period has expired.see paras 22-JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)March (1)
((Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 98/56/EC – Marketing of propagating material of ornamental plants – Failure to transpose within the prescribed period – Difficulties of interpretation))
In Case C-135/01, 
            
 Commission of the European Communities,   represented by G. Braun, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, 
v
 Federal Republic of Germany,  represented by W.-D. Plessing and B. Muttelsee-Schön, acting as Agents,
            
defendant, 
APPLICATION for a declaration that, by failing within the prescribed period to adopt all the laws, regulations and administrative
            measures necessary in order to transpose into national law Council Directive 98/56/EC of July on the marketing of
            propagating material of ornamental plants (OJ L 226, p. 16), the Federal Republic of Germany has failed to fulfil its
            obligations under the EC Treaty and that directive,
            
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
composed of: J.-P. Puissochet, President of the Chamber, C. Gulmann and V. Skouris (Rapporteur), F. Macken and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on November 2002, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on March 2001, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         under Article EC for a declaration that, by failing within the prescribed period to adopt all the laws, regulations and
         administrative measures necessary to transpose into national law Council Directive 98/56/EC of July on the marketing
         of propagating material of ornamental plants (OJ L 226, p. 16,  
         the directive), the Federal Republic of Germany has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EC Treaty and that directive. 
         
The law
            
The purpose of the directive is,  
          inter alia , to harmonise the conditions of the quality and health of material used for propagating ornamental plants. 
         
            
Article 2(1) of the directive is worded as follows: Propagating material: plant material intended for:
         
─
the propagation of ornamental plants, or 
         
─
the production of ornamental plants; however, in the case of production from complete plants, this definition applies only
            to the extent that the resulting ornamental plant is intended for further marketing. 
         
Propagation: reproduction by vegetative or other means.
         
            
Article 19(1) of the directive provides that the Member States are to bring into force the laws, regulations or administrative
         provisions necessary to comply with the directive on July and are forthwith to inform the Commission thereof. 
         The pre-litigation procedure
            
As it had not received any notification of the transposition of the directive into German law, the Commission, by letter of
         November 1999, initiated the procedure under Article EC, putting the Federal Republic of Germany on formal notice to
         submit its observations within a period of two months. 
         
            
The Federal Republic of Germany replied to the letter of formal notice on January 2000. It stated, essentially, that the
         measures transposing the directive were being prepared and, as justification for the delay in that process, it referred to
         difficulties arising from the definition of the term  
         propagating material. 
         
            
The Commission issued a reasoned opinion on July in which it stated that the Federal Republic of Germany had not adopted
         the measures necessary to transpose the directive by July 1999. It requested that Member State to adopt within two months
         from the notification thereof the measures necessary to comply with that opinion. 
         
            
In its response to the reasoned opinion, sent to the Commission by letter of October 2000, the Federal Republic of Germany
         again referred to the difficulties of transposition arising, in its view, from the definition of  
         propagating material, and, at the same time, pointing out that the procedure to amend the national law was in train. 
         
            
In a letter to the Commission dated December 2000, the Federal Republic of Germany announced that the directive would be
         transposed shortly. 
         
            
The Commission received no further information from the German Government enabling it to conclude that the Federal Republic
         of Germany had complied in full with its obligation to transpose the directive. 
         
            
In those circumstances, the Commission brought the present action. 
         AdmissibilityArguments of the parties
         
            
In its defence, the Federal Republic of Germany contends that the action is inadmissible on account of the irregular nature
         of the pre-litigation procedure. 
         
            
In particular, in its response to the letter of formal notice, the German Government stated that the difficulties in transposing
         the directive arose from the term  
         propagating material, which defined the scope of application of the directive but which not all the Member States had interpreted in the same
         way. The Federal Republic of Germany states, first, that it is not clear whether the definition in Article 2(1) of the directive
         relates to the production of complete plants or to production from complete plants. The German language version of that provision
         supports the first hypothesis by its use of the word  
         von and the English language version the second by its use of the word  
         from. Second, the directive does not specify what is meant by  
         complete plants nor the extent to which, in light of the definition of  
         propagating material in the directive, the various stages of marketing the categories of products (for example, flower bulbs, herbaceous plants,
         trees and ornamental shrubs) are covered by the scheme in question. The lack of a uniform Community interpretation of the
         term  
         propagating material persisted even after the meeting of the Standing Committee for Propagating Material of Ornamental Plants, established under
         Article of the directive, which took place on November (
         the meeting of November 1999). 
         
            
However, at no stage of the pre-litigation procedure did the Commission mention those difficulties of interpretation, even
         though it was required to respond to the objections raised by the Federal Republic of Germany. The Federal Republic of Germany
         claims that that failure and the fact that the Commission has not defined the Community term  
         propagating material constitute a failure to state reasons which vitiates the pre-litigation procedure in that, by not sufficiently clarifying
         the content of the obligations to be transposed, the Commission did not give the Federal Republic of Germany the opportunity
         to comply with its obligations under Community law. Therefore, the action is inadmissible. 
         
            
In its reply, the Commission states that, contrary to the contention of the Federal Republic of Germany, the term  
         propagating material does not give rise to any doubt in the other Member States such as to prevent the directive from being transposed, at least
         since the meeting of November at which consensus was reached as to the term  
         complete plant and the definition of  
         propagating material.  
         
            
Indeed, the English (
         production from complete plants) and French (
         productions effectuées à partir de plantes complètes) language versions of Article 2(1) of the directive leave no doubt as to the meaning to be attached to the, admittedly ambiguous,
         wording (
         bei Erzeugung von vollständigen (fertigen) Pflanzen) of the German version. 
         
            
The difficulties which allegedly continue to prevent transposition of the directive into German law apparently concern not
         so much the meaning to be ascribed to a definition which is now clear but rather the interpretation of the scope of the German
         measure which does not substantively match that definition and the consensus reached by the Member States. In not entering
         into that internal debate any more than was necessary, the Commission did not err in the pre-litigation procedure. 
         
            
In its rejoinder, the Federal Republic of Germany persisted in its plea of inadmissibility raised in its defence and challenges
         the Commission's assertions as to the outcome of the meeting of November 1999. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
It is to be observed that the purpose of the pre-litigation procedure laid down in Article EC is to give the Member State
         the opportunity to comply with its obligations under Community law or to avail itself of its right to defend itself against
         the complaints made by the Commission (Case 293/Commission  v  
          Belgium  [1988] ECR 305, paragraph 13; order in Case C-266/Commission  v  
          Spain  [1995] ECR I-1975, paragraph 16, and Case C-1/Commission  v  
          France  [2001] ECR I-9989, paragraph 53). 
         
            
The proper conduct of the pre-litigation procedure constitutes an essential guarantee required by the Treaty not only in order
         to protect the rights of the Member State concerned, but also so as to ensure that any contentious procedure will have a clearly
         defined dispute as its subject-matter (
          Commission  v  
          France , cited above at paragraph 19, paragraph 53).  
         
            
Thus, the pre-litigation procedure pursues the following three objectives: to allow the Member State to put an end to any
         infringement, to enable it to exercise its rights of defence and to define the subject-matter of the dispute with a view to
         bringing an action before the Court (Case C-362/Commission  v  
          Ireland  [2002] ECR I-0000, paragraph 18).  
         
            
In light of the foregoing, it is, in principle, for the Commission to set out, in its reasoned opinion, its assessment of
         the Member State's observations set out in its response to the letter of formal notice (see  
          Commission  v  
          Ireland , cited above at paragraph 21, paragraph 19). 
         
            
However, in the present case, in failing to adopt a position on the alleged difficulties surrounding the term  
         propagating material and, in any event, failing to define that term in the course of the pre-litigation procedure, contrary to the Federal Republic
         of Germany's allegation, the Commission did not engender any uncertainty in that Member State as to the extent of its obligations
         and therefore did not prevent it from putting an end to the alleged infringement.  
         
            
First, the Commission is not empowered to determine conclusively, by reasoned opinions formulated pursuant to Article EC or other statements of its position in the course of such proceedings, the rights and duties of a Member State or to afford
         that State guarantees concerning the compatibility of a given line of conduct with Community law (see, to that effect, Joined
         Cases 142/and 143/Essevi and Salengo  [1981] ECR 1413, paragraph 16). 
         
            
Second, a Member State cannot rely on difficulties in interpreting a directive in order to delay transposing it until after
         the prescribed period has expired (Case C-316/Commission  v  
          Germany  [2001] ECR I-2037, paragraph 9). 
         
            
Nor does it appear that, by its stance during the pre-litigation procedure, the Commission infringed the rights of defence
         of the Federal Republic of Germany or that the dispute brought before the Court at the end of that procedure was deprived
         of any clearly defined purpose. 
         
            
It follows that the plea of inadmissibility raised by the Federal Republic of Germany must be rejected. 
         Failure to fulfil obligationsArguments of the parties
         
            
The Commission submits that the Federal Republic of Germany has failed to fulfil its obligations under Community law by not
         adopting within the prescribed period the measures necessary to comply with the directive. It points out that that Member
         State does not dispute the need to adopt national measures in order to transpose that directive in full. 
         
            
The Federal Republic of Germany acknowledges that it has not transposed the directive within the prescribed period. It submits,
         however, that the difficulties and delays which arose in the transposition are attributable in part to the Commission in that
         it failed to provide a definition of  
         propagating material enabling a uniform application of Community law. That constitutes an infringement of the principle of sincere cooperation
         under Article EC. In light of that infringement the action is unfounded. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
As is apparent from paragraphs to of the present judgment, the Commission has not failed to fulfil its obligations under
         Community law in not defining, in the pre-litigation procedure, the term  
         propagating material in Article 2(1) of the directive. Therefore, its conduct cannot be regarded as contrary to the principle of sincere cooperation.
         
         
            
In those circumstances, and given that the directive was not transposed within the prescribed period, the Commission's action
         is well founded.  
         
            
Therefore, by failing within the prescribed period to adopt all the laws, regulations and administrative measures necessary
         in order to transpose into national law the directive, the Federal Republic of Germany has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under that directive. 
         
Costs
            
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party's pleadings. Since the Commission has asked for costs against the Federal Republic of
         Germany, which has failed in its submissions, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs.  
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
hereby:  
         
1.
 Declares that, by failing within the prescribed period to adopt all the laws, regulations and administrative measures necessary
            to transpose into national law Council Directive 98/56/EC of July on the marketing of propagating material of ornamental
            plants, the Federal Republic of Germany has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive; 
            
2.
 Orders the Federal Republic of Germany to pay the costs.
            
Puissochet
Gulmann 
Skouris 
Macken
Cunha Rodrigues 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on March 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
J.-P. Puissochet  
Registrar
President of the Sixth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: German.
Top  
 