
Avis juridique important
|
61992JJudgment of the Court of January 1994.  -  Commission of the European Communities v Ireland.  -  Failure by a Member State to fulfil its obligations - Directives 88/407/EEC and 90/120/EEC on deep-frozen semen of animals of the bovine species - Directive 88/658/EEC on meat products - Failure to transpose.  -  Case C-381/92.  
European Court reports Page I-Summary
Parties
Grounds
Decision on costs
Operative part
Keywords
++++Measures adopted by the Community institutions - Directives - Implementation by the Member States - Mere administrative practices inadequate  (EEC Treaty, Art. 189, third para.)  
Summary
Mere administrative practices, which by their nature are alterable at will by the authorities and are not given the appropriate publicity, cannot be regarded as constituting the proper fulfilment of Member States' obligations under a directive in accordance with Article of the Treaty. 
Parties
In Case C-381/92,  Commission of the European Communities, represented by Christopher Docksey, a member of its Legal Service, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of Georgios Kremlis, a member of its Legal Service, Wagner Centre, Kirchberg,  applicant,  v  Ireland, represented by Louis J. Dockery, Chief State Solicitor, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Irish Embassy, Route d' Arlon,  defendant,  APPLICATION for a declaration that by failing to bring into force within the time permitted the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Council Directive 88/407/EEC of June laying down the animal health requirements applicable to intra-Community trade in and imports of deep-frozen semen of domestic animals of the bovine species (Official Journal L 194, p. 10), Council Directive 90/120/EEC of March amending Council Directive 88/407/EEC (Official Journal L 71, p. 37) and Council Directive 88/658/EEC of December amending Directive 77/99/EEC on health problems affecting intra-Community trade in meat products (Official Journal L 382, p. 15), Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty,  THE COURT,  composed of: O. Due, President, G.F. Mancini, J.C. Moitinho de Almeida, D.A.O. Edward (Rapporteur), (Presidents of Chambers), R. Joliet, F.A. Schockweiler, G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias, F. Grévisse and M. Zuleeg, Judges,  Advocate General: G. Tesauro,  Registrar: J.-G. Giraud,  having regard to the Report of the Judge-Rapporteur,  after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on November 1993,  gives the following  Judgment  
Grounds
By an application lodged at the Court Registry on October the Commission of the European Communities brought an action under Article of the EEC Treaty for a declaration that by failing to bring into force within the time permitted the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Council Directive 88/407/EEC of June laying down the animal health requirements applicable to intra-Community trade in and imports of deep-frozen semen of domestic animals of the bovine species (Official Journal L 194, p. 10), Council Directive 90/120/EEC of March amending Council Directive 88/407/EEC (Official Journal L 71, p. 37) and Council Directive 88/658/EEC of December amending Directive 77/99/EEC on health problems affecting intra-Community trade in meat products (Official Journal L 382, p. 15), Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty.  As regards Directives 88/and 90/120, which should have been transposed by January and April respectively, the Irish Government explained its delay in transposing them by referring to the complexity of the legislative amendments required. It maintained that steps were being taken to bring about their adoption as soon as possible and that in any case they were already being applied in practice, imports into Ireland of deep-frozen bovine semen being already made subject to the requirements laid down in the directives.  On September the Irish Government informed the Commission that it had adopted the European Communities (Trade in Bovine Breeding Animals, their Semen, Ova and Embryos) Regulations (S.I. No of 1993), which transposes those directives into Irish law.  By a letter received at the Court on November 1993, after the Advocate General had delivered his Opinion, the Commission discontinued its action with regard to Directives 88/and 90/120, but stated that it would pursue the action with regard to Directive 88/658.  It is therefore not necessary to consider the claims regarding Directives 88/and 90/120.  As regards Directive 88/658, which was to have been transposed by July at the latest, and by January in the case of some provisions, the Irish Government maintains that it has been transposed into national law by means of administrative action, in particular by means of instructions given to the relevant officials, and which it had notified to the Commission on June 1991. It adds that in any case the directive has ceased to be applicable, having been replaced by Council Directive 92/5/EEC of February amending and updating Directive 77/99/EEC on health problems affecting intra-Community trade in meat products and amending Directive 64/433/EEC (Official Journal L 57, p. 1), which came into force on January 1993. In those circumstances it considers that it can no longer be charged with having failed to fulfil any of its obligations.  The Court observes in the first place that mere administrative practices, which by their nature are alterable at will by the authorities and are not given the appropriate publicity, cannot be regarded as constituting the proper fulfilment of a Member State' s obligations under the Treaty (Case C-236/Commission v Ireland [1992] ECR I-5933, paragraph of the judgment).  In the second place, it is to be noted that Directive 92/has not removed the obligations imposed by Directive 88/but has simply updated them. That being so, although Directive 88/ceased to have effect on January 1993, only due transposition of Directive 92/would have enabled the Court to conclude that Ireland had remedied the failure with which it is charged in these proceedings. However, Ireland does not claim to have transposed the latter directive.  Consequently, Ireland must be held to have failed to fulfil its obligations in the terms set out in the Commission' s submissions regarding Directive 88/658.  
Decision on costs
Costs  Under the first paragraph of Article 69(5) of the Rules of Procedure a party who discontinues proceedings shall be ordered to pay the costs unless the conduct of the other party justifies ordering the latter to pay them. Since Ireland did not transpose Directives 88/and 90/until after the commencement of this action, it is appropriate to order it to pay the costs relating thereto. Since it has been unsuccessful in the remainder of the action, it must also bear the relevant costs pursuant to Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure.  
Operative part
On those grounds,  THE COURT  hereby:  1. Declares that by failing to bring into force within the time permitted the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Council Directive 88/658/EEC of December amending Directive 77/99/EEC on health problems affecting intra-Community trade in meat products Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty;  2. Orders Ireland to pay the costs.  
Top  
 