
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-165/Betriebsrat der Vertretung der Europäischen Kommission in ÖsterreichvEuropean Communities, Commission of the European Communities(Reference for a preliminary ruling fromthe Oberster Gerichtshof (Austria))
         
«(Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Communities – Conditions of Employment of Other Servants – Local staff – Representation of the Commission in Austria – Applicability of national legislation concerning the representation of workers and defence of their interests)»
Opinion of Advocate General Geelhoed delivered on April I - Judgment of the Court, July I - Summary of the Judgment
Officials – Conditions of Employment of Other Servants – Local staff – Applicability of national legislation of the place of employment concerning the representation of workers and defence of their
                     interests – Not applicable
                  (Staff Regulations, Art. 9; Annex II; Conditions of Employment of Other Servants, Arts and 79)The arrangements for the representation and defence of the interests of the local staff of a Community institution do not
         form part of the  
         conditions of employment within the meaning of Article of the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the European Communities, and are governed
         exhaustively by Article of the Staff Regulations in conjunction with Annex II thereto and Article of the Conditions of
         Employment.  Consequently, the reference in Article of the Conditions of Employment to current rules and practice in the
         place where local staff are to perform their duties cannot include the national legislation applicable to that place concerning
         the participation of workers in the undertaking which employs them.Article of and Annex II to the Staff Regulations and Article of the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants therefore
         preclude the application to the local staff employed by the representation of the Commission in Austria of the provisions
         of Austrian legislation on labour relations in establishments which provide for a works council to be set up with the function
         of representing the staff and defending their interests.see paras 46-47, 52, operative part
      
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURTJuly (1)
((Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Communities – Conditions of Employment of Other Servants – Local staff – Representation of the Commission in Austria – Applicability of national legislation concerning the representation of workers and defence of their interests))
In Case C-165/01, 
            REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Oberster Gerichtshof (Austria) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings
            pending before that court between 
            
 Betriebsrat der Vertretung der Europäischen Kommission in Österreich
and
 European Communities, Commission of the European Communities,
on the interpretation of Article of and Annex II to the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Communities and Article
            of the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the European Communities,
THE COURT,,
composed of: G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias, President, M. Wathelet, R. Schintgen (Rapporteur) and C.W.A. Timmermans (Presidents of Chambers), C. Gulmann, D.A.O. Edward, A. La Pergola, P. Jann, V. Skouris, F. Macken, N. Colneric, S. von Bahr and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed, Registrar: M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
the Betriebsrat der Vertretung der Europäischen Kommission in Österreich, by G. Lansky, Rechtsanwalt, 
               
─
the European Communities, Commission of the European Communities, by M. Langer, acting as Agent, assisted by B. Hainz, Rechtsanwalt,
               
               
─
the Austrian Government, by C. Pesendorfer, acting as Agent, 
               
─
the German Government, by W.-D. Plessing and M. Lumma, acting as Agents, 
               
─
the Swedish Government, by A. Kruse, acting as Agent, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of the Betriebsrat der Vertretung der Europäischen Kommission in Österreich, represented
               by D. Pätzold, Rechtsanwalt; the European Communities, Commission of the European Communities, represented by J. Currall,
               acting as Agent, assisted by B. Hainz; the Netherlands Government, represented by C. Wissels, acting as Agent; and the Swedish
               Government, represented by A. Kruse, at the hearing on February 2003,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
By order of March 2001, received at the Court on April 2001, the Oberster Gerichtshof (Supreme Court) referred to the
         Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC two questions on the interpretation of Article of and Annex II to the
         Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Communities and Article of the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants
         of the European Communities. 
         
            
Those questions were raised in proceedings between the Betriebsrat der Vertretung der Europäischen Kommission in Österreich
         (Works Council of the Representation of the European Commission in Austria,  
         the works council) and the European Communities, Commission of the European Communities, concerning the installation on the premises of the
         Commission's representation in Vienna (Austria) of a monitoring device recording personal data of the persons employed by
         the Commission. 
         
Legal background
Community legislation
         
            
Articles and of Regulation (EEC, Euratom, ECSC) No 259/of the Council of February laying down the Staff Regulations
         of Officials and the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the European Communities and instituting special measures
         temporarily applicable to officials of the Commission (OJ, English Special Edition (I), p. 30) determine respectively
         the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Communities (
         the Staff Regulations) and the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the European Communities (
         the Conditions of Employment). 
         
            
Under the first paragraph of Article of the Staff Regulations: For the purposes of these Staff Regulations,  
         official of the Communities means any person who has been appointed, as provided for in these Staff Regulations, to an established post on the staff
         of one of the institutions of the Communities by an instrument issued by the appointing authority of that institution.
         
            
Article of the Staff Regulations, which appears in Title I,  
         General provisions, prescribes: 
         
1.
 There shall be set up:
         
(a)
within each institution: 
         
─
a Staff Committee, which may be organised in sections for the different places of employment; 
               
─
one or more Joint Committees, as appropriate for the number of officials at the places of employment; 
               
─
one or more Disciplinary Boards, as appropriate for the number of officials at the places of employment; 
               
─
a Reports Committee, if required; 
               
(b)
for the Communities: 
         
─
an Invalidity Committee; 
               
which shall perform the functions assigned to them by these Staff Regulations.
         
1a.
 For the application of certain provisions of these Staff Regulations, a common Joint Committee may be established for two
         or more institutions.
         
2.
 The composition and procedure of the bodies shall be determined by each institution in accordance with the provisions of Annex
         II.
         The members of these bodies shall be listed in the Monthly Staff Bulletin of the Communities.
         
3.
 The Staff Committee shall represent the interests of the staff vis-à-vis their institution and maintain continuous contact
         between the institution and the staff. It shall contribute to the smooth running of the service by providing a channel for
         the expression of opinion by the staff.
         It shall bring to the notice of the competent bodies of the institution any difficulty having general implications concerning
         the interpretation and application of these Staff Regulations. It may be consulted on any difficulty of this kind.The Committee shall submit to the competent bodies of the institution suggestions concerning the organisation and operation
         of the service and proposals for the improvement of staff working conditions or general living conditions.The Committee shall participate in the management and supervision of social welfare bodies set up by the institution in the
         interests of its staff. It may, with the consent of the institution, set up such welfare services.
         
4.
 In addition to the functions assigned to them by these Staff Regulations, the Joint Committee or Committees may be consulted
         by the appointing authority or by the Staff Committee on questions of a general nature which either of the latter thinks fit
         to submit.
         
5.
 The opinion of the Reports Committee shall be sought: 
         
(a)
on action following completion of probationary service; 
         
(b)
on dismissals for incompetence; and 
         
(c)
on the selection of staff to be affected by any reduction in the establishment. 
         The Committee shall ensure that the periodic reports on staff members are made in a uniform manner within any one institution.
         
            
Titles II to VII of the Staff Regulations lay down the rules on the rights and obligations of officials, their career (including
         recruitment, promotion and termination of service), working conditions (hours of work, leave, holidays), emoluments and social
         security (in particular remuneration and social security benefits), disciplinary measures and appeals available to officials.
         
         
            
Annex II to the Staff Regulations contains the rules on the composition and procedure of the bodies provided for in Article
         9. 
         
            
Article of Annex II, which forms Section of the annex, headed  
         Staff Committee, provides: The Staff Committee shall comprise the members thereof, together with their alternates, if any, whose term of office shall
         be three years. The institution may, however, decide to fix a shorter term of office, which may not be less than one year.
         Every official of the institution shall be entitled to vote and stand for election.The conditions for election to the Staff Committee if it is not organised in local sections, or to the local section, if the
         Staff Committee is organised in local sections, shall be laid down by the general meeting of officials of the institution
         in service at the relevant place of employment. Election shall be by secret ballot.If the Staff Committee is organised in local sections, the manner in which the members of the Central Committee are appointed
         for each place of employment shall be laid down by the general meeting of officials of the institution in service at the relevant
         place of employment. Only members of the local section concerned may be appointed members of the Central Committee.Membership of the Staff Committee if it is not organised in local sections, or of the local section if the Staff Committee
         is organised in local sections, shall be such as to ensure the representation of all categories of officials and of all services
         provided for in Article of the Staff Regulations and also of the servants referred to in the first paragraph of Article
         of the Conditions of Employment of other servants of the Communities. The Central Committee of a Staff Committee organised
         in local sections shall be validly constituted upon appointment of a majority of its members.Elections to the Staff Committee if it is not organised in local sections, or to the local section if the Staff Committee
         is organised in local sections, shall be valid only if two thirds of the officials entitled to vote take part. However, if
         this proportion is not attained, the second vote shall be valid if the majority of those entitled take part.The duties undertaken by members of the Staff Committee and by officials appointed by the Committee to organs set up under
         the Staff Regulations or by the institution shall be deemed to be part of their normal service in their institution. The fact
         of performing such duties shall in no way be prejudicial to the person concerned.
         
            
Sections 2, 3, and of Annex II to the Staff Regulations govern respectively the composition and operation of the Joint
         Committees, the Disciplinary Board, the Invalidity Committee and the Reports Committee. The Joint Committees and the Disciplinary
         Committee include members nominated by the Staff Committee. 
         
            
By virtue of the Rules laying down the Composition and Operation of the Staff Committee, adopted by the Commission pursuant
         to Article 9(2) of and Annex II to the Staff Regulations, the Staff Committee of the Commission consists of a central committee
         and several local sections, corresponding to the various places of employment of the staff of that institution. The members
         of the central committee are nominated by the various local sections from among their members. The members of each local section
         are elected by the officials and other servants referred to in Article of the Conditions of Employment. Officials and other
         servants who are not attached to a particular local section are represented by the local section of Brussels (Belgium). As
         there is no section specifically for the staff working in Vienna, they are represented by the Brussels local section, and
         so take part in that section's elections. The procedures for elections to local sections and the central committee are laid
         down by the general meeting of Commission officials, so as to ensure that officials of all categories and services and the
         other servants referred to in the first paragraph of Article of the Conditions of Employment are represented on the central
         committee and, as far as possible, in each local section. 
         
            
The Conditions of Employment apply, as laid down in Article 1, to all servants engaged under contract by the Communities.
         That provision distinguishes between temporary staff, auxiliary staff, local staff and special advisers. 
         
            
The first paragraph of Article of the Conditions of Employment provides: For the purposes of these Conditions of Employment,  
         local staff means staff engaged according to local practice for manual or service duties, assigned to a post not included in the list
         of posts appended to the section of the budget relating to each institution and paid from the total appropriations for the
         purpose under that section of the budget. By way of exception, staff engaged to perform executive duties at the Press and
         Information Offices of the Commission of the European Communities may also be regarded as local staff.
         
            
Article of the Conditions of Employment, which forms part of Title I,  
         General provisions, provides: A servant whose contract is for more than one year or for an indefinite period shall be entitled to vote in elections and
         stand for election to the Staff Committee provided for in Article of the Staff Regulations.A servant whose contract is for less than one year shall also be entitled to vote if he has been employed for at least six
         months.The Joint Committee provided for in Article of the Staff Regulations may be consulted by the institution or by the Staff
         Committee on questions of a general nature relating to servants to whom Article applies.
         
            
Titles II (Articles to 50a) and III (Articles to 78) of the Conditions of Employment lay down the rules applicable to
         temporary staff and auxiliary staff respectively, concerning in particular their rights and obligations, conditions of engagement,
         working conditions including holidays, remuneration, social security benefits, appeals and termination of employment. 
         
            
Title IV of the Conditions of Employment, headed  
         Local staff, contains the following provisions:  Article Subject to the provisions of this Title, the conditions of employment of local staff, in particular:
         
(a)
the manner of their engagement and termination of their contract; 
         
(b)
their leave; and 
         
(c)
their remuneration 
         shall be determined by each institution in accordance with current rules and practice in the place where they are to perform
         their duties. Article As regards social security, the institution shall be responsible for the employer's share of the social security contributions
         under current regulations in the place where the servant is to perform his duties. Article 1. Any dispute between the institution and a member of the local staff serving in a Member State shall be submitted to the
         competent court in accordance with the laws in force in the place where the servant performs his duties.2. Any dispute between the institution and a member of the local staff serving in a third country shall be submitted to an
         arbitration board under the conditions defined in the arbitration clause contained in the servant's contract.
         
            
On the basis  
          inter alia  of Articles 4, 79, and of the Conditions of Employment, the Commission on November 1989, after consulting the Staff
         Committee, adopted framework rules determining the conditions of employment of local staff of the Commission of the European
         Communities serving in third countries. The framework rules entered into force on January 1990, but are applicable only
         from the coming into effect of the special conditions of application drawn up for each place of employment. 
         
            
Article of the rules fixing the special conditions of employment of local staff serving in Austria (
         the special rules for Austria), adopted in after consulting the central committee of the Staff Committee, provides: These rules determine the special conditions of employment of local staff of the Commission of the European Communities serving
         in Austria who have contracts for a definite or indefinite period or are regarded as such under Austrian legislation.The legal provisions of the present rules are to apply without prejudice to more favourable mandatory Austrian legislation.
         
            
Like Titles II and III of the Conditions of Employment applicable to temporary staff and auxiliary staff, the special rules
         for Austria contain provisions relating  
          inter alia  to the conditions of engagement of local staff, their career, rights and obligations, working conditions including holidays,
         remuneration, social security benefits, termination of contracts, and appeals available to them. 
         
            
It follows from the Commission's reply to a written question put by the Court that the special rules for Austria have continued
         to apply to local staff of the Commission's representation in Vienna even after the accession of the Republic of Austria to
         the European Union. 
         National legislation
         
            
The order for reference gives the following account of the national legal background: In Austria the term  
          Arbeitsverfassungsrecht  (labour relations law) is understood to mean that part of employment law which concerns the organisation, tasks, powers and
         mutual relations (disputes and collective agreements) of the representation of workers in a sector or an establishment, on
         the one hand, and the representation of the interests of employers in a sector or of individual employers, on the other, and
         collective legal regulation by other employment law bodies ... .The main source of labour relations law is the [Bundesgesetz betreffend die Arbeitsverfassung (Arbeitsverfassungsgesetz) (Federal
         law on labour relations,  
         the ArbVG) of December 1973]. Its provisions govern three core areas of labour relations, that is to say, collective legal regulation
         (collective sources of law) in sectors and establishments (Part I of the ArbVG), labour relations in establishments (
          Betriebsverfassung ) (Part II of the ArbVG and the rules on labour relations at European level in Part V) and the organisation, competence and
         procedure of those authorities and offices which hear disputes over laws and rules in labour relations law in establishments
         and deal with other administrative matters (Part III of the ArbVG ...).The part of the ArbVG governing labour relations in establishments includes all the provisions which give the staff of an
         establishment (undertaking, group) a legal organisation, define duties and grant powers mainly as against the proprietor of
         the establishment. Those provisions are based on the notion that workers should participate in the affairs of the establishment.
         In this connection the provisions on labour relations in establishments in the ArbVG presume the existence of two groups of
         persons with opposing interests (proprietor of the establishment and staff) and allow the staff various powers ... ....Part II of the ArbVG (labour relations in establishments) applies pursuant to Paragraph 33(1) to  
         establishments of all types, establishment being defined in Paragraph 34(1) as any place of work  
         which forms an organisational unit within which a natural or legal person or a community of persons permanently pursues the
         achievement of specific results of labour by technical or non-material means, whether with a view to profit or not.The territoriality principle determines the scope of the rules in the ArbVG on labour relations in establishments: every place
         of work located in Austria is therefore covered by the ArbVG and is therefore ─ where the other conditions are met ─ subject
         to the obligation to set up a works council ... .According to Paragraph 33(2)(2) of the ArbVG, however,  
         authorities, offices and other administrative entities of the Federation, the  
          Länder , associations of municipalities, and municipalities do not fall within the provisions of Part II of that law. Instead, the laws on staff representation of the Federation or
         the individual  
          Länder  apply to the institutions which are exempted by that provision. ...Under Paragraph 40(1) of the ArbVG, in every establishment in which at least five (within the meaning of Paragraph 49(1) of
         the ArbVG) workers entitled to vote are permanently employed, the workforce bodies required by the other provisions of Part
         II of the ArbVG are to be set up. The most important such body is the works council (
          Betriebsrat ) (Paragraph et seq. of the ArbVG).The powers of the workforce to be exercised by the works council are laid down in the third chapter of Part II of the ArbVG
         (Paragraph et seq. of the ArbVG). These include the rights laid down in sections and of the third chapter, such as
         the right to monitor compliance with the legal provisions concerning the employees of the establishment (Paragraph of the
         ArbVG), the right to ask for appropriate measures to be taken and defects to be remedied in all matters concerning the interests
         of the employees (Paragraph of the ArbVG), the right to general information from the proprietor of the establishment (Paragraph
         of the ArbVG) ... . Paragraphs (
         mandatory co-decision) and Paragraph 96a (
         necessary co-decision) of the ArbVG lay down a series of measures which require the approval of the works council in order to take effect in law;
         for measures under paragraph 96a of the ArbVG, the approval of the works council can be replaced, under subparagraph thereof,
         by decisions of an arbitration body. Paragraph 97(1)(1) to (6a) in conjunction with Paragraph 97(2) of the ArbVG regulates
         cases of  
         enforceable co-decision in which, in the absence of a works agreement, the measure sought may, following an application to the arbitration body,
         be replaced by a decision of that body, whereas in the cases of  
         optional co-decision listed in Paragraph 97(1)(7) to (23a) and (25) of the ArbVG the measure sought cannot be adopted in the absence of a works
         agreement ... .In section of the third chapter of Part II of the ArbVG, rules are laid down on the right of participation of the works
         council in staff matters, namely rights of information (Paragraph of the ArbVG) and rights of participation in the engagement
         of employees (Paragraph of the ArbVG), the determination of remuneration in individual cases (Paragraph of the ArbVG),
         transfers (Paragraph of the ArbVG), the imposition of disciplinary measures (Paragraph of the ArbVG), the allocation
         of works housing (Paragraph of the ArbVG), promotions (Paragraph of the ArbVG) and the termination by agreement of
         employment relationships (Paragraph 104a of the ArbVG). Provisions in this section to be emphasised are above all Paragraphs
         and of the ArbVG, which, in connection with termination of contracts and dismissal of employees, give the works council
         ... the possibility under certain conditions of bringing legal proceedings against terminations of contracts (dismissals)
         on the ground of reprehensible reasons (Paragraph 105(3)(1) of the ArbVG) or because they are socially unjustified (Paragraph
         105(3)(2) of the ArbVG). ......Paragraph of the [Bundesgesetz über die Arbeits- und Sozialgerichtsarbeit (Arbeits- und Sozialgerichtsgesetz) (Federal
         law on the work of labour and social courts,  
         the ASGG) of March 1985] grants the works council capacity to be a party to proceedings. This legal provision is to be understood
         in the sense of a confirmation of the general capacity to be a party to proceedings of the works council in matters relating
         to employment law ... . Paragraph 54(1) of the ASGG gives the works council the right, within its sphere of operation, to
         sue or be sued in proceedings to establish the existence or non-existence of rights or legal relationships affecting at least
         three employees of the establishment or undertaking.
         
            
The order for reference also discloses that the works proprietor's obligation under Paragraph of the ArbVG to provide the
         works council with information on all matters which concern the economic, social, health or cultural interests of the employees
         of the establishment may be enforced by legal proceedings. Moreover, under Paragraph 96a of the ArbVG, the  
         introduction of systems for the automatic recording, processing and transfer of personal data on employees, going beyond the
         recording of general details about the person and occupational qualifications is among the measures which are subject to the approval of the works council. However,  
         approval is not necessary where the actual or proposed use of such data does not go beyond the fulfilment of obligations under
         the law, the rules of collective legal regulation or an employment contract. Where the approval of the works council is required, it must be in the form of a (written) works agreement. If no agreement
         is reached between the works council and the works proprietor, the proprietor can have an arrangement adopted by using the
         arbitration body. If the employer takes the measure without securing the approval of the arbitration body or the works council,
         the works council can have the measure annulled by the courts. 
         The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
On March a works council was elected, pursuant to the provisions of the ArbVG, by the local staff of the Commission's
         representation in Vienna. The latter, which was informed without delay of the election and the immediately following constitution
         of the works council, did not contest the election. In the order for reference, the national court states that the chairman
         and vice-chairman of the works council are regarded by the Commission's representation in Vienna as the local representatives
         of the local staff. 
         
            
In February elections were held for the Staff Committee of the Commission, within the meaning of Article of the Staff
         Regulations. The local staff working in the Commission's representation in Vienna took part in the election. None of them
         was elected to the Staff Committee. 
         
            
At the end of October 1998, the works council learnt of the existence of a monitoring device which allowed personal data on
         the employees to be recorded, since, to gain access to the office, they had to use a personalised microchip card and enter
         a code. 
         
            
The works council, taking the view that the rights conferred on it by Paragraphs and 96a of the ArbVG had been infringed
         by the Commission when the device was installed and used, brought proceedings in the Austrian courts seeking an order that
         the Commission, first, inform it which personal data concerning employees is automatically recorded and how that data is processed
         and communicated and, second, dismantle all equipment for recording personal data of employees installed unlawfully in the
         absence of approval by the works council. 
         
            
The Arbeits- und Sozialgericht Wien (Labour and Social Court, Vienna) (Austria), at first instance, dismissed the application
          
          inter alia  on the ground that, by virtue of the primacy of Community law, in particular Article of the Staff Regulations, the provisions
         of the ArbVG did not apply and the election of the works council was therefore null and void, so that it did not have capacity
         to be a party or to bring proceedings. 
         
            
The Oberlandesgericht Wien (Higher Regional Court, Vienna) (Austria), on appeal, upheld that decision, again essentially on
         the ground of the primacy of Community law, which precluded the coexistence within the Community institutions of a staff committee
         within the meaning of Article of the Staff Regulations, which, as an internal body, lacked the necessary legal personality
         and capacity to being proceedings itself, and a body emanating from the staff, such as the works council within the meaning
         of the ArbVG, with capacity to bring proceedings under Paragraph of the ASGG. 
         
            
The works council appealed on a point of law (
          Revision ) against the judgment of the Oberlandesgericht Wien to the Oberster Gerichtshof. Regarding it as clear that the Commission's
         representation in Vienna does not fall within the exception under Paragraph 33(2)(2) of the ArbVG, that it constitutes an
         establishment within the meaning of Paragraph 34(1) of that law and that it permanently employs at least five workers entitled
         to vote within the meaning of Paragraph 49(1) of that law, the Oberster Gerichtshof considers that the representation is obliged
         to set up a works council in accordance with Paragraph 40(1) of the ArbVG, if Part II of the ArbVG applies to it. 
         
            
Observing in that connection that the Court has not yet ruled on whether Article of the Conditions of Employment refers
         also to legislation such as Part II of the ArbVG, or on whether the provisions of the Staff Regulations relating to the Staff
         Committee are capable of restricting the application of that national law, the Oberster Gerichtshof decided to stay the proceedings
         and refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
         
1.
 Is Article of the Conditions of Employment (Article of Council Regulation (EEC, Euratom, ECSC) No 259/of February
         1968), under which the conditions of employment of local staff, in particular (a) the details of their engagement and termination
         of their contract, (b) their leave, and (c) their remuneration, are to be determined by each institution in accordance with
         current rules and practice in the place where they are to perform their duties, to be understood as a reference to the relevant
         national law on employment, which, in the case of Austria, also requires the application of the law on labour relations in
         establishments laid down in Part II of the ArbVG? 
         
2.
 Are the provisions of Article of the Staff Regulations (Article of Council Regulation (EEC, Euratom, ECSC) No 259/of
         February 1968) and those of Annex II to the Staff Regulations concerning the Staff Committee, which is also responasible
         for representing the local staff of the Communities, to be interpreted as laying down exhaustive rules on collective employment
         law and the rights of co-decision of local staff and thus as precluding the application of the rules on labour relations in
         establishments laid down in the ArbVG to local staff serving in the representation of the Commission of the European Communities
         in Vienna?
         
The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
Since the two questions are closely connected, they should be examined together. 
         
            
To answer the questions, it should be noted, first, that Article 9(1) of the Staff Regulations provides for a staff committee
         to be set up within each Community institution. In accordance with the first subparagraph of Article 9(3), that staff committee
         represents the interests of the staff  
          vis-à-vis  the institution concerned, maintaining continuous contact between the institution and the staff, and contributes to the smooth
         running of the service of the institution by providing a channel for the expression of opinion by the staff. 
         
            
For the purpose of carrying out that function of representing the interests of the staff, the Staff Committee, under the second,
         third and fourth subparagraphs of Article 9(3) of the Staff Regulations, has the right to bring matters to the notice of the
         competent bodies of the institution concerned and to be consulted by them on any difficulty having general implications concerning
         the interpretation and application of the Staff Regulations, the right to make suggestions of any sort concerning the organisation
         and operation of the service of that institution or for the improvement of staff working conditions or general living conditions,
         and the right to participate in the management and supervision of social welfare bodies set up by that institution in the
         interests of its staff. Moreover, in accordance with the provisions of Section of Annex II to the Staff Regulations, persons
         nominated by the Staff Committee are members of the joint committee or committees within each institution and, under Article
         9(4) of the Staff Regulations, those committees may be consulted on questions of a general nature which either the appointing
         authority or the Staff Committee itself thinks fit to submit. 
         
            
It should also be noted that, under Article of the Conditions of Employment, staff engaged under contract by the Communities,
         including local staff, are entitled, subject to certain conditions concerning the length of their contracts or the period
         for which they have actually been employed, to vote in elections for the Staff Committee of the institution which has engaged
         them and to stand for election to that committee, on the same basis as all officials of that institution. 
         
            
Next, the fourth paragraph of Article of Annex II to the Staff Regulations prescribes that the membership of the staff committee
         of each institution, or of its local sections if it is divided into local sections, must be such as to ensure the representation
         of all the staff referred to in the first paragraph of Article of the Conditions of Employment, including local staff with
         contracts for more than one year or for an indefinite period. It follows from paragraph above that the Commission expressly
         reiterated that obligation in the Rules laying down the Composition and Operation of the Staff Committee which it adopted
         pursuant to Article 9(2) of and Annex II to the Staff Regulations. 
         
            
It follows from the above that, by adopting Regulation No 259/68, the Community legislature ensured that local staff are able
         to take part in representing the interests of the staff of the institution which has engaged them, on the same terms of staff
         representation as those it established for the benefit of officials of the European Communities and the other staff covered
         by the Conditions of Employment. 
         
            
In those circumstances, it must be examined, second, whether Article of the Conditions of Employment must be interpreted
         as allowing, or indeed requiring, the local staff of an institution also to enjoy the right to take part in representing their
         interests under the national legislation in force in the Member State where they are to perform their duties. 
         
            
To determine for this purpose whether, having regard to the use of the words  
         in particular in Article of the Conditions of Employment, the arrangements for the representation and defence of the interests of local
         staff are also included in the  
         conditions of employment within the meaning of that provision, the latter expression must be placed in its context and interpreted in terms of the
         spirit of the provision and the structure of the Conditions of Employment of which it forms part. 
         
            
First of all, Article of the Conditions of Employment provides that, subject to the other provisions of Title IV relating
         to the social security arrangements applicable to local staff and the settlement of disputes between them and their institution,
         the conditions of employment of local staff are to be determined by each institution in accordance with current rules and
         practice in the place where they are to perform their duties. 
         
            
As the Court held in Case C-126/Vitari  [2000] ECR I-9425, paragraph 23, it follows that the national law of the State in which a member of the local staff performs
         his duties is not applicable as it stands to the employment relationship between a Community institution and a member of the
         local staff. 
         
            
Next, the Conditions of Employment are divided into several titles, the first of which, as its heading shows, contains general
         provisions applicable to all categories of staff referred to in Article of the Conditions of Employment, while the following
         titles lay down the specific rules applicable to each of those categories. 
         
            
It is clear, first, that the conditions under which contract staff may vote for and be elected to the Staff Committee are
         laid down in Article of the Conditions of Employment, which, since it forms part of Title I, applies to all the staff covered
         by the Conditions of Employment. 
         
            
Second, while Titles II and III of the Conditions of Employment, relating to temporary staff and auxiliary staff, define in
         detail the rules applicable to those staff as regards  
          inter alia  their conditions of engagement and termination of employment, working conditions including holidays, and remuneration, Article
         of the Conditions of Employment, which appears in Title IV relating to local staff, refers as regards those aspects of
         their conditions of employment to the current rules and practice in the place where they are to perform their duties. 
         
            
In those circumstances, it must be recognised that when, in Title IV of the Conditions of Employment dealing with local staff,
         the Community legislature refers, as regards their conditions of employment, to current rules and practice in the place where
         they are to perform their duties, this is not intended to cover aspects of the employment relationship between those staff
         and their institution other than those regulated in Titles II and III for other categories of staff. 
         
            
Finally, it should be pointed out that Article of the Conditions of Employment cannot without a risk of jeopardising the
         proper functioning of the services of a Community institution be interpreted as capable of leading to the adoption, on a specific
         point and for the same category of the institution's staff, of differing or even conflicting measures, drawn up in different
         frameworks and in accordance with different rules. 
         
            
Yet that could be the case precisely in the event of the concurrent exercise by the whole of the staff of a Community institution
         within the Staff Committee, on the one hand, and a particular category of staff within a body set up pursuant to the national
         legislation of the State in which they perform their duties, on the other, of the rights conferred on them respectively by
         the Staff Regulations and by that national legislation as regards representation of the staff and defence of their interests.
         
         
            
It follows that the arrangements for the representation and defence of the interests of the local staff of a Community institution
         do not form part of the  
         conditions of employment within the meaning of Article of the Conditions of Employment, and that those arrangements are governed exhaustively by
         Article of the Staff Regulations in conjunction with Annex II thereto and Article of the Conditions of Employment. 
         
            
Consequently, the reference in Article of the Conditions of Employment to current rules and practice in the place where
         local staff are to perform their duties cannot include the national legislation applicable to that place concerning the participation
         of workers in the undertaking which employs them, such as the rules in Part II of the ArbVG. 
         
            
Contrary to the submissions of the works council and the Austrian and Swedish Governments, no argument to the contrary can
         be derived from the allegedly fragmentary or rudimentary nature of the provisions of the Staff Regulations and the Conditions
         of Employment on participation by the staff of the Community institutions in the representation and defence of their interests.
         
         
            
First, as the Advocate General observes in points and of his Opinion, the system of representation and defence of the
         interests of the staff established by the relevant provisions of the Staff Regulations and the Conditions of Employment is
         designed to meet the needs of the various institutions and their staff and to enable them to contribute by carrying out their
         individual tasks to the realisation of the objectives of the European Union. 
         
            
It was not argued before the Court that the details of that system, as they follow from Regulation No 259/68, were contrary
         to any higher-ranking provision of Community law, or were inadequate for ensuring the defence of the interests of the staff
         of the Community institutions in a form appropriate to the needs of the institutions and the accomplishment of their tasks.
         
         
            
Second, the arrangements for the participation by the workers of an undertaking, as organised at the level of the States in
         which local staff of the European Communities may be required to perform their duties, are not necessarily the same as those
         defined in Part II of the ArbVG, and may even vary within a single State depending on the circumstances, so that in any event
         their application to those local staff would not be such as to guarantee those staff, in all cases, a more complete participation
         in the defence of their interests than that which derives from the provisions of the Staff Regulations and the Conditions
         of Employment. 
         
            
In the light of all the foregoing, the answer to the questions must be that Article of and Annex II to the Staff Regulations
         and Article of the Conditions of Employment must be interpreted as precluding the application to the local staff employed
         in the Commission's representation in Vienna of the Austrian legislation on labour relations in establishments in Part II
         of the ArbVG. 
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the Austrian, German, Netherlands and Swedish Governments, which have submitted observations to the
         Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings
         pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT,
in answer to the questions referred to it by the Oberster Gerichtshof by order of March 2001, hereby rules: 
         
Rodríguez Iglesias
Wathelet 
Schintgen 
Timmermans
Gulmann 
Edward 
La Pergola
Jann 
Skouris 
Macken
Colneric 
von Bahr 
Cunha Rodrigues 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on July 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: German.
Top  
 