
Case C-140/Amalia Valeško
v
Zollamt Klagenfurt
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Unabhängiger Finanzsenat, Außenstelle Klagenfurt)
(Act of Accession to the European Union – Transitional measures – Annex XIII – Taxation – Cigarettes imported from Slovenia – Import into Austria in travellers’ personal luggage – Exemption from excise duty limited to certain quantities – Possibility of maintaining until December the quantitative limits applied to imports from non-member countries – Directive 69/169/EEC)
Summary of the Judgment
Accession of new Member States – Act of Accession of – Transitional measures – Tax provisions 
(Arts EC, EC and EC; Act of Accession of 2003, Art. 24, Annexe XIII, point 6(2); Council Directive 69/169, Arts 4(1)(a)
            and 5(8))
Section 6(2) of Annexe XIII to the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia,
         the Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta,
         the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic and the adjustments to the treaties on which the
         European Union is founded is to be interpreted as not precluding the Republic of Austria from maintaining, on a transitional
         basis, its legislation containing an exemption from excise duty reduced to cigarettes for cigarettes coming from Slovenia
         imported into the Republic of Austria in the personal luggage of travellers resident in that Member State and entering it
         directly via its land border or inland waters.
      
That exemption, which was introduced, prior to the accession of the Republic of Slovenia to the Union, on the basis of Article
         5(8) of Directive 69/on the harmonisation of provisions laid down by law, regulation or administrative action relating
         to exemption from turnover tax and excise duty on imports in international travel, according to which Member States retain
         the power to lower the 200-unit duty-free allowance for cigarettes fixed by Article 4(1)(a) of Directive 69/for travel
         between non-member countries and the Community, was introduced in order to prevent Austrian residents from systematically
         avoiding payment of excise duty on cigarettes by buying, often on repeated short journeys, cigarettes in non-member countries
         bordering the Republic of Austria where the tax level and therefore prices are considerably lower than those in force in Austria,
         and by then importing up to of those cigarettes, exempt from excise duty, on each of those journeys. 
      
That specific risk of tax avoidance and impairment of the objective of protecting public health persists after the accession
         of the Republic of Slovenia to the European Union, since, under Section 6(2) of Annex XIII to the Act of Accession, that new
         Member State may, even though it is required to raise its rates gradually, postpone the application of the overall minimum
         excise duty on cigarettes until December 2007. The scope of the measure in question is, moreover, specifically limited
         to what is necessary to combat such practices. 
      
Therefore, that measure can still be based on Article 5(8) of Directive 69/169, read in conjunction with Article of the
         Act of Accession.
      
Moreover, since that national legislation is justified in the light of one of the measures referred to in Article of the
         Act of Accession, in this case the transitional measure provided for in Section 6(2) of Annex XIII to that act, the question
         of the compatibility of that legislation with other provisions of primary law, such as Articles EC, EC and EC, can
         no longer arise. Therefore, those articles must be interpreted as not prohibiting such national legislation, notwithstanding
         the fact that, following the last enlargement of the European Union, that reduced exemption no longer applies to any non-member
         country with the sole exception of the Swiss Samnauntal customs enclave, since imports of cigarettes from non-member countries
         generally benefit from an exemption for units.
      
(see paras 38, 40, 59-61, 67, 71, 74-75, operative part 1-2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Act of Accession to the European Union – Transitional measures – Annex XIII – Taxation – Cigarettes imported from Slovenia – Import into Austria in travellers’ personal luggage – Exemption from excise duty limited to certain quantities – Possibility of maintaining until December the quantitative limits applied to imports from third countries – Directive 69/169/EEC)
In Case C-140/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Unabhängiger Finanzsenat, Außenstelle Klagenfurt (Austria),
         made by decision of March 2005, received at the Court on March 2005, in the proceedings
      
Amalia Valeško
v
Zollamt Klagenfurt
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, J. Makarczyk, R. Silva de Lapuerta, G. Arestis and J. Klučka,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro,
Registrar: B. Fülöp, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on February 2006,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Ms Valeško, by R. Vouk, Rechtsanwalt,
–        the Austrian Government, by H. Dossi and J. Bauer, acting as Agents,
–        the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by G. Albenzio, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Slovenian Government, by T. Mihelič and V. Klemenc, acting as Agents,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by M. Heller and K. Gross, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2006, 
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Section 6(2) of Annex XIII to the Act concerning the
         conditions of accession of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the
         Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and
         the Slovak Republic [to the European Union] and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union is founded (OJ
         L 236, p. 33) (‘the Act of Accession’), as well as Articles EC, EC and EC.
      
That reference was made in the course of proceedings between Ms Valeško and the Zollamt Klagenfurt (Klagenfurt Customs Office,
         hereinafter ‘the Zollamt’) concerning the exemption from excise duty applicable on the import into Austria of cigarettes
         from Slovenia.
      
 Legal context
 Community law
Article of the Act of Accession states:
      
‘From the date of accession, the provisions of the original Treaties and the acts adopted by the institutions and the European
         Central Bank before accession shall be binding on the new Member States and shall apply in those States under the conditions
         laid down in those Treaties and in this Act.’
      
Article of the Act of Accession provides:
      
‘The application of the original Treaties and acts adopted by the institutions shall, as a transitional measure, be subject
         to the derogations provided for in this Act’.
      
Article of the Act of Accession reads:
      
‘The measures listed in Annexes V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII, XIII and XIV to this Act shall apply in respect of the new
         Member States under the conditions laid down in those Annexes.’
      
Section 6(2) of Annexe XIII to the Act of Accession provides: 
      
‘L 0079: Council Directive 92/79/EEC of October on the approximation of taxes on cigarettes (OJ L 316, 31.10.1992,
         p. 8), as last amended by:
      
–        L 0010: Council Directive 2002/10/EC of 12.2.(OJ L 46, 16.2.2002, p. 26).
By way of derogation from Article 2(1) of Directive 92/79/EEC, Slovenia may postpone the application of the overall minimum
         excise duty of EUR and EUR per cigarettes for cigarettes of the price category most in demand until December
         2007, provided that during this period, Slovenia gradually adjusts its excise duty rates towards the overall minimum excise
         duty provided for in the Directive. 
      
Without prejudice to Article of Council Directive 92/12/EEC on the general arrangements for products subject to excise duty
         and on the holding, movement and monitoring of such products [(OJ L 76, 23.3.1992, p. 1. Directive as last amended by Directive
         2000/47/EC (OJ L 193, 29.7.2000, p. 73)], and having informed the Commission, Member States may, as long as the above derogation
         applies, maintain the same quantitative limits for cigarettes which may be brought into their territories from Slovenia without
         further excise duty payment as those as applied with regard to import from third countries. Member States making use of this
         possibility may carry out the necessary checks provided that these checks do not affect the proper functioning of the internal
         market.’
      
Article of Directive 92/provides:
      
‘As regards products acquired by private individuals for their own use and transported by them, the principle governing the
         internal market lays down that excise duty shall be charged in the Member State in which they are acquired.’
      
Article 45(1) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 918/of March setting up a Community system of reliefs from customs
         duty (OJ L 105, p. 1), as amended by Council Regulation (EEC) No 1315/of May (OJ L 123, p. 2, hereinafter
         ‘Regulation No 918/83’), reads:
      
‘Subject to Articles to 49, goods contained in the personal luggage of travellers coming from a third country shall be
         admitted free of import duties, provided such imports are of a non-commercial nature.’
      
As regards cigarettes, Article 46(1)(a) of Regulation No 918/prescribes as the maximum quantity to which the relief
         referred to in Article 45(1) is limited.
      
Article 49(1) of Regulation No 918/provides:
      
‘Member States may reduce the value and/or the quantities of goods allowed to enter duty-free if they are imported by: 
–        persons residing in the frontier zone,
–        frontier workers, 
–        the crews of means of transport used between third countries and the Community.
…’
Article 1(1) of Council Directive 69/169/EEC of May on the harmonisation of provisions laid down by Law, Regulation
         or Administrative Action relating to exemption from turnover tax and excise duty on imports in international travel (OJ, English
         Special Edition (I), p. 232), as amended by Council Directive 94/4/EC of February amending Directives 69/169/EEC
         and 77/388/EEC and increasing the level of allowances for travellers from third countries and the limits on tax-free purchases
         in intra-Community travel (OJ L 60, p. 14, hereinafter ‘Directive 69/169’), provides: 
      
‘1. Goods contained in the personal luggage of travellers coming from third countries shall be exempt from the turnover tax
         and excise duty levied on imports if the imported goods have no commercial character and the total value of the goods does
         not exceed ECU per person’.
      
Article 4(1)(a) of Directive 69/provides that each Member State is, as regards imports from third countries, to set a
         quantitative limit of cigarettes for exemptions from turnover tax and excise duty.
      
Article of Directive 69/provides:
      
‘1. Member States may reduce the value and/or quantity of the goods which may be admitted duty free, down to one-tenth of
         the values and/or quantities provided for in Articles … 4(1), column II, where such goods are imported from another Member
         State by persons resident in the frontier zone of the importing Member State or in that of the neighbouring Member State,
         by frontier zone workers, or by the crew of the means of transport used in international travel.
      
However, duty free entitlement in respect of the goods listed below may be as follows:
(a)      tobacco products
cigarettes 
…
2. Member States may set lower limits as to value and/or quantity for the exemption of goods when they are imported from a
         third country by persons resident in the frontier zone, by frontier zone workers or by the crew of the means of transport
         used in travel between third countries and the Community.
      
3. Member States may set lower limits as to value and/or quantity for the exemption of goods when they are imported from another
         Member State by members of the armed forces of a Member State, including civilian personnel and spouses and dependent children,
         stationed in another Member State.
      
…
8. Member States may reduce the quantities of goods referred to in Article 4(1)(a) and (d) for travellers coming from a third
         country who enter a Member State.’
      
 National law
Paragraph 6(3) of the Tabaksteuergesetz (Law on Tobacco Duty) of August (BGBl. I, 704/1994), as amended by the Abgabenänderungsgesetz
         (Tax Amendment Law) of December (BGBl. I, 124/2003), (hereinafter ‘the TabStG’) provides:
      
‘The Federal Minister for Finance shall be authorised by regulation:
(1)      to order that tobacco products may be imported free of duty if they can be exempted from customs duty or excise duties pursuant
         to … Regulation No 918/… and any other laws adopted by the European Community:
      
(2)      to regulate the duty-free import of tobacco goods from other Member States into the tax territory if such duty-free import
         is permitted under the rules in point (1):
      
…
(5)      to exclude tobacco duty from the exemption from import duty under Paragraph 2(1) of the Law implementing customs duties if
         such a measure is necessary for transposing the laws adopted by the European Community or ensuring uniform taxation.’
      
Under Paragraph 29(1) of the TabStG:
      
‘Tobacco products purchased in another Member State where they are in free circulation by a natural person for his own use
         and introduced by him into the tax territory shall be duty-free if they are for private, non-commercial purposes.’
      
Paragraph 29a of the TabStG reads:
      
‘1.      During the transitional periods mentioned in Paragraph 44f(2), the exemption from excise duty under Paragraph applicable
         to tobacco products imported into the tax territory in travellers’ personal luggage shall be limited to 
      
…
(3)      cigarettes on entry from the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Poland,
         the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic.
      
2.      By way of derogation from subparagraph 1, the exemption from excise duty applicable to tobacco products imported in the personal
         luggage of travellers who are normally resident in the tax territory and enter that territory directly via a land border or
         inland waters shall be limited, during the transitional periods mentioned in Paragraph 44f(2), to:
      
…
(2)      cigarettes on entry from the Slovak Republic, the Republic of Slovenia or the Republic of Hungary.’
Paragraph 44f(2)(4) of the TabStG provides:
      
‘Paragraph 29a … shall enter into force at the same time as the Treaty of Accession of the Czech Republic, the Slovak Republic,
         the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Slovenia, the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Latvia
         and the Republic of Lithuania to the European Union and shall apply during the transitional periods in respect of 
      
…
(4)      the Republic of Slovenia up to December 2007.
…’
On the basis of the powers conferred upon him by Paragraph 6(3) of the TabStG, the Federal Minister for Finance adopted the
         Verbrauchsteuerbefreiungsverordnung (Regulation concerning exemption from excise duties) of January (BGBl. II, 3/1995)
         which was amended, with effect on and from July by the Verordnung: Änderung der Verbrauchsteuerbefreiungsverordnung
         (Regulation amending the Regulation concerning exemption from excise duties) of June (BGBl. II, 162/1997) (hereinafter
         ‘the VerbStBefV’).
      
Paragraph of the VerbStBefV provides:
      
‘1.      Unless stipulated otherwise in Paragraphs to 5, products subject to excise duties which are imported from a third country
         into the tax territory within the meaning of the laws on excise duty shall be exempt from excise duties if they are exempt
         from customs duty upon import into the the Community customs territory pursuant to: 
      
(1)      Regulation No 918/and the legal provisions adopted for its implementation,
(2)      Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/of October establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L 302, p. 1), and
         the legal provisions adopted for its implementation,
      
(3)      the Law implementing customs duties, BGBl. No 659/1994.
2.      Unless stipulated otherwise in Paragraphs and of this Regulation, for the purposes of the exemption from excise duties,
         the Community customs territory shall be replaced by the tax territory within the meaning of the excise duty laws, and third
         country shall be replaced by any country which falls outside the scope of Directive 92/12.’
      
Paragraph 3a of the VerbStBefV provides:
      
‘1.      The exemption from excise duty applicable to tobacco products imported in the personal luggage of travellers who are normally
         resident in the territory to which this Regulation applies and who enter that territory via a land border with States other
         than the Member States of the European Union and the EFTA States shall be limited to:
      
(1)      cigarettes … 
…
2.      Subparagraph shall not apply to tobacco products which can be proved to have been purchased in the territory to which this
         regulation applies or in another Member State of the European Union where they were in free circulation for tax purposes and
         in respect of which the excise duty has not been reimbursed.
      
3.      Subparagraph shall also apply to tobacco products imported from the Swiss Samnauntal customs enclave.
…’
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Coming from Slovenia, Ms Valeško, an Austrian national, returned on July to the Republic of Austria, the Member State
         in which she resides.
      
During a check carried out at the Austrian frontier post of Grablach, she declared Davidoff Gold cigarettes.
      
By decision of July 2004, based on Paragraph 29a of the TabStG and the exemption limited to cigarettes under that provision,
         the Zollamt (Customs Office) levied tobacco tax on of the cigarettes imported by Ms Valeško, in the sum of EUR 16.80.
      
Ms Valeško appealed against that decision claiming that the exemption from excise duty limited to cigarettes under Paragraph
         29a of the TabStG is contrary to Community law. By decision of December 2004, the Zollamt rejected that appeal.
      
Ms Valeško brought an action against that decision before the Unabhängiger Finanzsenat, Außenstelle Klagenfurt (Independent
         Finance Tribunal, Klagenfurt Division). She asked, should Paragraph 29a of the TabStG be applied, for a question to be referred
         to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling.
      
The national court observes that, under Austrian law, the provisions of customs law apply to the levying of excise duty on
         imports if goods subject to such duty are brought directly into the tax territory from a third country. 
      
According to that court, Section 6(2) of Annex XIII to the Act of Accession could be interpreted as meaning that the Member
         States may maintain quantitative limits provided that they were already applicable, particularly with regard to the Republic
         of Slovenia as a third country, at the time of that State’s accession to the European Union. 
      
Were that interpretation to be accepted, that condition would be satisfied as regards Paragraph 29a of the TabStG, since the
         quantitative limit of cigarettes laid down by that provision was already prescribed in Paragraph 3a of the VerbStBefV prior
         to the accession of the Republic of Slovenia to the European Union. 
      
However, in the referring court’s view, another interpretation is also possible. The wording of Section 6(2) of Annex XIII
         to the Act of Accession, in particular the passage ‘the same quantitative limits … as those applied with regard to imports
         from third countries’, would permit an approach based on the state of the law in force after the accession of the Republic
         of Slovenia to the European Union.
      
According to that interpretation, for cigarettes coming from Slovenia, the same quantitative limits would apply as those prescribed
         for cigarettes from third countries that remain after the last enlargement of the European Union. 
      
Were that second interpretation to be upheld, the quantitative limit of cigarettes laid down in Paragraphs 29a of the TabStG
         and 3a of the VerbStBefV would continue to apply only to imports from the Swiss Samnauntal customs enclave because, apart
         from the Swiss Confederation and the Principality of Liechtenstein, Member States of the European Free Trade Association,
         no other third country shares a common frontier with Austria.
      
The referring court expresses doubts about the application to imports from Slovenia of the quantitative limit of cigarettes,
         since the maintenance of such a restrictive regime seems to go beyond what the legislature intended and, therefore, to conflict
         with the Act of Accession as well as the principles enshrined in Articles EC, EC and EC.
      
It was in those circumstances that the Unabhängiger Finanzsenat, Außenstelle Klagenfurt decided to stay the proceedings and
         to refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Are the provisions contained in Section 6(2) of Annex XIII to the Act of Accession, which state that, without prejudice to
         Article of … Directive 92/… and having informed the Commission, Member States may, as long as the above derogation applies,
         “maintain” the same quantitative limits for cigarettes which may be brought into their territories from Slovenia without further
         excise duty payment as those applied with regard to imports from third countries, to be interpreted as meaning – in the light
         of the technical term “maintain” – that they permit quantitative limits which applied in a Member State until the accession
         of the Republic of Slovenia inter alia in relation to the Republic of Slovenia as a third country? 
      
2.      If the Court of Justice concludes that the Treaty provisions in question are not in fact to be construed as permitting quantitative
         limits which applied in a Member State until the accession of the Republic of Slovenia inter alia in relation to the Republic
         of Slovenia as a third country: on a proper construction of Articles EC, EC and EC, do the rules of a Member State
         under which the exemption from excise duty applicable to tobacco products imported in the personal luggage of travellers who
         are normally resident in the tax territory of that Member State and enter that territory directly via a land border or inland
         waters is limited to cigarettes on entry from certain other Member States, comply with the principles of the free movement
         of goods where a quantitative limit of that kind exists only in respect of a customs enclave in a single third country (the
         Swiss Confederation) whilst from any other third country importation of cigarettes free of excise duty into that Member
         State is allowed?’ 
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 The first question
By its first question, the referring court seeks to ascertain whether Section 6(2) of Annex XIII to the Act of Accession is
         to be interpreted as meaning that it enables the Republic of Austria to maintain, on a transitional basis, its legislation
         containing an exemption from excise duty for cigarettes imported in travellers’ personal luggage limited to units, since
         that exemption was already in force prior to the accession of the Republic of Slovenia to the European Union, or whether that
         provision of the Act of Accession is to be understood as meaning that the maintenance of such an exemption is subject to the
         condition that it be applied by the Republic of Austria to imports from third countries by virtue of its current legislation.
      
At the outset, it must be observed that the matter of exemptions from excise duty on imports of goods contained in the personal
         luggage of travellers coming from third countries, in particular cigarettes, is governed by Directive 69/169. 
      
The purpose of that directive, as its title suggests, is to harmonise exemptions from turnover tax and excise duty on imports
         in international travel. As is clear from the recitals in its preamble and from those in the preambles to the directives subsequently
         amending it, the aim is to liberalise still further the system of taxes on imports in travel in order to facilitate such travel
         (Case C-394/Heinonen [1999] ECR I-3599, paragraph 25). 
      
In addition, in the field covered by Directive 69/169, the Member States retain only the limited powers granted them by the
         actual provisions of the directive and of the directives amending it (Case C-96/Commission v Spain [1992] ECR I-3789, paragraph 10, and the case-law there cited). 
      
As regards, in particular, cigarettes, it is clear from Article 4(1)(a) of Directive 69/that the exemption from excise
         duty, for travel between third countries and the Community, is limited to cigarettes. However, under Article 5(2) and
         (8) of that directive, Member States continue to have power to lower that limit subject to the conditions laid down by those
         provisions.
      
Those provisions, as applicable both before and after the Republic of Slovenia’s accession to the European Union and at the
         material time in the main proceedings, have not been amended.
      
It is, in addition, common ground that the Republic of Austria adopted Paragraph 29a of the TabStG and established the exemption
         limited to cigarettes under that provision on the basis of Article 5(8) of Directive 69/and that the national provision
         was notified by that Member State’s authorities to the Commission as one of the transitional measures referred to in Article
         of the Act of Accession.
      
Moreover, it is not disputed that that provision of the national legislation reproduced, in essentially identical terms, the
         exemption already laid down in Paragraph 3a of the VerbStBefV, which applied, from January 1997, to imports by travellers
         of cigarettes from third countries bordering the Republic of Austria, in particular Slovenia, and which, since the last enlargement
         of the European Union, applies only to the Samnauntal customs enclave.
      
Therefore, the question arises whether, prior to the Republic of Slovenia’s accession to the Union, the national legislation
         at issue in the main proceedings establishing the reduced exemption of cigarettes could be based on the limited powers
         available to the Republic of Austria under Article 5(8) of Directive 69/169, and whether, following that accession, that legislation
         can still, in view of the intervention of Article of the Act of Accession, be based on those powers.
      
The Commission submits that the question calls for a negative reply.
      
It maintains that the exception under Article 5(8) of Directive 69/cannot be invoked as regards a national exemption such
         as that in question in the main proceedings, since it applies only to imports of goods from certain third countries and it
         is, moreover, limited to a specific category of travellers from those countries, namely those who are normally resident in
         Austria and enter that Member State directly via a land border or inland waters. 
      
The first three paragraphs of Article of Directive 69/lay down some exceptions which apply to certain specifically defined
         categories of travellers. Those exceptions would be superfluous and might, furthermore, be evaded if Article 5(8) had to be
         understood as according to the Member States a general power to add other specific categories of travellers to those defined
         in those first three paragraphs.
      
The recognition of such powers could also lead to the introduction of different exemption regimes in the Member States. The
         development of such regimes would be likely to compromise the objective of Directive 69/169, namely to facilitate international
         travel.
      
Finally, the Commission maintains that the interpretation which it advocates is necessary in order to comply with the principle
         prohibiting any discrimination between third countries in international trade.
      
Those arguments cannot be accepted.
      
As regards the argument based on the setting out in Article 5(1) to (3) of Directive 69/of specific exceptions applicable
         to certain categories of travellers, it must be observed that, among those provisions, Article 5(2) alone can be relevant
         to the main proceedings, since it covers imports from third countries whereas Article 5(1) and (3) concern goods from another
         Member State.
      
Whilst it is true that the category of travellers constituted by persons who are normally resident in Austria, the subject
         of the national measure in question in the main proceedings, is defined more widely than the categories represented by persons
         resident in the frontier zone, frontier zone workers or the crew of the means of transport used in travel between third countries
         and the Community within the meaning of Article 5(2) of Directive 69/169, the specific nature of the categories referred to
         by the last exception does not preclude the application of the exception under Article 5(8) to another category of travellers,
         defined more widely.
      
Indeed, that last exception is also specific since it applies only to certain exhaustively listed goods, in particular, to
         cigarettes.
      
According to the wording of Article 5(8) of Directive 69/169, Member States may reduce the quantities of the goods referred
         to in Article 4(1)(a) and (d) of that directive, among others cigarettes, for travellers coming from a third country who enter
         a Member State.
      
In view of the general nature of the terms used, the wording of that provision could not found a restrictive interpretation,
         such as that suggested by the Commission, according to which reduced exemptions adopted under that provision are permitted
         only if they apply to all third countries without distinction and for all categories of travellers.
      
The general nature of that wording implies, on the contrary, that, as regards the specific goods referred to in Article 4(1)(a)
         and (d) of Directive 69/169, among others cigarettes, a wide power is reserved to the Member States to reduce the quantities
         of the goods concerned.
      
It is true that a certain tension exists between that power and the general aim of Directive 69/169, which, as noted in paragraph
         of this judgment, is to liberalise the system of taxes on imports in travel in order to facilitate such travel.
      
In making use of that power, the Member States are therefore required to limit as far as possible the negative effects which
         the measures adopted could have on the realisation of the general aim of Directive 69/and thus to strike a reasonable
         balance between that aim and the specific aim of Article 5(8) of Directive 69/169. 
      
That specific aim must take account of the particular nature of the goods in question, namely tobacco products such as cigarettes,
         and of the legal interest which the provision in question in the main proceedings allows to be protected. 
      
As the Advocate General pointed out in point of his Opinion, fiscal legislation is an important and effective instrument
         for discouraging consumption of those products and, therefore, for the protection of public health.
      
It is common ground that Paragraph 3a of the VerbStBefV laying down the exemption limited to cigarettes was introduced
         in order to prevent Austrian residents from systematically evading payment of the overall minimum excise duty on cigarettes,
         the rates of which are fixed by Article of Directive 92/79, as amended by Directive 2002/10, by buying, often on repeated
         short journeys, cigarettes in third countries bordering the Republic of Austria where the tax level and therefore prices are
         considerably lower than those in force in that Member State, and by then importing up to of those cigarettes, exempt from
         excise duty, on each of those journeys.
      
That specific risk of evasion of fiscal policy and impairment of the objective of protection of public health persists after
         the accession of the Republic of Slovenia to the European Union, since, under Section 6(2) of Annex XIII to the Act of Accession,
         that new Member State may, even though it is required to raise its rates gradually, postpone the application of the overall
         minimum excise duty on cigarettes until December 2007.
      
It must also be observed that the scope of the measure in question in the main proceedings is specifically limited to what
         is necessary to combat such practices, which are regarded as posing, having regard particularly to their cumulative effects,
         a significant risk to the effectiveness of fiscal policy relating to tobacco products, and, therefore, to the imperative of
         the protection of public health.
      
It is important to note that that measure concerns only persons normally resident in Austria, whose protection in health matters
         is the responsibility of the Austrian legislature, and who enter Austria directly from a third country with a shared border
         where the level of taxation on cigarettes is lower than that imposed by the Community legislation in force.
      
That explains why that measure does not apply to imports from third countries bordering Austria, such as the Swiss Confederation
         and the Principality of Liechtenstein, where the level of taxation on tobacco products is not lower than that imposed by the
         Community legislation, but does apply to those coming from the Swiss Samnauntal customs enclave, since the level of taxation
         in that area is lower than that required by the Community legislation. 
      
Moreover, the national measure at issue in the main proceedings is not applicable to journeys which are not regarded as representing
         a significant risk to the effectiveness of fiscal policy relating to those products, such as those made by air, or to journeys
         made to third countries which do not share a border with Austria.
      
It is therefore evident, given the limitation of its scope on the basis of specific considerations relating to the risk of
         interference with fiscal policy and the protection of public health which arises from the proximity of the countries concerned
         and the level of taxation on tobacco products in those countries, that the national measure at issue strikes a reasonable
         balance between the general aim of Directive 69/and the specific aim of Article 5(8) of that directive. 
      
As regards the Republic of Slovenia’s situation following its accession to the European Union, it is common ground that the
         rates of taxation applicable in that Member State to tobacco products, although at a higher level than at that accession,
         are still lower than those imposed by the Community legislation in force.
      
Therefore, the specific risk which the exemption limited to cigarettes is intended to combat remains, with the result that
         that measure can still be based on Article 5(8) of Directive 69/169, read in conjunction with Article of the Act of Accession.
      
In those circumstances, the Commission’s argument that the national legislation in question in the main proceedings is discriminatory
         cannot be accepted.
      
It follows from the foregoing that, in the light of the objectives pursued, the scope of that national legislation is limited
         to imports from third countries and new Member States bordering the Republic of Austria where the level of taxation on tobacco
         products is lower than that imposed by the Community legislation.
      
Therefore, since the situation of those third countries and new Member States bordering the Republic of Austria is not comparable
         to that of other third countries, the difference in treatment resulting from that legislation cannot be regarded as constituting
         discrimination against imports from those third countries and new Member States. 
      
Having regard to the foregoing, the reply to the first question must be that Section 6(2) of Annex XIII to the Act of Accession
         must be interpreted as meaning that it does not preclude the Republic of Austria from maintaining, on a transitional basis,
         its exemption from excise duty limited to cigarettes for cigarettes coming from Slovenia imported into the Republic of
         Austria in the personal luggage of travellers resident in that Member State and entering it directly via its land border or
         inland waters. 
      
 The second question
By its second question, the referring court is asking, in essence, whether Articles EC, EC and EC are to be interpreted
         as meaning that they prohibit national legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings, under which the exemption
         from excise duty for cigarettes imported in travellers’ personal luggage is limited to units on entry to the Republic of
         Austria from certain other Member States, in particular the Republic of Slovenia, because, following the last enlargement
         of the European Union, that exemption no longer applies to any third country with the sole exception of the Swiss Samnauntal
         customs enclave, since imports of cigarettes from third countries generally benefit from an exemption for units.
      
In that respect, as regards the situation subsequent to the Republic of Slovenia’s accession to the European Union, it is
         clear from paragraph of this judgment that the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings can still be based
         on Article 5(8) of Directive 69/169, read in conjunction with Article of the Act of Accession.
      
Since that national legislation is justified in the light of one of the measures referred to in Article of the Act of Accession,
         in this case the transitional measure provided for in Section 6(2) of Annex XIII to that act, the question of the compatibility
         of that legislation with other provisions of primary law, such as Articles EC, EC and EC, can no longer arise.
      
Therefore, the reply to the second question is that Articles EC, EC and EC must be interpreted as meaning that they
         do not prohibit national legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings, under which the exemption from excise
         duty for cigarettes imported in travellers’ personal luggage is limited to units on entry to the Republic of Austria from
         certain other Member States, in particular the Republic of Slovenia, notwithstanding the fact that, following the last enlargement
         of the Union, that reduced exemption no longer applies to any third country with the sole exception of the Swiss Samnauntal
         customs enclave, since imports of cigarettes from third countries generally benefit from an exemption for units.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Section 6(2) of Annexe XIII to the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia,
            the Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta,
            the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic and the adjustments to the treaties on which the
            European Union is founded is to be interpreted as meaning that it does not preclude the Republic of Austria from maintaining,
            on a transitional basis, its legislation containing an exemption from excise duty reduced to cigarettes for cigarettes
            coming from Slovenia imported into the Republic of Austria in the personal luggage of travellers resident in that Member State
            and entering it directly via its land border or inland waters.
2.      Articles EC, EC and EC must be interpreted as meaning that they do not prohibit national legislation such as that
            at issue in the main proceedings, under which the exemption from excise duty for cigarettes imported in travellers’ personal
            luggage is limited to units on entry to the Republic of Austria from certain other Member States, in particular the Republic
            of Slovenia, notwithstanding the fact that, following the last enlargement of the European Union, that reduced exemption no
            longer applies to any third country with the sole exception of the Swiss Samnauntal customs enclave, since imports of cigarettes
            from third countries generally benefit from an exemption for units. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 