
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-147/Michelle K. Alabaster
v
Woolwich plc and Secretary of State for Social Security
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Court of Appeal (England and Wales) (Civil Division))
(Social policy – Men and women – Equal pay – Pay during maternity leave – Calculation of the amount of pay – Pay rise taken into account)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Social policy – Men and women – Equal pay – Maternity leave – Determining the pay received during maternity leave – Criteria
            – Obligation to include a pay rise awarded between the beginning of the period covered by the reference pay and the end of
            the maternity leave – Conditions
(EC Treaty, Art. (Arts to of the EC Treaty have been replaced by Arts EC to EC))
2.        Social policy – Approximation of laws – Protection of the safety and health of workers – Pregnant workers and workers who
            have recently given birth or are breastfeeding – Directive 92/– Pay received during maternity leave – Obligation on the
            Member States to determine how any pay rise is to be included
(Council Directive 92/85)
1.        Article of the Treaty (Articles to of the Treaty have been replaced by Articles to EC) must be interpreted
         as requiring that, in so far as the pay received by the worker during her maternity leave is determined at least in part on
         the basis of the pay she earned before her maternity leave began, any pay rise awarded between the beginning of the period
         covered by the reference pay and the end of the maternity leave must be included in the elements of pay taken into account
         in calculating the amount of such pay. This requirement is not limited to cases where the pay rise is back-dated to the period
         covered by the reference pay. 
      
(see para. 50, operative part 1)
2.        Absent any Community legislation in this sphere, it is for the competent national authorities to determine how, in compliance
         with all the provisions of Community law, and in particular Directive 92/on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements
         in the safety and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding, any pay
         rise awarded before or during maternity leave must be included in the elements of pay used to calculate the pay due to a worker
         during maternity leave. 
      
(see para. 56, operative part 2)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Full Court)March 2004(1)
(Social policy  –  Men and women  –  Equal pay  –  Pay during maternity leave  –  Calculation of amount  –  Whether to include a pay rise)
 In Case C-147/02,
             REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Court of Appeal (England and Wales) (Civil Division) for a preliminary
            ruling in the proceedings pending before that court between 
            
Michelle K. Alabaster
and
Woolwich plc,Secretary of State for Social Security,
 on the interpretation of Article of the EC Treaty (Articles to of the EC Treaty have been replaced by Articles
            to EC) and the judgment in Case C-342/Gillespie and Others [1996] ECR I-475,
THE COURT (Full Court),
 composed of: V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans, C. Gulmann, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues and A. Rosas, Presidents
            of Chambers, A. La Pergola, J.-P. Puissochet, R. Schintgen (Rapporteur), F. Macken and N. Colneric, Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: P. Léger, Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
–
 Mrs Alabaster, by L. Cox QC and K. Monaghan, Barrister, 
               
–
 Woolwich plc, by M. Griffiths, Barrister, instructed by C. McIntyre, Solicitor, 
               
–
 the United Kingdom Government, by P. Ormond, acting as Agent, C. Vajda QC and R. Haynes, Barrister, 
               
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by M.-J. Jonczy and N. Yerrell, acting as Agents,
               
after hearing the oral observations of Mrs Alabaster, represented by K. Monaghan and by A. Reindorf, Barrister, the United
               Kingdom Government, represented by C. Jackson, acting as Agent, and C. Vajda, and the Commission, represented by J. Jonczy
               and N. Yerrell, at the hearing on June 2003,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By order of March 2002, received at the Court on April 2002, the Court of Appeal (England and Wales) (Civil Division)
         referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC three questions on the interpretation of Article of
         the EC Treaty (Articles to of the EC Treaty have been replaced by Articles to EC) and the judgment in Case
         C-342/Gillespie and Others [1996] ECR I-475.
         
            
 Those questions were raised in proceedings between Mrs Alabaster and Woolwich plc (hereinafter ‘the Woolwich’) and the Secretary
         of State for Social Security relating to a request to have a pay rise taken into account in calculating statutory maternity
         pay.
         
Legal background
Community legislation
            
 The first two paragraphs of Article of the Treaty, as applicable at the time of the facts in the main proceedings, provide:
         
         ‘Each Member State shall during the first stage ensure and subsequently maintain the application of the principle that men
         and women should receive equal pay for equal work. 
          For the purpose of this article, pay means the ordinary basic or minimum wage or salary and any other consideration, whether
         in cash or in kind, which the worker receives, whether directly or indirectly, in respect of his employment from his employer.’
         
         
            
 According to the first paragraph of Article of Council Directive 75/117/EEC of February on the approximation of
         the laws of the Member States relating to the application of the principle of equal pay for men and women (OJ L 45, p.
         19), the principle of equal pay is intended to eliminate, for the same work or for work to which equal value is attributed,
         all discrimination on grounds of sex with regard to all aspects and conditions of remuneration.
         
            
 Council Directive 92/85/EEC of October on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and
         health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding (tenth individual directive
         within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC) (OJ L 348, p. 1) was adopted on the basis of Article 118a
         of the EC Treaty.
         
            
 Article 14(1) provided that the directive was to be transposed by October at the latest.
         
            
 Article of Directive 92/85, on maternity leave, provides as follows: 
         ‘1.     Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that workers within the meaning of Article are entitled to a continuous
         period of maternity leave of at least weeks allocated before and/or after confinement in accordance with national legislation
         and/or practice. 
          2.       The maternity leave stipulated in paragraph must include compulsory maternity leave of at least two weeks allocated before
         and/or after confinement in accordance with national legislation and/or practice.’
         
            
 With regard to employment rights, Article of Directive 92/provides as follows: 
         ‘In order to guarantee workers within the meaning of Article the exercise of their health and safety protection rights as
         recognised in this article, it shall be provided that: 
         ...
         
(2)
in the case referred to in Article 8, the following must be ensured: 
(a)
the rights connected with the employment contract of workers within the meaning of Article 2, other than those referred to
                     in point (b) below; 
                  
(b)
maintenance of a payment to, and/or entitlement to an adequate allowance for, workers within the meaning of Article 2; 
(3)
The allowance referred to in point 2(b) shall be deemed adequate if it guarantees income at least equivalent to that which
               the worker concerned would receive in the event of a break in her activities on grounds connected with her state of health,
               subject to any ceiling laid down under national legislation.
            
(4)
Member States may make entitlement to pay or the allowance referred to in points and 2(b) conditional upon the worker concerned
               fulfilling the conditions of eligibilty for such benefits laid down under national legislation.
            
These conditions may under no circumstances provide for periods of previous employment in excess of months immediately
                     prior to the presumed date of confinement.’
                  
National law  The Social Security Contributions and Benefits Act The national provisions on statutory maternity pay are to be found in Part XII of the Social Security Contributions and Benefits
         Act (‘the Act’). 
         
            
 Under section of the Act, an employee is entitled to statutory maternity pay if she has been employed for a continuous
         period of at least weeks with the same employer by the 15th week before the expected week of confinement, her normal weekly
         earnings are over a certain level, she has given the employer the appropriate notice and the baby is due within weeks.
         
         
            
 Under section 165(1) of the Act, statutory maternity pay is payable for a maximum of weeks. 
         
            
 Section 166(1) of the Act provides that there are two rates of pay, the ‘higher rate’ and the ‘lower rate’. 
         
            
 Section 166(2) of the Act states that the higher rate is a rate equivalent to nine-tenths of the woman’s normal weekly earnings
         for a period of eight weeks immediately preceding the 14th week before the expected week of confinement or the lower rate,
         whichever is the higher. The lower rate is a flat-rate weekly payment. 
         
            
 Under section 166(1) and (4) of the Act, where an employee is entitled to higher rate statutory maternity pay, she is entitled
         to the higher rate for six weeks and to the lower rate for weeks. 
         
            
 Section 171(4) of the Act provides that a woman’s normal weekly earnings are to be taken to be the average weekly earnings
         which in the relevant period have been paid to her. 
         
 The Statutory Maternity Pay (General) Regulations The Statutory Maternity Pay (General) Regulations 1986, as amended with effect from June by Statutory Instrument No
         of (‘the Regulations’), lay down certain conditions for applying the Act with regard to statutory maternity pay.
         
         
            
 Regulation of the Regulations defines ‘earnings’ for the purpose of calculating statutory maternity pay.
         
            
 Regulation determines how normal weekly earnings are to be calculated.
         
            
 Regulation 21(2) defines ‘the appropriate date’ as the first day of the 14th week before the expected week of confinement,
         or the first day in the week in which the woman is confined, whichever is the earlier. 
         
            
 Regulation 21(3) provides that the relevant period for the purposes of Section 171(4) of the Act is the period between: 
         
‘(a)
the last normal pay day before the appropriate date; and
(b)
the last normal pay day to fall at least weeks earlier than the normal pay day mentioned in subparagraph (a), including
               the normal pay day mentioned in subparagraph (a) but excluding that first mentioned in subparagraph (b)’.
            
            
 Regulation 21(7) provides as follows: 
         ‘In any case where a woman receives a back-dated pay increase which includes a sum in respect of a relevant period, normal
         weekly earnings shall be calculated as if such sum was paid in that relevant period even though received after that period.’
         
The main proceedings and the questions referred
            
 Mrs Alabaster was an employee of the Woolwich in the United Kingdom from December to August 1996. 
         
            
 She commenced maternity leave on January 1996, her expected week of confinement being February 1996.
         
            
 Mrs Alabaster received statutory maternity pay from the week of January 1996. It was paid at the higher rate not just for
         the statutory six-week period but for an additional four weeks under her contract of employment. She then received it at the
         lower rate for eight weeks. 
         
            
 On December Mrs Alabaster received a pay increase with effect from December. However, this increase was not reflected
         in the calculation of her statutory maternity pay because it came after the relevant period for calculating normal earnings.
         
         
            
 Pursuant to Regulation 21(3) of the Regulations, the relevant period for calculating normal earnings in Mrs Alabaster’s case
         began on September and ended on October 1995. 
         
            
 Regulation 21(7) of the Regulations was thus not applicable since it only entered into force on June 1996. In any event,
         the provision would not have applied in Mrs Alabaster's case because her pay increase was not backdated in respect of the
         relevant period. 
         
            
 On January Mrs Alabaster brought a complaint against the Woolwich in the Employment Tribunal, arguing that the failure
         to reflect the salary increase in the calculation of the statutory maternity pay she received constituted discrimination against
         her on grounds of sex, contrary to Article of the Treaty. 
         
            
 The Secretary of State for Social Security was joined in the proceedings by an order of the Employment Tribunal dated May
         1997. 
         
            
 By a decision of March the Employment Tribunal held, applying the Gillespie judgment, that the failure to take account of Mrs Alabaster’s pay increase in determining her statutory maternity pay amounted
         to a breach of Article of the Treaty. 
         
            
 The Woolwich and the Secretary of State for Social Security appealed on this issue to the Employment Appeal Tribunal, which
         dismissed the appeal by a decision of April 2000, also applying Gillespie.
         
            
 The respondents in the main proceedings appealed to the Court of Appeal (England and Wales) (Civil Division), which, taking
         the view that the resolution of the dispute depended on the interpretation of Community law, decided to stay the proceedings
         and to refer the following questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling: 
         ‘In a situation where: 
         
–
the earnings-related element of a woman’s statutory maternity pay (SMP) is calculated by reference to her normal weekly earnings
               for an eight week period ending on the 15th week before the expected week of confinement (the relevant period), and 
            
–
the employer grants a pay rise, which is not back-dated to the relevant period, at any time after the end of the relevant
               period used for calculating that woman’s earnings-related element of SMP and before the end of her maternity leave: 
            
1.
Is [Article of the Treaty] and the judgment in Gillespie [1996] ECR I‑to be interpreted as meaning that the woman is entitled to have that pay rise taken into consideration in
               calculating or re-calculating the earnings-related element of her SMP? 
            
2.
Is the answer to Question affected by whether the effective date of the pay rise commences: (i) prior to the beginning of
               the woman’s maternity leave, (ii) prior to the ending of the period of the earnings-related period of her SMP, or (iii) on
               some other date and, if so, on what date? 
            
3.
If the answer to Question is in the affirmative, 
(a)
how should the calculation or re-calculation of the normal weekly earnings in the relevant period take into account the pay
                     rise? 
                  
(b)
Should the relevant period be changed? 
(c)
What allowance, if any, should be made for other factors occurring within the period to which the pay rise relates such as
                     the numbers of hours worked, and the reason for the pay increase? 
                  
(d)
Does it follow that if there is a reduction in pay after the end of the relevant period but before the end of the woman’s
                     period of maternity leave, her SMP should be calculated or re-calculated to take account of the reduction of pay, and if so,
                     how is this to be done?’ 
                  
Request for reopening of the oral procedure
            
 By document lodged at the Court Registry on November 2003, the United Kingdom Government requested the Court to order the
         reopening of the oral procedure pursuant to Article of the Rules of Procedure.
         
            
 In support of that request, it claims that in his Opinion the Advocate General gave his views on a question which had not
         been expressly referred by the national court.
         
            
 The Court may of its own motion, or on a proposal from the Advocate General, or at the request of the parties reopen the oral
         procedure, in accordance with Article of its Rules of Procedure, if it considers that it lacks sufficient information,
         or that the case must be dealt with on the basis of an argument which has not been debated between the parties (see the order
         in Case C-17/Emesa Sugar [2000] ECR I-665, paragraph 18, the judgment in Case C‑309/Woutersand Others [2002] ECR I-1577, paragraph 42, and the judgment of November in Case C-209/Schilling and Fleck-Schilling [2003] ECR I-0000, paragraph 19).
         
            
 In the circumstances of this case, however, the Court, after hearing the Advocate General, considers that it has all the details
         necessary for it to answer the questions referred and that those matters were addressed in the arguments presented to it at
         the hearing. The request for reopening the oral procedure must therefore be refused.
         
The questions referredFirst and second questions
            
 By the first question the national court asks whether Article of the Treaty and the judgment in Gillespie  are to be interpreted as meaning that a woman is entitled to have a pay rise which was awarded to her after the relevant period
         and was not back-dated to that period taken into consideration in the calculation of the earnings-related element of the statutory
         maternity pay. By the second question it asks whether the fact that the effective date of the pay rise commences prior to
         the beginning of the maternity leave, or prior to the end of the earnings-related period of her statutory maternity pay, or
         on some other date has any effect on the answer to the first question. As those questions are closely related it is necessary
         to consider them together.
         
            
 It must be observed at the outset that whilst Directive 92/85, which was to be transposed by the Member States by October
         1994, was not applicable at the time of the facts of the main proceedings in Gillespie, it does apply ratione temporis to this case. 
         
            
 However, whilst the Directive provides in Article 11(2) and (3) that some of the rights connected with the employment contract
         of persons such as the applicant in the main proceedings must be ensured, it is not sufficient to provide a useful reply to
         the first two questions raised by the national court. 
         
            
 In those circumstances it is necessary to determine whether it is possible to deduce the answer to those questions from other
         provisions or principles of Community law.
         
            
 It must be observed in this connection that under Article of Directive 75/the principle of equal pay for men and women
         for equal work enshrined in Article of the Treaty, which was applicable at the time of the facts in the main proceedings,
         means that for the same work or for work to which equal value is attributed all discrimination on grounds of sex with regard
         to all aspects and conditions of remuneration must be eliminated.
         
            
 Regarding first the concept of pay in the aforementioned provisions, according to the definition in the second paragraph of
         Article of the Treaty it includes all consideration which workers receive directly or indirectly from their employers
         in respect of their employment. The legal nature of such consideration is not important for the purposes of the application
         of that article, provided that it is granted in respect of employment (see Case 12/Garland [1982] ECR 359, paragraph 10, and Gillespie, paragraph 12). 
         
            
 Consideration classified as pay includes, inter alia, consideration paid by the employer by virtue of legislative provisions
         and under a contract of employment whose purpose is to ensure that workers receive income even where, in certain cases specified
         by the legislature, they are not performing any work provided for in their contracts of employment (see Case C-360/Bötel [1992] ECR I-3589, paragraphs and 15, and Gillespie, paragraph and the cases cited therein).
         
            
 It follows that, since the benefit paid by an employer under legislation or collective agreements to a woman on maternity
         leave is based on the employment relationship, it constitutes pay within the meaning of Article of the Treaty and Directive
         75/(Gillespie, paragraph 14, and Case C‑411/Boyle and Others [1998] ECR I-6401, paragraph 38). 
         
            
 Secondly, the Court has consistently held that discrimination involves the application of different rules to comparable situations
         or the application of the same rule to different situations (see, in particular, Case C-279/Schumacker [1995] ECR I-225, paragraph 30, and Gillespie, paragraph 16). 
         
            
 In that connection women taking maternity leave provided for by national legislation are in a special position which requires
         them to be afforded special protection, but which is not comparable, in particular, either with that of a man or with that
         of a woman actually at work (Gillespie, paragraph 17). Therefore they cannot usefully rely on the provisions of Article of the Treaty to argue that they should
         continue to receive full pay while on maternity leave as though they were actually working, like other workers (Gillespie, paragraph 20).
         
            
 However the Court found, thirdly, at paragraph of Gillespie, that benefit paid during maternity leave is equivalent to a weekly payment calculated on the basis of the average pay received
         by the worker at the time when she was actually working and which was paid to her week by week, just like any other worker.
         The principle of non-discrimination therefore requires that a woman who is still linked to her employer by a contract of employment
         or by an employment relationship during maternity leave must, like any other worker, benefit from any pay rise, even if back-dated,
         which is awarded between the beginning of the period covered by reference pay and the end of maternity leave. To deny such
         an increase to a woman on maternity leave would discriminate against her since, had she not been pregnant, she would have
         received the pay rise. 
         
            
 It follows that in a case such as that in the main proceedings where the income guaranteed by national law to the worker is
         calculated partially on the pay received by her before her maternity leave, Article of the Treaty entitles her to have
         a pay rise which was awarded to her after the beginning of the period covered by the reference pay and before the end of maternity
         leave taken into account in determining the elements of her pay used to calculate the consideration paid by her employer.
         
            
 The requirement recalled in paragraph of the judgment in Gillespie means that any pay rise awarded after the beginning of the period covered by her reference pay must be included in the elements
         of pay used to determine the amount of pay owed to the worker during her maternity leave, and, contrary to the contention
         of the United Kingdom Government, should not be limited to cases where the pay is back-dated to that period.
         
            
 In the light of the foregoing, the reply to the first and second questions must be that Article of the Treaty must be
         interpreted as requiring that, in so far as the pay received by the worker during her maternity leave is determined, at least
         in part, on the basis of the pay she earned before her maternity leave began, any pay rise awarded between the beginning of
         the period covered by the reference pay and the end of the maternity leave must be included in the elements of pay taken into
         account in calculating the amount of such pay. This requirement is not limited to cases where the pay rise is back-dated to
         the period covered by the reference pay.
         
Third  question
            
 By the third question the referring court asks essentially, in the event that the Court finds that there is a right to have
         a pay rise taken into account in circumstances such as those in the main proceedings, how the pay rise should be taken account
         of in calculating the pay due to the worker during her maternity leave and whether account should also be taken of any decrease
         in the woman’s pay during the period following that covered by the reference pay and during her maternity leave. 
         
            
 As regards the first point it should be borne in mind that Article EC is based on a clear division of functions between
         the national courts and the Court of Justice, so that the Court may rule on the interpretation or validity of Community provisions
         only on the basis of the facts which the national court puts before it (Case C-30/AC-ATEL Electronics Vertriebs [1994] ECR I-2305, paragraph 16). It follows that, within the framework of the procedure under Article EC, it is not
         for the Court of Justice but for the national court to apply the Community rules which it has interpreted to national measures
         or situations (Case 222/ICAP [1979] ECR 1163, paragraph 10, and C‑342/Lloyd Schuhfabrik Meyer [1999] ECR I-3819, paragraph 11).
         
            
 Furthermore, as the manner in which the requirement referred to at paragraph of this judgment is to be implemented is not
         the subject of Community legislation, it is within the discretion of the competent authorities of the Member State concerned,
         provided that they comply with that requirement and with all provisions of Community law, in particular those stemming from
         Directive 92/85. It is not therefore for the Court to rule on the manner in which the pay rise is to be taken into account
         when determining the reference pay, or on whether the period covered by that pay should be altered or whether, where the information
         on file is in any event not sufficient, other factors that may affect the determination of that pay should be taken into account.
         
         
            
 As to the question of whether decreases in pay ought to be taken into account, the Court has held that in the context of Article
         EC proceedings it must, in order to determine whether it has jurisdiction, examine the conditions in which the case has
         been referred to it by the national court. The spirit of cooperation which must prevail in the preliminary ruling procedure
         requires the national court to have regard to the function entrusted to the Court of Justice, which is to assist in the administration
         of justice in the Member States and not to deliver advisory opinions on general or hypothetical questions (Case C-415/Bosman [1995] ECR I-4921, paragraph 59; Case C-379/PreussenElektra [2001] ECR I-2099, paragraph 38; Case C-390/Canal Satélite Digital [2002] ECR I-607, paragraph 18; and Case C‑451/Cura Anlagen [2002] ECR I-3193, paragraph 16).
         
            
 In this case the hypothetical nature of the issue on which the Court is asked to rule is confirmed by the fact that the main
         proceedings, as set out in the order for reference, relate exclusively to the refusal to take account of a pay rise, there
         being no question of any pay decrease. In those circumstances the reply to the second part of the third question referred
         by the national court cannot have any bearing on the main proceedings and that part of the question is therefore inadmissible.
         
            
 In the light of the foregoing considerations, the reply to the third question must be that, absent any Community legislation
         in this sphere, it is for the competent national authorities to determine how, in compliance with all the provisions of Community
         law, and in particular Directive 92/85, any pay rise awarded before or during maternity leave must be included in the elements
         of pay used to calculate the pay due to a worker during maternity leave.
         
Costs 
            
 The costs incurred by the United Kingdom Government and by the Commission, which have submitted observations to the Court,
         are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before
         the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court.
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT
 in answer to the questions referred to it by the Court of Appeal (England and Wales) (Civil Division) by order of March
         2002, hereby rules: 
         
 
1.
Article of the EC Treaty (Articles to of the Treaty have been replaced by Articles to EC) must be interpreted
                     as requiring that, in so far as the pay received by the worker during her maternity leave is determined at least in part on
                     the basis of the pay she earned before her maternity leave began, any pay rise awarded between the beginning of the period
                     covered by the reference pay and the end of the maternity leave must be included in the elements of pay taken into account
                     in calculating the amount of such pay. This requirement is not limited to cases where the pay rise is back-dated to the period
                     covered by the reference pay.
                  
 
2.
Absent any Community legislation in this sphere, it is for the competent national authorities to determine how, in compliance
                     with all the provisions of Community law, and in particular Council Directive 92/85/EEC of October on the introduction
                     of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given
                     birth or are breastfeeding (tenth individual directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC), any pay
                     rise awarded before or during maternity leave must be included in the elements of pay used to calculate the pay due to a worker
                     during maternity leave.
                  
Skouris
Jann
Timmermans
Gulmann
Cunha Rodrigues
Rosas
La Pergola
Puissochet
Schintgen
Macken
Colneric
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on March 2004.
         
R. Grass
V. Skouris
Registrar
President
 –
            
Language of the case: English.
Top  
 