
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
March (*)
      
(Appeal — Orphan medicinal products — Regulation (EC) No 141/— Regulation (EC) No 847/— Refusal to grant marketing authorisation for the generic version of the orphan medicinal product ‘imatinib mesylate’)
In Case C‑138/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on March 2015,
Teva Pharma BV, established in Utrecht (Netherlands), 
      
Teva Pharmaceuticals Europe BV, established in Utrecht,
      
represented by K. Bacon QC, E. Mackenzie, Barrister, and G. Morgan, Solicitor,
appellants,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
European Medicines Agency (EMA), represented by N. Rampal Olmedo, M. Tovar Gomis, S. Marino and T. Jabłoński, acting as Agents,
      
defendant at first instance,
European Commission, represented by A. Sipos and M. Šimerdová, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
intervener at first instance,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
composed of A. Arabadjiev, President of the Chamber, J.-C. Bonichot and C.G. Fernlund (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: P. Mengozzi,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the written procedure,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By their appeal, Teva Pharma Europe BV and Teva Pharmaceuticals Europe BV, companies governed by Netherlands law (together,
         ‘the Teva companies’), seek to have set aside the judgment of the General Court of the European Union of January in
         Case T‑140/Teva Pharma and Teva Pharmaceuticals Europe v EMA (EU:T:2015:41) (‘the judgment under appeal’), by which that court dismissed their action for annulment of the decision of
         the European Medicines Agency (EMA) of January rejecting their application to place on the market the generic version
         of the orphan medicinal product imatinib mesylate, in so far as concerns the therapeutic indications for the treatment of
         chronic myeloid leukaemia (‘the contested decision’). 
      
 Legal context
 Regulation (EC) No 141/Regulation (EC) No 141/of the European Parliament and of the Council of December on orphan medicinal products
         (OJ L 18, p. 1), as amended by Regulation (EC) No 596/of the European Parliament and of the Council of June (OJ L 188, p. 14), lays down procedures for the designation of medicinal products as orphan medicinal products and for
         the marketing authorisation of such products. 
      
Recital of Regulation No 141/reads as follows: 
      
‘[E]xperience in the United States of America and Japan shows that the strongest incentive for industry to invest in the development
         and marketing of orphan medicinal products is where there is a prospect of obtaining market exclusivity for a certain number
         of years during which part of the investment might be recovered; data protection under Article 4(8)(a)(iii) of Council Directive
         65/65/EEC of January on the approximation of provisions laid down by law, regulation or administrative action relating
         to medicinal products [OJ, English Special Edition, 1965, p. 20] is not a sufficient incentive for that purpose; Member States
         acting independently cannot introduce such a measure without a Community dimension as such a provision would be contradictory
         to Directive 65/65/EEC; if such measures were adopted in an uncoordinated manner by the Member States, this would create obstacles
         to intra-Community trade, leading to distortions of competition and running counter to the single market; market exclusivity
         should however be limited to the therapeutic indication for which orphan medicinal product designation has been obtained,
         without prejudice to existing intellectual property rights; in the interest of patients, the market exclusivity granted to
         an orphan medicinal product should not prevent the marketing of a similar medicinal product which could be of significant
         benefit to those affected by the condition.’
      
Article 3(1) of Regulation No 141/is worded as follows: 
      
‘A medicinal product shall be designated as an orphan medicinal product if its sponsor can establish:
(a)      that it is intended for the diagnosis, prevention or treatment of a life-threatening or chronically debilitating condition
         affecting not more than five in thousand persons in the [European Union] when the application is made, or 
      
that it is intended for the diagnosis, prevention or treatment of a life-threatening, seriously debilitating or serious and
         chronic condition in the [European Union] and that without incentives it is unlikely that the marketing of the medicinal product
         in the [European Union] would generate sufficient return to justify the necessary investment, 
      
and
(b)      that there exists no satisfactory method of diagnosis, prevention or treatment of the condition in question that has been
         authorised in the [European Union] or, if such method exists, that the medicinal product will be of significant benefit to
         those affected by that condition.’ 
      
Under the procedure set out in Article of Regulation No 141/2000, a medicinal product designated as an orphan medicinal
         product by the European Commission is entered in the Community Register of Orphan Medicinal Products.
      
Article of Regulation No 141/states as follows: 
      
‘1.      Where a marketing authorisation in respect of an orphan medicinal product is granted pursuant to [Council] Regulation (EEC)
         No 2309/[of July laying down Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products for
         human and veterinary use and establishing a European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products (OJ L 241, p. 1)]
         or where all the Member States have granted marketing authorisations in accordance with the procedures for mutual recognition
         laid down in Articles and 7a of Directive 65/65/EEC or Article 9(4) of Council Directive 75/319/EEC of May on the
         approximation of provisions laid down by law, regulation or administrative action relating to medicinal products [OJ L 147, p. 13], and without prejudice to intellectual property law or any other provision of [EU] law, the [European Union]
         and the Member States shall not, for a period of years, accept another application for a marketing authorisation, or grant
         a marketing authorisation or accept an application to extend an existing marketing authorisation, for the same therapeutic
         indication, in respect of a similar medicinal product. 
      
…
3.      By way of derogation from paragraph 1, and without prejudice to intellectual property law or any other provision of [EU] law,
         a marketing authorisation may be granted, for the same therapeutic indication, to a similar medicinal product if: 
      
(a)      the holder of the marketing authorisation for the original orphan medicinal product has given his consent to the second applicant,
         or
      
(b)      the holder of the marketing authorisation for the original orphan medicinal product is unable to supply sufficient quantities
         of the medicinal product, or
      
(c)      the second applicant can establish in the application that the second medicinal product, although similar to the orphan medicinal
         product already authorised, is safer, more effective or otherwise clinically superior. 
      
4.      The Commission shall adopt definitions of “similar medicinal product” and “clinical superiority” in the form of an implementing
         Regulation. 
      
…’
 Regulation (EC) No 847/Article 3(2) of Commission Regulation (EC) No 847/of April laying down the provisions for implementation of the
         criteria for designation of a medicinal product as an orphan medicinal product and definitions of the concepts ‘similar medicinal
         product’ and ‘clinical superiority’ (OJ L 103, p. 5) provides as follows: 
      
‘For the purposes of the implementation of Article of Regulation … No 141/on orphan medicinal products, the following
         definitions shall apply: 
      
–        “significant benefit” means a clinically relevant advantage or a major contribution to patient care.’ 
 Background to the dispute
It is apparent from paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal that by decision of February the Commission designated
         imatinib mesylate (‘imatinib’) an orphan medicinal product for the treatment of chronic myeloid leukaemia (‘CML’) and entered
         that product in the Community Register of Orphan Medicinal Products in accordance with Article 5(9) of Regulation No 141/2000.
         
      
On November 2001, the Commission granted Novartis a marketing authorisation for imatinib under the commercial name Glivec
         for the treatment of adult patients with CML in chronic phase after failure of interferon-alpha therapy, or in accelerated
         phase or blast crisis. Subsequently, the Commission extended the terms of that marketing authorisation to cover other orphan
         conditions. Pursuant to Article of Regulation No 141/2000, the period of exclusivity enjoyed by Glivec expired on November
         2011. 
      
On May 2006, the Commission designated and registered as an orphan medicinal product nilotimib, a medicinal product for
         the treatment of CML, which was sold under the commercial name Tasigna and developed by the holder of the marketing authorisation
         for Glivec. In the course of the marketing authorisation procedure for Tasigna, that holder indicated to the EMA that it consented
         to authorisation being granted for the marketing of that similar medicinal product for the same therapeutic indications as
         those covered by the marketing authorisation granted for Glivec, in accordance with Article 8(3)(a) of Regulation No 141/2000.
         
      
On November 20007, the Commission adopted a decision authorising the marketing of Tasigna for the treatment of adult patients
         with CML in chronic phase and accelerated phase, with resistance or intolerance to prior treatment involving Glivec. That
         decision was mentioned in the Official Journal of the European Union of December (OJ C 316, p. 48). 
      
On December 2010, the Commission extended the terms of that marketing authorisation to cover the treatment of adult patients
         with newly diagnosed CML in chronic phase. The relevant decision was mentioned in the Official Journal of the European Union of February (OJ C 61, p. 1). 
      
On January 2012, Teva Pharmaceuticals Europe BV applied on behalf of Teva Pharma BV for authorisation to place on the market
         a generic version of Glivec. That application referred, inter alia, to certain CML therapeutic indications covered by the
         marketing authorisation granted for Tasigna. 
      
By the contested decision, the EMA refused to grant that application, in so far as it covered the CML therapeutic indications
         for which Tasigna enjoyed marketing authorisation, on the ground that those therapeutic indications still enjoyed market exclusivity
         protection under Article 8(1) of Regulation No 141/2000. 
      
 The procedure before the General Court and the judgment under appeal
On March 2012, the Teva companies brought an action for the annulment of the contested decision. 
      
By order of the President of the First Chamber of the General Court of September 2012, the Commission was granted leave
         to intervene in support of the EMA. 
      
By the judgment under appeal, the General Court dismissed the Teva companies’ action and ordered them to pay the costs. 
      
 Forms of order sought by the parties
The Teva companies claim that the Court should set aside the judgment under appeal, annul the contested decision and order
         the EMA to pay the costs. 
      
The EMA and the Commission contend that the Court should dismiss the appeal and order the Teva companies to pay the costs.
         
      
 The appeal
 The first part of the single ground of appeal, alleging that the General Court erred in law in its interpretation of the conditions
            for the application of the ten-year market exclusivity period
 Arguments of the parties
Teva takes issue with the General Court’s interpretation of Regulation No 141/in paragraph of the judgment under appeal
         and does not accept that a marketing authorisation granted pursuant to Article 8(3) of that regulation can enjoy a period
         of market exclusivity under Article 8(1) of the regulation. That interpretation fails to take account of the aim of Article 8(3)
         of the regulation, which is to protect a similar medicinal product notwithstanding the market exclusivity provided for in
         Article 8(1). As it constitutes a derogation, Article 8(3) should be construed narrowly; it cannot be interpreted as conferring
         the right to market exclusivity provided for in Article 8(1). 
      
Moreover, the General Court’s interpretation is contrary to the scheme of Article of Regulation No 141/2000. Article 8(1)
         is intended to provide a reward for the first orphan medicinal product authorised for a particular indication, that reward
         taking the form of market exclusivity. The notion of exclusivity implies a status that may be enjoyed by only one product.
         If the legislature had intended to confer market exclusivity on several medicinal products at the same time, it would have
         so stated in an express provision, as is apparent from the Explanatory Memorandum to the Proposal for a European Parliament
         and Council Regulation (EC) on orphan medicinal products submitted by the Commission on July (OJ C 276, p. 7).
         
      
The Teva companies maintain that the General Court’s interpretation is, in certain respects, conflicting. In particular, Article 8(3)(a)
         of Regulation No 141/expressly provides that a medicinal product may be authorised with the consent of the holder of
         the marketing authorisation for the original orphan medicinal product. They observe, however, that if the Commission has already
         granted to a third party a marketing authorisation for a second similar orphan medicinal product which independently enjoys
         a period of market exclusivity, the provisions of Article 8(1) and 8(3) will be in direct conflict. 
      
The holder of the marketing authorisation for the original orphan medicinal product would be denied the possibility of consenting
         to the placing on the market of the product in question, whereas the consent of the holder of the authorisation for the second
         medicinal product would be required. Where the marketing authorisation holders are independent entities, it is unlikely in
         practice that such consent would be forthcoming. The Teva companies submit that the holder of the marketing authorisation
         for the second medicinal product would also be denied the possibility of consenting to a subsequent marketing authorisation
         application for a similar medicinal product, as that application would then be in conflict with the market exclusivity enjoyed
         by the original product. 
      
The fact that Article gives no indication as to how those conflicts could be resolved shows that the legislature did not
         envisage such situations. 
      
The EMA and the Commission contend that Article 8(1) of Regulation No 141/is applicable to any medicinal product designated
         an orphan product in accordance with the criteria laid down in Article of the regulation. 
      
 Findings of the Court
It should be noted that in paragraph of the judgment under appeal the General Court found that ‘the marketing authorisation
         granted for an orphan medicinal product in respect of the same therapeutic indications as those for which the original orphan
         product was authorised, including on one of the grounds laid down in Article 8(3) of Regulation No 141/2000, automatically
         confers on that product the ten-year period of market exclusivity provided for in Article 8(1) of that regulation’.
      
It should be recalled in that connection that, in order to provide the pharmaceutical industry with an incentive to sponsor
         the research, development and marketing of orphan medicinal products, Regulation No 141/offers the sponsors of such products
         the prospect of obtaining market exclusivity for a certain number of years. In line with that objective, referred to in recital
         of the regulation, Article 8(1) thereof provides that ‘where a marketing authorisation in respect of an orphan medicinal
         product is granted … the [European Union] and the Member States shall not, for a period of years, accept another application
         for a marketing authorisation, or grant a marketing authorisation or accept an application to extend an existing marketing
         authorisation, for the same therapeutic indication, in respect of a similar medicinal product’.
      
As is apparent from recital of Regulation No 141/2000, that regulation nevertheless seeks to circumscribe that period of
         exclusivity in order not to prejudice existing intellectual property rights and, in the interests of patients, not to prevent
         the marketing of a medicinal product similar to the orphan product which could be of significant benefit to those affected
         by the condition in question. 
      
Accordingly, Article 8(3) of Regulation No 141/provides that it is possible to derogate from the ten-year exclusivity
         period and grant marketing authorisation for a similar medicinal product in respect of the same therapeutic indication and
         to do so in three cases, namely (i) where the holder of the marketing authorisation for the original orphan product consents
         or (ii) is unable to supply sufficient quantities of the medicinal product and (iii) where the second applicant can establish
         that his product, ‘although similar to the orphan medicinal product already authorised, is safer, more effective or otherwise
         clinically superior’.
      
None of the provisions referred to above expressly provides that a marketing authorisation granted on the basis of Article 8(3)
         of Regulation No 141/is to be denied the benefit of the ten-year period of exclusivity provided for in Article 8(1) of
         the regulation. The General Court was therefore entitled to state, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that there
         is nothing in that provision concerning whether the authorisation referred to in Article 8(3) of the regulation confers market
         exclusivity on a similar medicinal product and, in paragraph of the judgment, that there is nothing in the regulation to
         suggest that application of Article 8(3) precludes the application of Article 8(1).
      
It is also apparent from the factors referred to above that although the market exclusivity provided in Article 8(1) of Regulation
         No 141/is reserved for orphan medicinal products alone, the derogations exhaustively set out in Article 8(3) of the regulation
         relate to any similar medicinal product within the meaning of Regulation No 847/2000, irrespective of whether or not the product
         is an orphan product. As the General Court was correct to observe in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, Regulation
         No 141/does not contain any provision under which it is possible not to apply the ten-year period of market exclusivity
         to orphan medicinal products that have been granted marketing authorisation for certain therapeutic indications, with the
         exception of the situations set out in Article 8(2) of the regulation. As a consequence, where a similar medicinal product
         that has been granted marketing authorisation under Article 8(3) of Regulation No 141/is an orphan product, it enjoys
         the market exclusivity provided in Article 8(1) of the regulation. 
      
Contrary to the contentions of the Teva companies, that interpretation is neither illogical nor at odds with the purpose or
         scheme of Article of Regulation No 141/2000. Paragraphs and of Article of the regulation, although complementary,
         are different in scope and purpose. The fact that an orphan medicinal product enjoys the period of market exclusivity provided
         in Article 8(1) of Regulation No 141/does not preclude a second, similar product which has been authorised in accordance
         with Article 8(3) of the regulation being granted, in turn, market exclusivity, as long as it also fulfils the requirements
         set out in Article 3(1) of the regulation for designation as an orphan medicinal product. 
      
The General Court was therefore correct to state, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that it is precisely in order
         to ensure attainment of the objective pursued by Regulation No 141/— namely to encourage investment in the research,
         development and marketing of orphan medicinal products — that market exclusivity must be granted in all cases in which an
         orphan product has been given marketing authorisation. 
      
It follows from all the above considerations that the first part of the single ground of appeal is unfounded and must be rejected.
         
      
 The second part of the single ground of appeal, alleging that the General Court erred in law in its interpretation of the
            term of the market exclusivity period
 Arguments of the parties
The Teva companies dispute the General Court’s finding in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that ‘if [the similar
         product] is an orphan medicinal product, the ten-year period of market exclusivity with which it is endowed by virtue of Article 8(1)
         of the regulation cannot be curtailed as a result of the fact that there exists an orphan medicinal product which has received
         marketing authorisation for the same therapeutic indications and which benefits from market exclusivity for those indications’
         and that ‘similarly, the market exclusivity attaching to that product will not be extended as a result of the fact that marketing
         authorisation has been granted for the second medicinal product’. 
      
The Teva companies consider that interpretation to be clearly at odds with the objective of Article of Regulation No 141/as it would lead, in practice, to the prolongation of the market exclusivity period beyond its ten-year term. Accordingly,
         they claim that if the marketing authorisation had been granted for Tasigna on November 2011, that interpretation would
         have the effect of conferring market exclusivity until November 2021, that is, for a period of years, during which no
         generic version could be placed on the market. Such an extension of the market exclusivity period is particularly unjustified,
         given that it would not have been possible if Tasigna had represented a development that was sufficiently novel not be regarded
         as a similar product within the meaning of Regulation No 847/2000. Paradoxically, the effect of the contested decision would
         therefore be that a generic version of Glivec could not enjoy market exclusivity after the grant to Novartis of a marketing
         authorisation for a different product, whereas that company would have the benefit of market exclusivity for a similar medicinal
         product. That analysis would create ‘perverse’ incentives for undertakings to develop a series of slightly different, but
         nevertheless similar, orphan products, thereby benefiting from a prolongation of the period of market exclusivity, which is
         normally limited to years. 
      
The EMA and the Commission submit that there is no formal extension of the market exclusivity period of the first orphan medicinal
         product. The authorisation of any subsequent similar orphan product would have no impact on the decision to remove the first
         product from the Register of Orphan Medicinal Products at the end of the ten-year exclusivity period. 
      
 Findings of the Court
As observed in paragraph above, where a similar medicinal product that has been granted marketing authorisation under Article 8(3)
         of Regulation No 141/is an orphan medicinal product, it enjoys the market exclusivity provided in Article 8(1) of the
         regulation. In line with the objective pursued by Regulation No 141/2000, which is to provide the pharmaceutical industry
         with an incentive to sponsor the research, development and marketing of orphan medicinal products by granting them a period
         of market exclusivity, Article 8(1) of the regulation does not provide for any exception to the duration of that period or
         for any modification of the period. The General Court was therefore entitled to find, in paragraph of the judgment under
         appeal, that ‘no provision [is] made for any extension of that period, which may be reduced, under Article 8(2) of Regulation
         No 141/2000, only in situations in which it is established that the medicinal product in question no longer meets the requirements
         laid down in Article 3(1) of the regulation’.
      
The General Court did not therefore err in law in finding, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the ten-year
         period of market exclusivity with which an orphan medicinal product is endowed by virtue of Article 8(1) of Regulation No 141/‘cannot be curtailed as a result of the fact that there exists an orphan medicinal product which has received marketing authorisation
         for the same therapeutic indications and which benefits from market exclusivity for those indications’ and that ‘similarly,
         the market exclusivity attaching to that product will not be extended as a result of the fact that marketing authorisation
         has been granted for the [similar] medicinal product’. 
      
It follows from all the foregoing considerations that the second part of the single ground of appeal is unfounded and must
         be rejected. 
      
 The third part of the single ground of appeal, alleging that the General Court failed to examine the alternative case put
            forward by the Teva companies
 Arguments of the parties
The Teva companies take issue with the General Court on the ground that it distorted the meaning of its alternative case and
         failed to address that case. According to paragraph of the judgment under appeal, those companies had argued that ‘if a
         second, similar orphan medicinal product which has been granted marketing authorisation for the same therapeutic indications
         as those for which the marketing of the original orphan product was authorised may benefit from a ten-year period of market
         exclusivity that is independent of that enjoyed by the original orphan product, that period of exclusivity could operate only
         to prevent marketing authorisation being granted for products that are similar to the second medicinal product’.
      
The Teva companies contend that that description is not an accurate reflection of paragraphs to of the application which
         they submitted to the General Court or of paragraph of their reply, in which they submitted that the market exclusivity
         granted to a second medicinal product should prevent only the authorisation of products that are similar to the second product,
         while not being similar to the first orphan product. Even if Article of Regulation No 141/may be construed as providing,
         in principle, an independent period of market exclusivity for the second product, there should be an exception to that market
         exclusivity so as to permit the authorisation of a generic version of the first product, once the period of exclusivity for
         that first product has expired. 
      
The EMA questions whether the third part of the single ground of appeal is admissible, in that it relates to an appraisal
         of the facts. The EMA maintains, like the Commission, that this part of the ground of appeal is in any event unfounded as
         the General Court did not distort the Teva companies’ written pleadings. 
      
 Findings of the Court
It is apparent from paragraph of the judgment under appeal that the Teva companies maintain that the market exclusivity
         enjoyed by a second orphan medicinal product does not preclude marketing authorisation being granted for a product that is
         similar to the first orphan product. In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the General Court stated that the applicants
         submitted, in the alternative, that even if a similar orphan medicinal product authorised under the derogation in Article 8(3)
         of Regulation No 141/may benefit from an independent ten-year period of market exclusivity, that second period of exclusivity
         would preclude only authorisation for the marketing of products that are similar to the second orphan product and that such
         a period of exclusivity cannot operate to prevent marketing authorisation being granted for medicinal products that are similar
         to the first authorised orphan product, in particular generic versions of that product, after the expiry of the period of
         market exclusivity attaching to the first orphan product. In thus setting out the Teva companies’ arguments referred to in
         paragraph above, the General Court did not distort those arguments. 
      
As those arguments were rejected on the grounds set out in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the General Court cannot
         be criticised for failing to rule on the arguments. 
      
It follows that the third part of the single ground of appeal is clearly unfounded. The appeal must therefore be dismissed.
         
      
 Costs
Under Article 138(1) of the Rules of Procedure, applicable to the procedure on appeal pursuant to Article 184(1) of those
         rules, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings.
         
      
Since the EMA has applied for costs against the Teva companies and the Teva companies have been unsuccessful, they must be
         ordered to bear their own costs and pay the costs incurred by the EMA.
      
In accordance with Article 140(1) of the Rules of Procedure, applicable to the procedure on appeal pursuant to Article 184(1)
         of those rules, the Commission, which intervened in the proceedings, is to be ordered to bear its own costs. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (Sixth Chamber) hereby:
1.      Dismisses the appeal.
2.      Orders Teva Pharma BV and Teva Pharmaceuticals Europe BV to bear their own costs and to pay the costs incurred by the European
            Medicines Agency (EMA).
3.      Orders the European Commission to bear its own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 