
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-434/Arnold André GmbH & Co. KG
v
Landrat des Kreises Herford
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Verwaltungsgericht Minden)
(Directive 2001/37/EC – Manufacture, presentation and sale of tobacco products – Article – Prohibition of placing on the market of tobacco products for oral use – Validity)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Approximation of laws – Manufacture, presentation and sale of tobacco products – Directive 2001/– Legal basis – Article
            EC – Improvement of the conditions for the functioning of the internal market – Prohibition of marketing tobacco products
            for oral use – Included
(Art. EC; European Parliament and Council Directive 2001/37, Art. 8)
2.        Approximation of laws – Manufacture, presentation and sale of tobacco products – Directive 2001/– Harmonising measures
            – Prohibition of marketing tobacco products for oral use – No breach of the principle of proportionality
(European Parliament and Council Directive 2001/37, Art. 8)
3.        Free movement of goods – Quantitative restrictions – Measures having equivalent effect – Directive 2001/concerning the
            manufacture, presentation and sale of tobacco products – Prohibition of marketing tobacco products for oral use – Justification
            – Protection of public health
(Arts EC, EC and EC; European Parliament and Council Directive 2001/37, Art. 8)
4.        Acts of the institutions – Statement of reasons – Obligation – Extent – Directive 2001/concerning the manufacture, presentation
            and sale of tobacco products – Provision prohibiting the marketing of tobacco products for oral use
(Art. EC)
5.        Approximation of laws – Manufacture, presentation and sale of tobacco products – Directive 2001/– Harmonising measures
            – Prohibition of marketing tobacco products for oral use – No breach of the principle of non-discrimination
(European Parliament and Council Directive 2001/37, Art. 8)
1.        The prohibition of the marketing of tobacco products for oral use in Article of Directive 2001/on the approximation of
         the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning the manufacture, presentation and sale
         of tobacco products could be adopted on the basis of Article EC. That provision authorises the Community legislature to
         intervene by adopting appropriate measures, in compliance with Article 95(3) EC and with the legal principles mentioned in
         the Treaty or identified in the case-law, in particular the principle of proportionality. Having regard to the public’s growing
         awareness of the dangers to health of the consumption of tobacco products, it is likely that obstacles to the free movement
         of those products would arise by reason of the adoption by the Member States of new rules reflecting that development and
         intended more effectively to discourage consumption of those products.
      
(see paras 34, 40, 43)
2.        To satisfy its obligation to take as a base a high level of protection in health matters, in accordance with Article 95(3)
         EC, the Community legislature was able, without exceeding the limits of its discretion in the matter, to consider that a prohibition
         of the marketing of tobacco products for oral use such as that laid down in Article of Directive 2001/on the approximation
         of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning the manufacture, presentation and sale
         of tobacco products was necessary. No other measures aimed at imposing technical standards on manufacturers in order to reduce
         the harmful effects of the product, or at regulating the labelling of packagings of the product and its conditions of sale,
         in particular to minors, would have the same preventive effect in terms of the protection of health, inasmuch as they would
         let a product which is in any event harmful gain a place in the market.
      
(see paras 54-55)
3.        Even if the prohibition of marketing tobacco products for oral use under Article of Directive 2001/on the approximation
         of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning the manufacture, presentation and sale
         of tobacco products constitutes a restriction referred to in Articles EC and EC, it is justified on grounds of the protection
         of human health, and cannot therefore be regarded as having been adopted in breach of the provisions of those articles.
      
(see para. 59)
4.        Since Directive 2001/on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning
         the manufacture, presentation and sale of tobacco products specifies, in the 28th recital in its preamble, that Directive
         89/on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning the labelling
         of tobacco products prohibited the sale in the Member States of certain types of tobacco for oral use and that Article of the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Republic of Austria, the Republic of Finland and the Kingdom of Sweden
         and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union is founded granted the Kingdom of Sweden a derogation from
         the provisions of the latter directive, it does not appear that the confirmation of that prohibition in Article of Directive
         2001/required that directive to specify other relevant points of fact and law in order to satisfy the obligation to state
         reasons under Article EC.
      
(see para. 66)
5.        Although tobacco products for oral use, as defined in Article of Directive 2001/on the approximation of the laws, regulations
         and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning the manufacture, presentation and sale of tobacco products,
         are not fundamentally different in their composition or indeed their destination from tobacco products intended to be chewed,
         they were not in the same situation as those products at the time of adoption of the directive. Tobacco products for oral
         use were new to the markets of the Member States referred to in the prohibition of marketing in Article of the directive.
         That particular situation thus authorised a difference in treatment of those products, and it cannot validly be argued that
         there was a breach of the principle of non-discrimination.
      
(see para. 69)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)December 2004(1)
(Directive 2001/37/EC  –  Manufacture, presentation and sale of tobacco products  –  Article –  Prohibition of placing on the market of tobacco products for oral use  –  Validity)
 In Case C-434/02,
             REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Verwaltungsgericht Minden (Germany), made by decision of
            November 2002, received at the Court on November 2002, in the proceedings
            
Arnold André GmbH & Co. KG
v
Landrat des Kreises Herford,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),,
 composed of: V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans and K. Lenaerts, Presidents of Chambers, C. Gulmann, J.-P.
            Puissochet, N. Colneric, S. von Bahr and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur), Judges,
            
 Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed,Registrar: H. von Holstein, Deputy Registrar, and subsequently M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator,
             having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on June 2004,after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
            
–
 Arnold André GmbH & Co. KG, by J. Sedemund and M. Graf von Merveldt, Rechtsanwälte,
            
–
 Landrat des Kreises Herford, by P. Bischof, acting as Agent, 
            
–
 the Belgian Government, by A. Snoecx, acting as Agent,
            
–
 the French Government, by G. de Bergues and R. Loosli-Surrans, acting as Agents,
            
–
 the Irish Government, by K. Mooney and J. Buttimore BL,
            
–
 the Finnish Government, by T. Pynnä, acting as Agent,
            
–
 the Swedish Government, by A. Kruse, acting as Agent,
            
–
 the United Kingdom Government, by P. Ormond and C. Jackson, acting as Agents, and N. Paines QC and T. Ward, Barrister,
            
–
 the European Parliament, by E. Waldherr, M. Moore and U. Rösslein, acting as Agents,
            
–
 the Council of the European Union, by E. Karlsson and J.-P. Hix, acting as Agents,
            
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by I. Martínez del Peral, F. Hoffmeister and B. Martenczuk, acting as Agents,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 This reference concerns the validity of Article of Directive 2001/37/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of
         June on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning the
         manufacture, presentation and sale of tobacco products (OJ L 194, p. 26).
         
            
 The reference was made in the course of proceedings between Arnold André GmbH & Co. KG (‘Arnold André’) and the Landrat des
         Kreises Herford (chief administrative officer of the District of Herford) concerning the prohibition of the marketing in Germany
         of tobacco products for oral use from the importer Swedish Match.
         
Legal background
            
 Article 8a of Council Directive 89/622/EEC of November on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions of the Member States concerning the labelling of tobacco products (OJ L 359, p. 1), as amended by Council
         Directive 92/41/EEC of May (OJ L 158, p. 30), (‘Directive 89/622’) provides that the Member States are to prohibit
         the placing on the market of tobacco for oral use, defined in Article 2(4) of that directive as ‘all products for oral use,
         except those intended to be smoked or chewed, made wholly or partly of tobacco, in powder or particulate form or in any combination
         of these forms – particularly those presented in sachet portions or porous sachets – or in a form resembling a food product’.
         
            
 The 11th recital in the preamble to Directive 92/states that ‘it has been proved that smokeless tobacco products are a
         major risk factor as regards cancer and … they should therefore carry a specific warning of that risk’. According to the 12th
         recital in that preamble, ‘scientific experts are of the opinion that the addiction caused by tobacco consumption constitutes
         a danger meriting a specific warning on every tobacco product’.
         
            
 According to the 13th recital in the preamble to Directive 92/41:
         ‘… new tobacco products for oral use which have appeared on the market in certain Member States are particularly attractive
         to young people and … the Member States most exposed to this problem have already placed total bans on these new tobacco products
         or intend so to do’.
         
            
 The 14th recital in that preamble states:
         ‘… regarding such products, there are differences between the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member
         States and … these products therefore need to be made subject to common rules’.
         
            
 According to the 15th recital in the preamble:
         ‘... there is a real risk that the new products for oral use will be used above all by young people, thus leading to nicotine
         addiction, unless restrictive measures are taken in time’.
         
            
 According to the 16th recital in the preamble:
         ‘… in accordance with the conclusions of the studies conducted by the International Agency for Research on Cancer, tobacco
         for oral use contains particularly large quantities of carcinogenic substances; … these new products cause cancer of the mouth
         in particular’.
         
            
 According to the 17th recital in the preamble to that directive:
         ‘… the sales bans on such tobacco already adopted by three Member States have a direct impact on the establishment and operation
         of the internal market; … it is therefore necessary to approximate Member States’ laws, regulations and administrative provisions
         in this area, taking as a base a high level of health protection; … the only appropriate measure is a total ban; … however,
         such a ban should not affect traditional tobacco products for oral use, which will remain subject to the provisions of Directive
         89/622/EEC, as amended by this Directive, applicable to smokeless tobacco products’.
         
            
 Article 151(1) of the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Republic of Austria, the Republic of Finland and the
         Kingdom of Sweden and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union is founded  (OJ C 241, p. 21, and OJ
         L 1, p. 1, ‘the Act of Accession’) provides:
         ‘The Acts listed in Annex XV to this Act shall apply in respect of the new Member States under the conditions laid down in
         that Annex.’
         
            
 Chapter X, ‘Miscellaneous’, of Annex XV establishing the list provided for in Article of the Act of Accession, provides:
         
‘(a)
The prohibition in Article 8a of Directive 89/622/EEC, as amended …, concerning the placing on the market of the product defined
               in Article 2(4) of [the] Directive … shall not apply [in the Kingdom of Sweden …], with the exception of the prohibition to
               place this product on the market in a form resembling a food product.
            
(b)
[The Kingdom of Sweden] shall take all measures necessary to ensure that the product referred to in paragraph (a) is not placed
               on the market in the Member States for which Directives 89/622/EEC and 92/41/EEC are fully applicable.
            
…’
            
 Directive 2001/was adopted on the basis of Articles EC and EC and recasts Directive 89/and Council Directive
         90/239/EEC of May on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States
         concerning the maximum tar yield of cigarettes (OJ L 137, p. 36).
         
            
 According to the 28th recital in the preamble to Directive 2001/37:
         ‘Directive 89/622/EEC prohibited the sale in the Member States of certain types of tobacco for oral use. Article of the
         Act of Accession … grants the Kingdom of Sweden a derogation from the provisions of that Directive in this regard.’
         
            
 Article of Directive 2001/37, headed ‘Definitions’, provides:
         ‘For the purposes of this Directive:
         
1.
“tobacco products” means products for the purposes of smoking, sniffing, sucking or chewing, inasmuch as they are, even partly,
               made of tobacco, whether genetically modified or not;
            
…
4.
“tobacco for oral use” means all products for oral use, except those intended to be smoked or chewed, made wholly or partly
               of tobacco, in powder or in particulate form or in any combination of those forms, particularly those presented in sachet
               portions or porous sachets, or in a form resembling a food product;
            
…’
            
 According to Article 5(4) of that directive:
         ‘Tobacco products for oral use, where their marketing is permitted under Article 8, and smokeless tobacco products shall carry
         the following warning: “This tobacco product can damage your health and is addictive”.
         …’
         
            
 Article of the directive, ‘Tobacco for oral use’, provides:
         ‘Member States shall prohibit the placing on the market of tobacco for oral use, without prejudice to Article of the Act
         of Accession …’.
         
            
 Under Article 13(1) of the directive:
         ‘Member States may not, for considerations relating to the limitation of the tar, nicotine or carbon monoxide yields of cigarettes,
         to health warnings and other indications or to other requirements of this Directive, prohibit or restrict the import, sale
         or consumption of tobacco products which comply with this Directive, with the exception of measures taken for the purposes
         of verifying the data provided under Article 4.’
         
            
 Article of the directive provides inter alia that Directive 89/is repealed and that references to it are to be construed
         as references to Directive 2001/37.
         
The main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 Arnold André is a company established in Germany which markets cigars, pipe tobacco and traditional Swedish tobacco for oral
         use called ‘snus’. Snus is finely ground or cut tobacco sold loose or in small sachet portions and intended to be consumed
         by placing between the gum and the lip.
         
            
 On the basis essentially of Paragraph 5a of the Verordnung über Tabakerzeugnisse  (Tabakverordnung) (Regulation on tobacco
         products, BGBl. I, p. 460, ‘the tobacco regulation’), which transposed Article 8a of Directive 89/into German law,
         the Landrat des Kreises Herford, by decision of September 2002, prohibited Arnold André from marketing tobacco products
         of the Röda Lacket-Snus, Ljunglöfs Ettan-Snus and General Snus brands from the importer Swedish Match. Arnold André was ordered
         to recall the products concerned and the documentation relating to them, on pain of a financial penalty. Immediate enforcement
         of the decision of September was ordered.
         
            
 On September Arnold André brought an administrative complaint against that decision, and on September it applied
         to the Verwaltungsgericht Minden (Administrative Court, Minden) to suspend the immediate enforcement of the decision.
         
            
 The national court was uncertain as to the compatibility with provisions of Community law of Article of Directive 2001/37,
         which was transposed by Paragraph 5a of the tobacco regulation. It considered that Article might be contrary to the provisions
         of Articles EC and 95(1) EC and the principles of equal treatment and proportionality.
         
            
 The Verwaltungsgericht Minden decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following question to the Court for a preliminary
         ruling:
         ‘Is Article of Directive 2001/… , by which … the placing on the market of tobacco for oral use is prohibited, without
         prejudice to Article of the Act of Accession …, compatible with higher-ranking law of the European Communities?’
         
The applications for leave to submit observations in reply to the Opinion of the Advocate General and, in the alternative,
               for reopening of the oral procedure
            
 By act lodged at the Court Registry on October 2004, Arnold André requested the Court:
         
–
to grant it leave to submit written observations following the Opinion of the Advocate General;
–
in the alternative, to order the oral procedure to be reopened, pursuant to Article of the Rules of Procedure.
            
 Arnold André wishes to comment on the Advocate General’s suggestions relating to the possibility of maintaining the effects
         of Directive 2001/in the event that the Court declares it invalid.
         
            
 On this point, it must be recalled that the Statute of the Court of Justice and the Rules of Procedure make no provision for
         the parties to submit observations in response to the Advocate General’s Opinion (see the order in Case C-17/Emesa Sugar [2000] ECR I-665, paragraph 2). The application for leave to submit written observations in reply to the Advocate General’s
         Opinion is therefore dismissed.
         
            
 The Court may also, of its own motion, on a proposal from the Advocate General, or at the request of the parties, order the
         reopening of the oral procedure, in accordance with Article of the Rules of Procedure, if it considers that it lacks sufficient
         information or that the case should be decided on the basis of an argument which has not been debated between the parties
         (see Case C-309/Wouters and Others [2002] ECR I-1577, paragraph 42, and Case C-470/P Parliament v Ripo di Meana and Others [2004] ECR I-0000, paragraph 33). In the present case, however, the Court, after hearing the Advocate General, considers
         that it has all the information necessary for it to answer the question referred for a preliminary ruling. The application
         for the oral procedure to be reopened must therefore be dismissed.
         
The question referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling concerns the validity of Article of Directive 2001/37. To examine that point,
         the Court must ascertain whether that article could be adopted on the legal basis of Article EC and whether it was adopted
         in breach of Articles EC or EC or the principles of proportionality or non-discrimination.
         
The choice of Article EC as legal basis
            
 Article 95(1) EC provides that the Council is to adopt the measures for the approximation of the provisions laid down by law,
         regulation or administrative action in Member States which have as their object the establishment and functioning of the internal
         market.
         
            
 In this respect, it should be recalled that, while a mere finding of disparities between national rules is not sufficient
         to justify having recourse to Article EC (see, to that effect, Case C-376/Germany v Parliament and Council [2000] ECR I-8419, paragraph 84), it is otherwise where there are differences between the laws, regulations or administrative
         provisions of the Member States which are such as to obstruct the fundamental freedoms and thus have a direct effect on the
         functioning of the internal market (see, to that effect, Germany v Parliament and Council, paragraph 95, and Case C-491/British American Tobacco (Investments) and Imperial Tobacco [2002] ECR I-11453, paragraph 60).
         
            
 It also follows from the Court’s case-law that, while recourse to Article EC as a legal basis is possible if the aim is
         to prevent future obstacles to trade resulting from the heterogeneous development of national laws, the emergence of such
         obstacles must be likely and the measure in question must be designed to prevent them (see, to that effect, Case C-350/Spain v Council [1995] ECR I-1985, paragraph 35, Germany v Parliament and Council, paragraph 86, Case C-377/Netherlands v Parliament and Council [2001] ECR I-7079, paragraph 15, and British American Tobacco (Investments) and Imperial Tobacco, paragraph 61).
         
            
 The Court has also held that, where the conditions for recourse to Article EC as a legal basis are fulfilled, the Community
         legislature cannot be prevented from relying on that legal basis on the ground that public health protection is a decisive
         factor in the choices to be made (British American Tobacco (Investments) and Imperial Tobacco, paragraph 62).
         
            
 It should also be noted that the first subparagraph of Article 152(1) EC provides that a high level of protection of human
         health is to be ensured in the definition and implementation of all Community policies and activities, and that Article 95(3)
         EC expressly requires that, in achieving harmonisation, a high level of protection of human health should be guaranteed (British American Tobacco (Investments) and Imperial Tobacco, paragraph 62).
         
            
 It follows from the foregoing that, where there are obstacles to trade or it is likely that such obstacles will emerge in
         future because the Member States have taken or are about to take divergent measures with respect to a product or a class of
         products such as to ensure different levels of protection and thereby prevent the product or products concerned from moving
         freely within the Community, Article EC authorises the Community legislature to intervene by adopting appropriate measures,
         in compliance with Article 95(3) EC and with the legal principles mentioned in the Treaty or identified in the case-law, in
         particular the principle of proportionality.
         
            
 Depending on the circumstances, those appropriate measures may consist in requiring all the Member States to authorise the
         marketing of the product or products concerned, subjecting such an obligation of authorisation to certain conditions, or even
         provisionally or definitively prohibiting the marketing of a product or products (see, in the context of Council Directive
         92/59/EEC of June on general product safety (OJ L 228, p. 24), Case C-359/Germany v Council [1994] ECR I-3681, paragraphs and 33).
         
            
 It is in the light of those principles that the Court must ascertain whether the conditions for recourse to Article EC
         as legal basis were satisfied in the case of Article of Directive 2001/37.
         
            
 It must be pointed out, to begin with, that Article does no more than reproduce the provisions of Article 8a of Directive
         89/under which the Member States are to prohibit the placing on the market of tobacco for oral use. That tobacco is defined
         in Directive 2001/37, and in Directive 89/622, as ‘all products for oral use, except those intended to be smoked or chewed,
         made wholly or partly of tobacco, in powder or in particulate form or in any combination of those forms, particularly those
         presented in sachet portions or porous sachets, or in a form resembling a food product’.
         
            
 It is common ground that for those products, as indicated in the 14th recital in the preamble to Directive 92/41, there were
         differences, at the time of adoption of that directive, between the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the
         Member States. Two of them had already prohibited the marketing of such products and a third had adopted provisions which,
         while not yet in force, had the same object. Those provisions were intended, according to their authors, to stop the expansion
         of consumption of products harmful to health which were new to the markets of the Member States and were thought to be especially
         attractive to young people.
         
            
 As the market in tobacco products is one in which trade between Member States represents a relatively large part (see British American Tobacco (Investments) and Imperial Tobacco, paragraph 64), those prohibitions of marketing contributed to a heterogeneous development of that market and were therefore
         such as to constitute obstacles to the free movement of goods.
         
            
 Having regard also to the public’s growing awareness of the dangers to health of the consumption of tobacco products, it was
         likely that obstacles to the free movement of those products would emerge by reason of the adoption by the Member States of
         new rules reflecting that development and intended more effectively to discourage consumption of those products (British American Tobacco (Investments) and Imperial Tobacco, paragraph 67).
         
            
 Article of Directive 2001/was adopted in a context which, from the point of view of obstacles to the free movement of
         goods existing in the market for tobacco products as a result of the heterogeneous development of the conditions of marketing
         of tobacco products for oral use in the various Member States, was no different from that which existed when Article 8a of
         Directive 89/was adopted. It should be added that the Act of Accession cannot have any bearing on the assessment of that
         context. That Act not only excluded the Kingdom of Sweden from the scope of Article 8a, it also required that Member State
         to take all necessary measures to ensure that tobacco products for oral use were not placed on the market in the other Member
         States.
         
            
 Action by the Community legislature on the basis of Article EC was therefore justified with respect to tobacco products
         for oral use.
         
            
 It follows from the foregoing that the prohibition in Article of Directive 2001/could be adopted on the basis of Article
         EC. It will have to be examined below whether the adoption of that measure complied with Article 95(3) EC and the legal
         principles referred to in the national court’s question.
         
Article 95(3) EC and the principle of proportionality
            
 Article 95(3) EC provides that both the Commission and also the Parliament and the Council are to take as a base a high level
         of protection of human health, taking account in particular of any new development based on scientific facts.
         
            
 It should also be borne in mind that the principle of proportionality, which is one of the general principles of Community
         law, requires that measures implemented through Community provisions are appropriate for attaining the objective pursued and
         must not go beyond what is necessary to achieve it (see, inter alia, Case 137/Maizena [1987] ECR 4587, paragraph 15; Case C-339/ADM Ölmühlen [1993] ECR I-6473, paragraph 15; and Case C-210/Käserei Champignon Hofmeister [2002] ECR I-6453, paragraph 59).
         
            
 With regard to judicial review of the conditions referred to in the previous paragraph, the Community legislature must be
         allowed a broad discretion in an area such as that concerned in the present case, which involves political, economic and social
         choices on its part, and in which it is called on to undertake complex assessments. Only if a measure adopted in this field
         is manifestly inappropriate in relation to the objective which the competent institutions are seeking to pursue can the lawfulness
         of such a measure be affected (see, to that effect, Case C-84/United Kingdom v Council [1996] ECR I-5755, paragraph 58; Case C-233/Germany v Parliament and Council [1997] ECR I-2405, paragraphs and 56; Case C-157/National Farmers’ Union and Others [1998] ECR I-2211, paragraph 61; and British American Tobacco (Investments) and Imperial Tobacco, paragraph 123).
         
            
 With regard to Article 8a inserted in Directive 89/by Directive 92/41, it is apparent from the preamble to the latter
         directive that the prohibition of the marketing of tobacco products for oral use was the only measure that appeared appropriate
         to cope with the real danger that those new products would be used by young people, thus leading to nicotine addiction, with
         those products causing cancer of the mouth in particular.
         
            
 Arnold André essentially submits that, having regard to the state of the scientific information available to the Community
         legislature in 2001, when Article of Directive 2001/was adopted, on which it moreover relied in amending the rules governing
         the warning referred to in Article 5(4) of that directive, maintenance of the prohibition of marketing tobacco products for
         oral use was disproportionate in relation to the objective pursued and did not take account of the development of that scientific
         information.
         
            
 The answer to that argument must be that, while some experts could from call into question the assertion that, as the
         16th recital in the preamble to Directive 92/puts it, ‘these new products cause cancer of the mouth in particular’, all
         controversy on that point was not eliminated at the time of adoption of Directive 2001/37. Moreover, while part of the scientific
         community accepted that tobacco products for oral use could be used as substitute products for cigarettes, another part challenged
         the correctness of such a position. From that situation it must be inferred that the scientific information which could have
         been available to the Community legislature in did not allow the conclusion that consumption of the products in question
         presented no danger to human health.
         
            
 Moreover, like all other tobacco products, those for oral use contain nicotine, which causes addiction and whose toxicity
         is not disputed.
         
            
 Now, first, it had not been shown at the time of adoption of Directive 2001/that the harmful effects of those products
         were lesser in that regard than those of other tobacco products. Second, it had been shown that they presented serious risks
         to health, which the Community legislature had to take into account.
         
            
 In those circumstances, it cannot be maintained that, contrary to the provisions of Article 95(3) EC, the prohibition which
         follows from Article of Directive 2001/was laid down without account being taken of the development of scientific information.
         
            
 Moreover, nothing that has been submitted to the Court allows the view to be taken that tobacco products for oral use were
         not products new to the market of the Member States as it existed at the time of adoption of Directive 92/41.
         
            
 To satisfy its obligation to take as a base a high level of protection in health matters, in accordance with Article 95(3)
         EC, the Community legislature was thus able, without exceeding the limits of its discretion in the matter, to consider that
         a prohibition of the marketing of tobacco products for oral use was necessary, and in particular that there was no alternative
         measure which allowed that objective to be achieved as effectively.
         
            
 As the Advocate General observes in points to of his Opinion, no other measures aimed at imposing technical standards
         on manufacturers in order to reduce the harmful effects of the product, or at regulating the labelling of packagings of the
         product and its conditions of sale, in particular to minors, would have the same preventive effect in terms of the protection
         of health, inasmuch as they would let a product which is in any event harmful gain a place in the market.
         
            
 It follows from the above considerations that, with respect both to the objective of ensuring a high level of protection of
         human health given to the Community legislature by Article 95(3) EC and to its obligation to comply with the principle of
         proportionality, the contested prohibition cannot be regarded as manifestly inappropriate.
         
Article EC
            
 It is settled case-law that the prohibition of quantitative restrictions and measures having equivalent effect laid down by
         Article EC applies not only to national measures but also to measures adopted by the Community institutions (see in particular,
         to that effect, Case 15/Denkavit Nederland [1984] ECR 2171, paragraph 15; Case C-51/Meyhui [1994] ECR I-3879, paragraph 11; and Case C-114/Kieffer and Thill [1997] ECR I-3629, paragraph 27).
         
            
 Nevertheless, as Article EC provides, the provisions of Article EC do not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports,
         exports or goods in transit justified inter alia on grounds of protection of the health and life of humans.
         
            
 While the prohibition of marketing tobacco products for oral use under Article of Directive 2001/constitutes one of the
         restrictions referred to in Article EC, it is nevertheless justified, as indicated in paragraph above, on grounds of
         the protection of human health. It cannot therefore, in any event, be regarded as having been adopted in breach of the provisions
         of Article EC.
         
            
 Moreover, the prohibition imposed on the Kingdom of Sweden on placing tobacco products for oral use on the markets of the
         other Member States derives from the provisions of point (b) of Chapter X of Annex XV to the Act of Accession, not those of
         Directive 2001/37.
         
Article EC
            
 It must be borne in mind that, while the statement of reasons required by Article EC must show clearly and unequivocally
         the reasoning of the Community authority which adopted the contested measure, so as to enable the persons concerned to ascertain
         the reasons for it and to enable the Court to exercise judicial review, it is not required to go into every relevant point
         of fact and law (see, inter alia, Case C-122/Commission v Council [1996] ECR I-881, paragraph 29).
         
            
 Furthermore, the question whether a statement of reasons satisfies the requirements must be assessed with reference not only
         to the wording of the measure but also to its context and to the whole body of legal rules governing the matter in question.
         If the contested measure clearly discloses the essential objective pursued by the institution, it would be excessive to require
         a specific statement of reasons for each of the technical choices made by the institution (see, in particular, Case C-100/Italy v Council and Commission [2001] ECR I-5217, paragraph 64, and, to that effect, Joined Cases C-184/and C-223/Spain and Finland v Parliament and Council [2004] ECR I-0000, paragraph 79).
         
            
 The recitals in the preamble to Directive 92/set out clearly the reasons why a measure prohibiting the marketing of tobacco
         products for oral use should be introduced in Directive 89/622. In particular, after recalling that scientific experts were
         of the opinion that all tobacco products entail dangers to health and that it had been proved that smokeless tobacco products
         were a major risk factor as regards cancer, the preamble further stated that new tobacco products for oral use appearing on
         the market in certain Member States were particularly attractive to young people, with the risk of their developing an addiction
         to nicotine if restrictive measures were not taken in time. It was also observed that the Member States most exposed to that
         problem had already placed total bans on those new products or intended to do so.
         
            
 It should also be noted that the prohibition of marketing tobacco products for oral use laid down in Article of Directive
         2001/is confined, in the context of the recasting of earlier provisions which constitutes one of the objects of that directive,
         to confirming the identical measure adopted in 1992. The different treatment reserved in for those products as opposed
         to other smokeless tobacco products was the result of circumstances relating to the novelty on the internal market at the
         time of the products affected by the prohibition, their attraction for young people, and the existence of national prohibitive
         measures in certain Member States.
         
            
 Those circumstances remained the same in 2001. Admittedly, it is common ground that the marketing of tobacco products for
         oral use has a long tradition in Sweden and that those products could not be regarded as new to the market corresponding to
         the territory of that Member State on its accession in 1995. However, since Article of the Act of Accession precisely
         excluded the Kingdom of Sweden from the scope of the prohibition adopted in 1992, the territory of that State cannot be taken
         into account for the determination of the market referred to in Article of Directive 2001/or, consequently, for the assessment
         with respect to that market of the novelty of the products whose marketing is prohibited there in accordance with that article.
         
            
 Since Directive 2001/specifies, in the 28th recital in its preamble, that Directive 89/prohibited the sale in the Member
         States of certain types of tobacco for oral use and that Article of the Act of Accession granted the Kingdom of Sweden
         a derogation from the provisions of the latter directive, it does not appear that the confirmation of that prohibition in
         Article of Directive 2001/required that directive to specify other relevant points of fact and law in order to satisfy
         the obligation to state reasons under Article EC.
         
            
 Accordingly, Article of Directive 2001/complies with the obligation to state reasons set out in Article EC.
         
The principle of non-discrimination
            
 It is settled case-law that the principle of equal treatment requires that comparable situations must not be treated differently
         and that different situations must not be treated in the same way unless such treatment is objectively justified (see, to
         that effect, Case C-304/Spain v Commission [2004] ECR I-0000, paragraph 31).
         
            
 Although tobacco products for oral use, as defined in Article of Directive 2001/37, are not fundamentally different in their
         composition or indeed their intended use from tobacco products intended to be chewed, they were not in the same situation
         as those products. The tobacco products for oral use which are the subject of the prohibition laid down in Article 8a of Directive
         89/and repeated in Article of Directive 2001/were new to the markets of the Member States referred to in that measure.
         That particular situation thus authorised a difference in treatment, and it cannot validly be argued that there was a breach
         of the principle of non-discrimination.
         
            
 In the light of all the above considerations, the answer must be that consideration of the question referred has not disclosed
         any factor of such a kind as to affect the validity of Article of Directive 2001/37.
         
Costs
            
 Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
         
 On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) rules as follows:
         Consideration of the question referred has not disclosed any factor of such a kind as to affect the validity of Article of Directive 2001/37/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of June on the approximation of the laws, regulations
               and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning the manufacture, presentation and sale of tobacco products. Signatures.
      
 –
            
Language of the case: German.
Top  
 