
Case C-144/Werner Mangold
v
Rüdiger Helm
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Arbeitsgericht München)
(Directive 1999/70/EC – Clauses 2, and of the Framework Agreement on fixed-term work – Directive 2000/78/EC – Article – Equal treatment as regards employment and occupation – Age discrimination)
Opinion of Advocate General Tizzano delivered on June Judgment of the Court (Grand Chamber), November Summary of the Judgment
1.     Preliminary rulings – Jurisdiction of the Court – Limits – General or hypothetical questions – Determination by the Court
            of its own jurisdiction
(Art. EC)
2.     Social policy – Access to employment and working conditions – Equal treatment – Directive 1999/concerning the framework
            agreement on fixed-term work – National legislation reducing the general level of the previously guaranteed protection afforded
            to workers – Justification based on reasons not connected with the implementation of the framework agreement – Whether permissible
(Council Directive 1999/70, Annex, Clause 8(3))
3.     Social policy – Male and female workers – Access to employment and working conditions – Equal treatment – Directive 2000/establishing a general framework for equal treatment in employment and occupation – National legislation providing for differences
            in treatment on grounds of age – Not permissible unless objectively justified – Contracts of employment concluded before the
            expiry of the period fixed for the transposition of the directive also not permissible
(Council Directive 2000/78, Art. 6(1))
4.     Community law – Principles – Equal treatment – Discrimination on grounds of age –  Prohibited – Duty of national courts 
1.     In the context of the procedure for making a reference provided for by Article EC, the national court, which alone has
         direct knowledge of the facts of the case, is in the best position to assess, with full knowledge of the matter before it,
         the need for a preliminary ruling to enable it to give judgment.  Consequently, where the question submitted by the national
         court concerns the interpretation of Community law, the Court of Justice is, in principle, bound to give a ruling. 
      
Nevertheless, the Court considers that that it may, if need be, examine the circumstances in which the case was referred to
         it by the national court, in order to assess whether it has jurisdiction.  The spirit of cooperation which must prevail in
         preliminary ruling proceedings requires the national court for its part to have regard to the function entrusted to the Court
         of Justice, which is to contribute to the administration of justice in the Member States and not to give opinions on general
         or hypothetical questions.
      
(see paras 34-36)
2.     On a proper construction of Clause 8(3) of the Framework Agreement on fixed-term contracts concluded on March 1999, put
         into effect by Directive 1999/concerning the framework agreement on fixed-term work concluded by ETUC, UNICE and CEEP,
         which provides that implementation of that agreement does not constitute valid grounds for reducing the general level of protection
         afforded to workers in the field of the agreement, domestic legislation which, for reasons connected with the need to encourage
         employment and irrespective of the implementation of that agreement, has lowered the age above which fixed-term contracts
         of employment may be concluded without restrictions, is not contrary to that provision.
      
(see para. 54, operative part 1)
3.     Community law and, more particularly, Article 6(1) of Directive 2000/establishing a general framework for equal treatment
         in employment and occupation  must be interpreted as precluding a provision of domestic law such as that at issue in the main
         proceedings which authorises, without restriction, unless there is a close connection with an earlier contract of employment
         of indefinite duration concluded with the same employer, the conclusion of fixed-term contracts of employment once the worker
         has reached the age of 52.
      
Such legislation is not justified pursuant to Article 6(1) of that directive, inasmuch as it has not been shown that fixing
         an age threshold, as such, regardless of any other consideration linked to the structure of the labour market in question
         or the personal situation of the person concerned, is objectively necessary to the attainment of the objective which is the
         vocational integration of unemployed older workers, and as that legislation therefore goes beyond what is appropriate and
         necessary in order to attain the objective pursued.
      
That interpretation cannot be affected by the fact that, when the contract in question was concluded, the period prescribed
         for transposition into domestic law of Directive 2000/had not yet expired.  During the period prescribed for transposition
         of a directive, the Member States must refrain from taking any measures liable seriously to compromise the attainment of the
         result prescribed by that directive.  In this connection it is immaterial whether or not the rule of domestic law in question,
         adopted after the directive entered into force, is concerned with the transposition of the directive.
      
(see paras 65-68, 78, operative part 2)
4.     It is the responsibility of the national court, hearing a dispute involving the principle of non-discrimination in respect
         of age, which is a general principle of Community law, to provide, in a case within its jurisdiction, the legal protection
         which individuals derive from the rules of Community law and to ensure that those rules are fully effective, setting aside
         any provision of national law which may conflict with that law, even where the period prescribed for transposition of a directive
         based on that general principle, such as Directive 2000/establishing a general framework for equal treatment in employment
         and occupation, has not yet expired.
      
(see paras 75, 77, operative part 2)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Directive 1999/70/EC – Clauses 2, and of the Framework Agreement on fixed-term work – Directive 2000/78/EC – Article – Equal treatment as regards employment and occupation – Age discrimination)
In Case C-144/04,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Arbeitsgericht München (Germany), made by decision of February 2004, registered at the Court on March 2004, in the proceedings 
      
Werner Mangold
v
Rüdiger Helm,
      
 
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of P. Jann, President of the First Chamber, acting as President, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas and K. Schiemann, Presidents
         of Chambers, R. Schintgen (Rapporteur), S. von Bahr, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, R. Silva de Lapuerta, K. Lenaerts, E. Juhász, G.
         Arestis, A. Borg Barthet and M. Ilešič, Judges,
      
Advocate General: A. Tizzano,
Registrar: K. Sztranc, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on April 2005,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Mr Mangold, by D. Hummel and B. Karthaus, Rechtsanwälte,
–       Mr Helm, by himself, Rechtsanwalt,
–       the German Government, by M. Lumma, acting as Agent,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by N. Yerrell and S. Grünheid and by D. Martin and H. Kreppel, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on June 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Clauses 2, and of the Framework Agreement on fixed-term
         contracts concluded on March (‘the Framework Agreement’), put into effect by Council Directive 1999/70/EC of June
         concerning the framework agreement on fixed-term work concluded by ETUC, UNICE and CEEP (OJ L 175, p. 43), and of
         Article of Council Directive 2000/78/EC of November establishing a general framework for equal treatment in employment
         and occupation (OJ L 303, p. 16).
      
The reference has been made in the course of proceedings brought by Mr Mangold against Mr Helm concerning a fixed-term contract
         by which the former was employed by the latter (‘the contract’).
      
 Legal context
 The relevant provisions of Community law
 The Framework Agreement
According to Clause 1, ‘[t]he purpose of this Framework Agreement is to:
(a)      improve the quality of fixed-term work by ensuring the application of the principle of non-discrimination;
(b)      establish a framework to prevent abuse arising from the use of successive fixed-term employment contracts or relationships’.
Clause 2(1) of the Framework Agreement provides:
‘This agreement applies to fixed-term workers who have an employment contract or employment relationship as defined in law,
         collective agreements or practice in each Member State.’
      
Under Clause 5(1) of the Framework Agreement:
‘To prevent abuse arising from the use of successive fixed-term employment contracts or relationships, Member States, after
         consultation with social partners in accordance with national law, collective agreements or practice, and/or the social partners,
         shall, where there are no equivalent legal measures to prevent abuse, introduce in a manner which takes account of the needs
         of specific sectors and/or categories of workers, one or more of the following measures:
      
(a)      objective reasons justifying the renewal of such contracts or relationships;
(b)      the maximum total duration of successive fixed-term employment contracts or relationships;
(c)      the number of renewals of such contracts or relationships.’
Clause 8(3) of the Framework Agreement provides that:
‘Implementation of this agreement shall not constitute valid grounds for reducing the general level of protection afforded
         to workers in the field of the agreement.’
      
 Directive 2000/Directive 2000/was adopted on the basis of Article EC. The 1st, 4th, 8th and 25th recitals in the preamble to that directive
         are worded as follows:
      
‘(1)      In accordance with Article of the Treaty on European Union, the European Union is founded on the principles of liberty,
         democracy, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, and the rule of law, principles which are common to all Member
         States and it respects fundamental rights, as guaranteed by the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
         Fundamental Freedoms and as they result from the constitutional traditions common to the Member States, as general principles
         of Community law.
      
…
(4)      The right of all persons to equality before the law and protection against discrimination constitutes a universal right recognised
         by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
         against Women, United Nations Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and by the
         European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, to which all Member States are signatories.
         Convention No of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) prohibits discrimination in the field of employment and occupation.
      
…
(8)      The Employment Guidelines for agreed by the European Council at Helsinki on and December stress the need to
         foster a labour market favourable to social integration by formulating a coherent set of policies aimed at combating discrimination
         against groups such as persons with disability. They also emphasise the need to pay particular attention to supporting older
         workers, in order to increase their participation in the labour force.
      
…
(25)      The prohibition of age discrimination is an essential part of meeting the aims set out in the Employment Guidelines and encouraging
         diversity in the workforce. However, differences in treatment in connection with age may be justified under certain circumstances
         and therefore require specific provisions which may vary in accordance with the situation in Member States. It is therefore
         essential to distinguish between differences in treatment which are justified, in particular by legitimate employment policy,
         labour market and vocational training objectives, and discrimination which must be prohibited.’
      
According to Article 1, ‘the purpose of … Directive [2000/78] is to lay down a general framework for combating discrimination
         on the grounds of religion or belief, disability, age or sexual orientation as regards employment and occupation, with a view
         to putting into effect in the Member States the principle of equal treatment’.
      
Article of Directive 2000/78, headed ‘Concept of discrimination’, states in subparagraphs and 2(a) that:
‘(1)      For the purposes of this Directive, the “principle of equal treatment” shall mean that there shall be no direct or indirect
         discrimination whatsoever on any of the grounds referred to in Article 1.
      
(2)      For the purposes of paragraph 1:
(a)      direct discrimination shall be taken to occur where one person is treated less favourably than another is, has been or would
         be treated in a comparable situation, on any of the grounds referred to in Article 1.’
      
Article of Directive 2000/78, headed ‘Scope’, provides in subparagraph 1:
‘Within the limits of the areas of competence conferred on the Community, this Directive shall apply to all persons, as regards
         both the public and private sectors, including public bodies, in relation to:
      
(a)      conditions for access to employment, to self-employment or to occupation, including selection criteria and recruitment conditions,
         whatever the branch of activity and at all levels of the professional hierarchy, including promotion;
      
…
(c)      employment and working conditions, including dismissals and pay;
…’.
Article 6(1) of Directive 2000/provides:
‘Notwithstanding Article 2(2), Member States may provide that differences of treatment on grounds of age shall not constitute
         discrimination, if, within the context of national law, they are objectively and reasonably justified by a legitimate aim,
         including legitimate employment policy, labour market and vocational training objectives, and if the means of achieving that
         aim are appropriate and necessary.
      
Such differences of treatment may include, among others:
(a)      the setting of special conditions on access to employment and vocational training, employment and occupation, including dismissal
         and remuneration conditions, for young people, older workers and persons with caring responsibilities in order to promote
         their vocational integration or ensure their protection;
      
(b)      the fixing of minimum conditions of age, professional experience or seniority in service for access to employment or to certain
         advantages linked to employment;
      
(c)      the fixing of a maximum age for recruitment which is based on the training requirements of the post in question or the need
         for a reasonable period of employment before retirement.’
      
In accordance with the first paragraph of Article of Directive 2000/78, the Member States were to adopt the laws, regulations
         and administrative provisions necessary to comply with that directive by December at the latest. However, under the
         second paragraph of that article:
      
‘In order to take account of particular conditions, Member States may, if necessary, have an additional period of three years
         from December 2003, that is to say a total of six years, to implement the provisions of this Directive on age and disability
         discrimination. In that event they shall inform the Commission forthwith. Any Member State which chooses to use this additional
         period shall report annually to the Commission on the steps it is taking to tackle age and disability discrimination and on
         the progress it is making towards implementation. The Commission shall report annually to the Council.’
      
The Federal Republic of Germany having requested such an additional period for the implementation of the directive, so far
         as that Member State is concerned the period allowed will not expire until December 2006.
      
 The relevant provisions of national law
Paragraph of the Beschäftigungsförderungsgesetz (Law to promote employment), as amended by the law of September (BGBl. I, p. 1476) (‘the BeschFG 1996’), provided:
      
‘(1)      Fixed-term employment contracts shall be authorised for a maximum term of two years. Within that maximum limit of two years
         a fixed-term contract may be renewed three times at most.
      
(2)      Fixed-term employment contracts shall be authorised exempt from the condition set out in paragraph if the employee has reached
         the age of when the fixed-term employment contract begins.
      
(3)      Employment contracts within the meaning of paragraphs and shall not be authorised where there is a close connection with
         a previous employment contract of indefinite duration or with a previous fixed-term employment contract within the meaning
         of paragraph concluded with the same employer. Such close connection shall be presumed to exist where the interval between
         two employment contracts is less than four months.
      
(4)      The possibility of limiting the term of employment contracts for other reasons shall remain unaltered.
…’.
By virtue of Paragraph 1(6) of the BeschFG 1996, those rules were applicable until December 2000.
Directive 1999/implementing the Framework Agreement was transposed into German law by the Law on part-time working and
         fixed-term contracts amending and repealing provisions of employment law (Gesetz über Teilzeitarbeit und befristete Arbeitsverträge
         und zur Änderung und Aufhebung arbeitsrechtlicher Bestimmungen) of December (BGBl. 2000, p. 1966, ‘the TzBfG’). That
         law entered into force on January 2001.
      
Paragraph of the TzBfG, headed ‘Objective’, provides that:
‘This law is intended to encourage part-time working, to fix the conditions in which fixed-term contracts may be concluded
         and to prevent discrimination against workers employed part-time and workers employed under a fixed-term contract.’
      
Paragraph of the TzBfG, which regulates fixed-term contracts, provides that:
‘(1)      A fixed-term employment contract may be concluded if there are objective grounds for doing so. Objective grounds exist in
         particular where:
      
1.      the operational manpower requirements are only temporary,
2.      the fixed term follows a period of training or study in order to facilitate the employee’s entry into subsequent employment,
3.      one employee replaces another,
4.      the particular nature of the work justifies the fixed term,
5.      the fixed term is a probationary period,
6.      reasons relating to the employee personally justify the fixed term,
7.      the employee is paid out of budgetary funds provided for fixed-term employment and he is employed on that basis, or
8.      the term is fixed by common agreement before a court.
(2)      The term of an employment contract may be limited in the absence of objective reasons for a maximum period of two years. Within
         that maximum period a fixed-term contract may be renewed three times at most. The conclusion of a fixed-term employment contract
         within the meaning of the first sentence shall not be authorised if that contract is immediately preceded by an employment
         relationship of fixed or indefinite duration with the same employer. A collective agreement may fix the number or renewals
         or the maximum duration of the fixed term in derogation from the first sentence.
      
(3)      The conclusion of a fixed-term employment contract shall not require objective justification if the worker has reached the
         age of by the time the fixed-term employment relationship begins. A fixed term shall not be permitted where there is a
         close connection with a previous employment contract of indefinite duration concluded with the same employer. Such close connection
         shall be presumed to exist where the interval between two employment contracts is less than six months.
      
(4)      The limitation of the term of an employment contract must be fixed in writing in order to be enforceable.’
Paragraph 14(3) of the TzBfG has been amended by the First Law for the provision of modern services on the labour market of
         December (BGBl. I, p. 14607, ‘the Law of 2002’). The new version of that provision, which took effect on January
         2003, is henceforth worded as follows:
      
‘A fixed-term employment contract shall not require objective justification if when starting the fixed-term employment relationship
         the employee has reached the age of 58. It shall not be permissible to set a fixed term where there is a close connection
         with a previous employment contract of indefinite duration concluded with the same employer. Such close connection shall be
         presumed to exist where the interval between two employment contracts is less than six months. Until December the
         first sentence shall be read as referring to the age of instead of 58.’
      
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
On June Mr Mangold, then years old, concluded with Mr Helm, who practises as a lawyer, a contract that took effect
         on July 2003.
      
Article of that contract provided that:
‘1.      The employment relationship shall start on July and last until February 2004.
2.      The duration of the contract shall be based on the statutory provision which is intended to make it easier to conclude fixed-term
         contracts of employment with older workers (the provisions of the fourth sentence, in conjunction with those of the fourth
         sentence, of Paragraph 14(3) of the TzBfG …), since the employee is more than years old.
      
3.      The parties have agreed that there is no reason for the fixed term of this contract other than that set out in paragraph above. All other grounds for limiting the term of employment accepted in principle by the legislature are expressly excluded
         from this agreement.’
      
According to Mr Mangold, paragraph 5, inasmuch as it limits the term of his contract, is, although such a limitation is in
         keeping with Paragraph 14(3) of the TzBfG, incompatible with the Framework Agreement and with Directive 2000/78.
      
Mr Helm argues that Clause of the Framework Agreement requires the Member States to introduce measures to prevent abuse
         arising from the use of successive fixed-term contracts of employment, in particular, by requiring objective reasons justifying
         the renewal of such contracts, or by fixing the maximum total duration of such fixed-term employment relationships or contracts,
         or by limiting the number of renewals of such contracts or relationships. 
      
He takes the view that even if the fourth sentence of Paragraph 14(3) of the TzBfG does not expressly lay down such restrictions
         in respect of older workers, there is in fact an objective reason, within the meaning of Clause 5(1)(a) of the Framework Agreement,
         that justifies the conclusion of a fixed-term contract of employment, which is the difficulty those workers have in finding
         work having regard to the features of the labour market.
      
The Arbeitsgericht München is doubtful whether the first sentence of Paragraph 14(3) of the TzBfG is compatible with Community
         law.
      
First, that court considers that that provision is contrary to the prohibition of ‘regression’ (reduction of protection) laid
         down in Clause 8(3) of the Framework Agreement in that, on the transposition into national law of Directive 1999/70, that
         provision lowered from to the age of persons excluded from protection against the use of fixed-term contracts of employment
         where that use is not justified by an objective reason and, in consequence, the general level of protection enjoyed by that
         class of workers. Such a provision is also, in its opinion, contrary to Clause of the Framework Agreement which seeks to
         prevent abuse of such contracts, in that it lays down no restriction on the conclusion of such contracts by many workers falling
         into a class categorised by age only.
      
Second, the national court is uncertain whether rules such as those contained in Paragraph 14(3) of the TzBfG are compatible
         with Article of Directive 2000/78, in that the lowering, by the Law of 2002, from to of the age at which it is authorised
         to conclude fixed-term contracts, with no objective justification, does not guarantee the protection of older persons in work.
         Nor is the principle of proportionality observed.
      
It is true that the national court finds that, on the date of the conclusion of the contract, namely, June 2003, the period
         prescribed for transposition of Directive 2000/into national law had not yet expired. None the less, it notes that, in
         accordance with paragraph of the judgment in Case C-129/Inter‑Environnement Wallonie [1997] ECR I-7411, a Member State to which a directive is addressed may not, during the period prescribed for transposition,
         adopt measures that may seriously compromise the attainment of the result prescribed by the directive. 
      
Now, in the case in the main proceedings, the Law of 2002’s amendment of Paragraph 14(3) of the TzBfG came into force on January 2003, that is to say, after Directive 2000/was published in the Official Journal of the European Communities, but before the period allowed by Article of that directive for its transposition had expired. 
      
Third, the Arbeitsgericht München raises the question whether the national court is bound, in proceedings between individuals,
         to set aside rules of domestic law incompatible with Community law. In this respect it considers that the primacy of Community
         law must lead the court to find that Paragraph 14(3) of the TzBfG is inapplicable in its entirety and that, therefore, it
         is necessary to apply the fundamental rule laid down in Paragraph 14(1), in accordance with which there must be some objective
         reason for the conclusion of a fixed-term contract of employment.
      
Those were the circumstances in which the Arbeitsgericht München decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following questions
         to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1(a) Is Clause 8(3) of the Framework Agreement … to be interpreted, when transposed into domestic law, as prohibiting a reduction
         of protection following from the lowering of the age limit from to 58?
      
1(b)      Is Clause 5(1) of the Framework Agreement … to be interpreted as precluding a provision of national law which – like the provision
         at issue in this case – does not contain any of the three restrictions set out in paragraph of that clause?
      
2.      Is Article of … Directive 2000/… to be interpreted as precluding a provision of national law which, like the provision
         at issue in this case, authorises the conclusion of fixed-term employment contracts, without any objective reason, with workers
         aged and over, contrary to the principle requiring justification on objective grounds?
      
3.      If one of those three questions is answered in the affirmative: must the national court refuse to apply the provision of domestic
         law which is contrary to Community law and apply the general principle of internal law, under which fixed terms of employment
         are permissible only if they are justified on objective grounds?’
      
 Admissibility of the reference for a preliminary ruling
At the hearing the admissibility of the reference for a preliminary ruling was challenged by the Federal Republic of Germany,
         on the grounds that the dispute in the main proceedings was fictitious or contrived. Indeed, in the past Mr Helm has publicly
         argued a case identical to Mr Mangold’s, to the effect that Paragraph 14(3) of the TzBfG is unlawful.
      
It is first of all to be noted in that respect that, pursuant to Article EC, where a question on the interpretation of
         the Treaty or of subordinate acts of the institutions of the Community is raised before any court or tribunal of a Member
         State, that court or tribunal may, if it considers that a decision on the question is necessary to enable it to give judgment,
         request the Court of Justice to give a ruling thereon (see, inter alia, Case C-451/Cura Anlagen [2002] ECR I-3193, paragraph 22).
      
In the context of that procedure for making a reference, the national court, which alone has direct knowledge of the facts
         of the case, is in the best position to assess, with full knowledge of the matter before it, the need for a preliminary ruling
         to enable it to give judgment (Case C-83/Meilicke [1992] ECR I-4871, paragraph 23; C-146/McLachlan [1994] ECR I-3229, paragraph 20; Case C-412/Leclerc-Siplec [1995] ECR I-179, paragraph 10; and C-167/Inspire Art [2003] ECR I-10155, paragraph 43.
      
Consequently, where the question submitted by the national court concerns the interpretation of Community law, the Court of
         Justice is, in principle, bound to give a ruling (Case C-231/Gmurzynska-Bscher [1990] ECR I-4003, paragraph 20; Leclerc‑Siplec, paragraph 11; Joined Cases C-358/and C-416/Bordessa and Others [1995] ECR I-361, paragraph 10; and Inspire Art, paragraph 44).
      
Nevertheless, the Court considers that it may, if need be, examine the circumstances in which the case was referred to it
         by the national court, in order to assess whether it has jurisdiction. The spirit of cooperation which must prevail in preliminary
         ruling proceedings requires the national court for its part to have regard to the function entrusted to the Court of Justice,
         which is to contribute to the administration of justice in the Member States and not to give opinions on general or hypothetical
         questions (Case 149/Robards [1983] ECR 171, paragraph 19; Meilicke, paragraph 25; and Inspire Art, paragraph 45).
      
It is in the light of that function that the Court has considered that it has no jurisdiction to give a preliminary ruling
         on a question raised before a national court where the interpretation of Community law has no connection whatever with the
         circumstances or purpose of the main proceedings.
      
However, in the case in the main proceedings, it hardly seems arguable that the interpretation of Community law sought by
         the national court does actually respond to an objective need inherent in the outcome of a case pending before it. In fact,
         it is common ground that the contract has actually been performed and that its application raises a question of interpretation
         of Community law. The fact that the parties to the dispute in the main proceedings are at one in their interpretation of Paragraph
         14(3) of the TzBfG cannot affect the reality of that dispute.
      
The order for reference must, therefore, be regarded as admissible.
 Concerning the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 On Question 1(b)
In Question 1(b), which it is appropriate to consider first, the national court asks whether, on a proper construction of
         Clause of the Framework Agreement, it is contrary to that provision for rules of domestic law such as those at issue in
         the main proceedings to contain none of the restrictions provided for by that clause in respect of the use of fixed-term contracts
         of employment.
      
Here it is to be noted that Clause 5(1) of the Framework Agreement is supposed to ‘prevent abuse arising from the use of successive
         fixed-term employment contracts or relationships’.
      
Now, as the parties to the main proceedings confirmed at the hearing, the contract is the one and only contract concluded
         between them.
      
In those circumstances, interpretation of Clause 5(1) of the Framework Agreement is obviously irrelevant to the outcome of
         the dispute before the national court and, accordingly, there is no need to answer Question 1(b).
      
 On Question 1(a)
By Question 1(a), the national court seeks to ascertain whether on a proper construction of Clause 8(3) of the Framework Agreement,
         domestic legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings which, on transposing Directive 1999/70, lowered from to the age above which fixed-term contracts of employment may be concluded without restrictions, is contrary to that provision.
         
      
As a preliminary point, it is to be noted that, in the case in the main proceedings, the contract was concluded on June
         2003, that is to say, when the TzBfG, as amended by the Law of which lowered the age above which it is permissible to
         conclude fixed-term contracts of employment from to 52, was in force. In the instant case, it is common ground that Mr
         Mangold was engaged by Mr Helm at the age of 56. 
      
Nevertheless, the national court considers that an interpretation of Clause 8(3) would be helpful to it in assessing the validity
         of the lawfulness of Paragraph 14(3) of the TzBfG, in its original version, in so far as, if that latter provision should
         not be in keeping with Community law, the result would be that its amendment by the Law of would be invalid.
      
In any case, it is to be declared that the German legislature had already, when Directive 1999/was transposed into domestic
         law, lowered from to the age at which fixed-term contracts of employment might be concluded.
      
According to Mr Mangold, that reduction of protection, like that under the Law of 2002, is contrary to Clause 8(3) of the
         Framework Agreement.
      
In contrast, the German Government takes the view that that lowering of the relevant age was offset by giving workers bound
         by a fixed-term contract new social guarantees, such as the laying down of a general prohibition of discrimination and the
         extending to small businesses, and to short-term employment relationships, of the restrictions provided for in respect of
         recourse to that kind of contract.
      
In this connection, it appears from the very wording of Clause 8(3) of the Framework Agreement that implementation of the
         agreement cannot provide the Member States with valid grounds for reducing the general level of protection for workers previously
         guaranteed in the domestic legal order in the sphere covered by that agreement.
      
The term ‘implementation’, used without any further precision in Clause 8(3) of the Framework Agreement, does not refer only
         to the original transposition of Directive 1999/and especially of the Annex thereto containing the Framework Agreement,
         but must also cover all domestic measures intended to ensure that the objective pursued by the directive may be attained,
         including those which, after transposition in the strict sense, add to or amend domestic rules previously adopted.
      
In contrast, reduction of the protection which workers are guaranteed in the sphere of fixed-term contracts is not prohibited
         as such by the Framework Agreement where it is in no way connected to the implementation of that agreement.
      
Now, it is clear from both the order for reference and the observations submitted by the German Government at the hearing
         that, as the Advocate General has noted in paragraphs to of his Opinion, the successive reductions of the age above
         which the conclusion of a fixed-term contract is permissible without restrictions are justified, not by the need to put the
         Framework Agreement into effect but by the need to encourage the employment of older persons in Germany.
      
In those circumstances, the reply to be given to Question 1(a) is that on a proper construction of Clause 8(3) of the Framework
         Agreement, domestic legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings which, for reasons connected with the need to
         encourage employment and irrespective of the implementation of that agreement, has lowered the age above which fixed-term
         contracts of employment may be concluded without restrictions, is not contrary to that provision.
      
 On the second and third questions
By its second and third questions, which may appropriately be considered together, the national court seeks in essence to
         ascertain whether Article 6(1) of Directive 2000/must be interpreted as precluding a provision of domestic law such as
         that at issue in the main proceedings which authorises, without restriction, unless there is a close connection with an earlier
         contract of employment of indefinite duration concluded with the same employer, the conclusion of fixed-term contracts of
         employment once the worker has reached the age of 52. If so, the national court asks what conclusions it must draw from that
         interpretation.
      
In this regard, it is to be noted that, in accordance with Article 1, the purpose of Directive 2000/is to lay down a general
         framework for combating discrimination on any of the grounds referred to in that article, which include age, as regards employment
         and occupation.
      
Paragraph 14(3) of the TzBfG, however, by permitting employers to conclude without restriction fixed-term contracts of employment
         with workers over the age of 52, introduces a difference of treatment on the grounds directly of age.
      
Specifically with regard to differences of treatment on grounds of age, Article 6(1) of Directive 2000/provides that the
         Member States may provide that such differences of treatment ‘shall not constitute discrimination, if, within the context
         of national law, they are objectively and reasonably justified by a legitimate aim, including legitimate employment policy,
         labour market and vocational training objectives, and if the means of achieving that aim are appropriate and necessary’. According
         to subparagraph (a) of the second paragraph of Article 6(1), those differences may include inter alia ‘the setting of special
         conditions on access to employment and vocational training, employment and occupation … for young people, older workers and
         persons with caring responsibilities in order to promote their vocational integration or ensure their protection’ and, under
         subparagraphs (b) and (c), the fixing of conditions of age in certain special circumstances.
      
As is clear from the documents sent to the Court by the national court, the purpose of that legislation is plainly to promote
         the vocational integration of unemployed older workers, in so far as they encounter considerable difficulties in finding work.
      
The legitimacy of such a public-interest objective cannot reasonably be thrown in doubt, as indeed the Commission itself has
         admitted.
      
An objective of that kind must as a rule, therefore, be regarded as justifying, ‘objectively and reasonably’, as provided
         for by the first subparagraph of Article 6(1) of Directive 2000/78, a difference of treatment on grounds of age laid down
         by Member States.
      
It still remains to be established whether, according to the actual wording of that provision, the means used to achieve that
         legitimate objective are ‘appropriate and necessary’.
      
In this respect the Member States unarguably enjoy broad discretion in their choice of the measures capable of attaining their
         objectives in the field of social and employment policy.
      
However, as the national court has pointed out, application of national legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings
         leads to a situation in which all workers who have reached the age of 52, without distinction, whether or not they were unemployed
         before the contract was concluded and whatever the duration of any period of unemployment, may lawfully, until the age at
         which they may claim their entitlement to a retirement pension, be offered fixed-term contracts of employment which may be
         renewed an indefinite number of times. This significant body of workers, determined solely on the basis of age, is thus in
         danger, during a substantial part of its members’ working life, of being excluded from the benefit of stable employment which,
         however, as the Framework Agreement makes clear, constitutes a major element in the protection of workers.
      
In so far as such legislation takes the age of the worker concerned as the only criterion for the application of a fixed-term
         contract of employment, when it has not been shown that fixing an age threshold, as such, regardless of any other consideration
         linked to the structure of the labour market in question or the personal situation of the person concerned, is objectively
         necessary to the attainment of the objective which is the vocational integration of unemployed older workers, it must be considered
         to go beyond what is appropriate and necessary in order to attain the objective pursued. Observance of the principle of proportionality
         requires every derogation from an individual right to reconcile, so far as is possible, the requirements of the principle
         of equal treatment with those of the aim pursued (see, to that effect, Case C-476/Lommers [2002] ECR I‑2891, paragraph 39). Such national legislation cannot, therefore, be justified under Article 6(1) of Directive
         2000/78.
      
The fact that, when the contract was concluded, the period prescribed for the transposition into domestic law of Directive
         2000/had not yet expired cannot call that finding into question.
      
First, the Court has already held that, during the period prescribed for transposition of a directive, the Member States must
         refrain from taking any measures liable seriously to compromise the attainment of the result prescribed by that directive
         (Inter-Environnement Wallonie, paragraph 45).
      
In this connection it is immaterial whether or not the rule of domestic law in question, adopted after the directive entered
         into force, is concerned with the transposition of the directive (see, to that effect, Case C-14/ATRAL [2003] ECR I‑4431, paragraphs and 59).
      
In the case in the main proceedings the lowering, pursuant to Paragraph 14(3) of the TzBfG, of the age above which it is permissible
         to conclude fixed-term contracts from to took place in December and that measure was to apply until December
         2006.
      
The mere fact that, in the circumstances of the case, that provision is to expire on December 2006, just a few weeks after
         the date by which the Member State must have transposed the directive, is not in itself decisive.
      
On the one hand, it is apparent from the very wording of the second subparagraph of Article of Directive 2000/that where
         a Member State, like the Federal Republic of Germany in this case, chooses to have recourse to an additional period of three
         years from December in order to transpose the directive, that Member State ‘shall report annually to the Commission
         on the steps it is taking to tackle age … discrimination and on the progress it is making towards implementation’.
      
That provision implies, therefore, that the Member State, which thus exceptionally enjoys an extended period for transposition,
         is progressively to take concrete measures for the purpose of there and then approximating its legislation to the result prescribed
         by that directive. Now, that obligation would be rendered redundant if the Member State were to be permitted, during the period
         allowed for implementation of the directive, to adopt measures incompatible with the objectives pursued by that act.
      
On the other hand, as the Advocate General has observed in point of his Opinion, on December a significant proportion
         of the workers covered by the legislation at issue in the main proceedings, including Mr Mangold, will already have reached
         the age of and will therefore still fall within the specific rules laid down by Paragraph 14(3) of the TzBfG, with the
         result that that class of persons becomes definitively liable to be excluded from the safeguard of stable employment by the
         use of a fixed-term contract of employment, regardless of the fact that the age condition fixed at will cease to apply
         at the end of 2006.
      
In the second place and above all, Directive 2000/does not itself lay down the principle of equal treatment in the field
         of employment and occupation. Indeed, in accordance with Article thereof, the sole purpose of the directive is ‘to lay down
         a general framework for combating discrimination on the grounds of religion or belief, disability, age or sexual orientation’,
         the source of the actual principle underlying the prohibition of those forms of discrimination being found, as is clear from
         the third and fourth recitals in the preamble to the directive, in various international instruments and in the constitutional
         traditions common to the Member States.
      
The principle of non-discrimination on grounds of age must thus be regarded as a general principle of Community law. Where
         national rules fall within the scope of Community law, which is the case with Paragraph 14(3) of the TzBfG, as amended by
         the Law of 2002, as being a measure implementing Directive 1999/(see also, in this respect, paragraphs and above),
         and reference is made to the Court for a preliminary ruling, the Court must provide all the criteria of interpretation needed
         by the national court to determine whether those rules are compatible with such a principle (Case C-442/Rodríguez Caballero [2002] ECR I-11915, paragraphs to 32).
      
Consequently, observance of the general principle of equal treatment, in particular in respect of age, cannot as such be conditional
         upon the expiry of the period allowed the Member States for the transposition of a directive intended to lay down a general
         framework for combating discrimination on the grounds of age, in particular so far as the organisation of appropriate legal
         remedies, the burden of proof, protection against victimisation, social dialogue, affirmative action and other specific measures
         to implement such a directive are concerned.
      
In those circumstances it is the responsibility of the national court, hearing a dispute involving the principle of non-discrimination
         in respect of age, to provide, in a case within its jurisdiction, the legal protection which individuals derive from the rules
         of Community law and to ensure that those rules are fully effective, setting aside any provision of national law which may
         conflict with that law (see, to that effect, Case 106/Simmenthal [1978] ECR 629, paragraph 21, and Case C-347/Solred [1998] ECR I-937, paragraph 30).
      
Having regard to all the foregoing, the reply to be given to the second and third questions must be that Community law and,
         more particularly, Article 6(1) of Directive 2000/78, must be interpreted as precluding a provision of domestic law such as
         that at issue in the main proceedings which authorises, without restriction, unless there is a close connection with an earlier
         contract of employment of indefinite duration concluded with the same employer, the conclusion of fixed-term contracts of
         employment once the worker has reached the age of 52. 
      
It is the responsibility of the national court to guarantee the full effectiveness of the general principle of non-discrimination
         in respect of age, setting aside any provision of national law which may conflict with Community law, even where the period
         prescribed for transposition of that directive has not yet expired.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      On a proper construction of Clause 8(3) of the Framework Agreement on fixed-term contracts concluded on March 1999, put
            into effect by Council Directive 1999/70/EC of June concerning the framework agreement on fixed-term work concluded
            by ETUC, UNICE and CEEP, domestic legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which for reasons connected with
            the need to encourage employment and irrespective of the implementation of that agreement, has lowered the age above which
            fixed-term contracts of employment may be concluded without restrictions, is not contrary to that provision.
2.      Community law and, more particularly, Article 6(1) of Council Directive 2000/78/EC of November establishing a general
            framework for equal treatment in employment and occupation must be interpreted as precluding a provision of domestic law such
            as that at issue in the main proceedings which authorises, without restriction, unless there is a close connection with an
            earlier contract of employment of indefinite duration concluded with the same employer, the conclusion of fixed-term contracts
            of employment once the worker has reached the age of 52.
It is the responsibility of the national court to guarantee the full effectiveness of the general principle of non-discrimination
            in respect of age, setting aside any provision of national law which may conflict with Community law, even where the period
            prescribed for transposition of that directive has not yet expired.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 