
Case C-496/European Commission
v
Italian Republic
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Judgment of the Court establishing a failure to fulfil obligations – Failure to comply with the judgment – Article EC – Financial penalties)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Failure to comply with the obligation to recover unlawful aid – Defences – Absolute
            impossibility of implementation – Criteria of assessment
(Arts EC, 88(2) EC and 228(2) EC)
2.        Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Judgment of the Court establishing the failure of a Member State to fulfil its
            obligations – Breach of the obligation to comply with the judgment – Financial penalties – Purpose – Choice of appropriate
            penalty
(Art. 228(2) EC)
3.        Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Judgment of the Court establishing the failure of a Member State to fulfil its
            obligations – Breach of the obligation to comply with the judgment – Financial penalties – Penalty payment – Imposition of
            a penalty payment – Condition – Failure to comply continuing up to the time of the Court’s examination of the facts
(Art. 228(2) EC; Council Regulation No 659/1999, recital 13)
4.        Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Judgment of the Court establishing the failure of a Member State to fulfil its
            obligations – Breach of the obligation to comply with the judgment – Financial penalties – Penalty payment – Form of the penalty
            payment – Determination of the amount – Criteria
(Art. 228(2) EC)
5.        Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Judgment of the Court establishing the failure of a Member State to fulfil its
            obligations – Breach of the obligation to comply with the judgment – Financial penalties – Penalty payment – Determination
            of the amount – Evidence of the state of progress with compliance to be provided by the Member State concerned
(Art. 228(2) EC)
6.        State aid – Commission decision finding aid incompatible with the common market and ordering its cessation – Determination
            of the obligations of the Member State – Obligation of recovery – Scope
(Art. 88(2) EC; Arts 3(3) EU and EU; Protocol No on the internal market and competition)
7.        Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Judgment of the Court establishing the failure of a Member State to fulfil its
            obligations – Breach of the obligation to comply with the judgment – State aid – Financial penalties – Penalty payment – Termination
            of the penalty payment – Recipients in difficulties or bankrupt – No effect
(Art. 228(2) EC)
8.        Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Judgment of the Court establishing the failure of a Member State to fulfil its
            obligations – Breach of the obligation to comply with the judgment – State aid – Financial penalties – Penalty payment – Termination
            of the penalty payment – Orders for recovery challenged in the national courts – Obligation of the national authorities to
            contest national decisions depriving the Commission’s decision of effect
(Art. 228(2) EC)
9.        Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Judgment of the Court establishing the failure of a Member State to fulfil its
            obligations – Breach of the obligation to comply with the judgment – Financial penalties – Penalty payment – Lump sum payment
            – Both penalties applied cumulatively – Lawfulness – Conditions
(Art. 228(2) EC)
10.      State aid – Recovery of unlawful aid – Obligation – Duty actually and immediately to implement the Commission’s decision
(Art. 88(2) EC)
1.        Where the Commission’s decision requiring the cessation of State aid that is incompatible with the common market has not been
         the subject of a direct action or where such an action has been dismissed, the only defence available to a Member State against
         an action for failure to fulfil obligations is that it was absolutely impossible for it to implement the decision properly.
         Neither the apprehension of even insuperable internal difficulties nor the fact that the Member State in question finds it
         necessary to examine the individual situation of each undertaking concerned can justify a failure by that Member State to
         comply with its obligations under European Union law.
      
Thus a delay, following a first judgment finding a failure to fulfil obligations, on the part of the Member State concerned
         in implementing the Commission’s decision, attributable essentially to the lateness with which the Member State acted to remedy
         the difficulties of identifying and recovering the unlawful aid, cannot constitute valid justification in terms of a temporary
         absolute impossibility of implementation. It is not relevant in this respect that the Member State concerned has informed
         the Commission of the difficulties encountered in recovering the aid and the solutions adopted for remedying them.
      
(see paras 30-31)
2.        In the context of the procedure provided for in Article 228(2) EC, it is for the Court, in each case, in the light of the
         circumstances of the case before it and the degree of persuasion and deterrence which appears to it to be required, to determine
         the financial penalties appropriate for making sure that the judgment which previously established the breach is complied
         with as swiftly as possible and preventing similar infringements of European Union law from recurring. The Commission’s suggestions
         cannot bind the Court and merely constitute a useful point of reference. Similarly, guidelines such as those in the communications
         of the Commission are not binding on the Court but contribute to ensuring that the action brought by the Commission is transparent,
         foreseeable and consistent with legal certainty.
      
Moreover, the legal and factual context of the infringement established may be an indication that effective prevention of
         future repetition of similar infringements of European Union law may require the adoption of a deterrent measure.
      
(see paras 35-37, 89)
3.        The imposition of a penalty payment is in principle justified only in so far as the failure to comply with an earlier judgment
         of the Court continues up to the time of the Court’s examination of the facts.
      
That is the case where, in proceedings for the implementation of a Commission decision ordering the recovery of unlawful aid,
         on the date of the closure of the oral procedure, the Member State which granted the aid has not yet recovered a substantial
         part of the aid, thereby impeding the restoration of effective competition as envisaged by recital in the preamble to Regulation
         No 659/concerning the application of Article EC.
      
An order imposing a penalty payment on that Member State is an appropriate financial means by which to encourage it to take
         the necessary measures to put an end to the infringement established and to ensure full compliance with the Commission’s decision
         and the preceding judgment establishing its failure to fulfil obligations.
      
(see paras 42, 44-45)
4.        In exercising its discretion, it is for the Court to set the penalty payment so that it is both appropriate to the circumstances
         and proportionate to the infringement established and the ability to pay of the Member State concerned.
      
In the assessment carried out by the Court, the basic criteria which must be taken into account in order to ensure that a
         penalty payment has coercive force with a view to the uniform and effective application of European Union law are, in principle,
         the duration of the infringement, its degree of seriousness and the ability of the Member State concerned to pay. In applying
         those criteria, the Court is required to have regard in particular to the effects of non-compliance on public and private
         interests and to the urgency of compliance by the Member State concerned with its obligations.
      
In the case of a dispute relating to the failure to implement a Commission decision ordering recovery of aid paid under an
         unlawful aid scheme, in order to determine the form of the penalty payment, account must be taken of the special character
         of the operations for recovery of the aid, relied on by the Member State which granted the aid.
      
If it appears that it will be particularly difficult for that Member State in the short term to reach full compliance with
         the Commission’s decision and hence with the preceding judgment finding it to have failed to fulfil its obligations, in view
         of the fact that the operations involved relate to a large number of undertakings, the fixing of a penalty payment that is
         not invariable but takes account of the progress the Member State may have made in complying with its obligations appears
         appropriate to the circumstances of the particular case and hence proportionate to the infringement that has been found.
      
Consequently, the periodic payment of a sum calculated by multiplying a basic amount by the percentage of the unlawful aid
         that has not yet been recovered, or not shown to have been recovered, compared to the total amount not yet recovered on the
         date of delivery of the judgment must be considered appropriate.
      
(see paras 47-49, 52-53, 56-57, 93)
5.        For calculating a penalty payment imposed on a Member State which has failed to comply with a judgment of the Court requiring
         it to recover aid unlawfully paid, recovery of the aid may be taken into account only on condition that the Commission has
         been informed of it and is able to assess the adequacy of the evidence communicated to it in this respect.
      
In the case of the recovery of unlawful aid, it is for the Member State concerned to demonstrate to the Commission that the
         aid has been recovered, as follows from the principle of sincere cooperation, in order to ensure that the provisions of the
         Treaty are fully observed.
      
Moreover, apart from cases in which the unlawful aid is repaid by the recipient undertaking, the nature of the evidence required
         should be adjusted to the particular features of the factual situations encountered by the Member State in question in the
         course of its recovery operations.
      
(see paras 50, 53, 71)
6.        The Treaty rules on competition, in particular those on State aid, which are the expression of one of the essential tasks
         with which the European Union is entrusted, are of a vital nature, as is apparent from Article 3(3) TEU, namely the establishment
         of an internal market, and from Protocol No on the internal market and competition, which forms an integral part of the
         Treaties in accordance with Article TEU, and states that the internal market includes a system ensuring that competition
         is not distorted.
      
The recovery of aid that is incompatible with the common market aims to remove the distortion of competition caused by the
         competitive advantage the recipient of the aid has enjoyed in the market compared with its competitors, thereby restoring
         the situation prior to the payment of the aid.
      
Moreover, recovery penalises not only the incompatibility of the aid but also the Member State’s failure to fulfil the twofold
         obligation set out in Article 108(3) TFEU, under which that State must, first, inform the Commission of its plans to grant
         or alter aid and, secondly, must not put the proposed measures into effect until the procedure has resulted in a final decision.
      
(see paras 60-62)
7.        For calculation of the penalty payment in cases of the recovery of unlawful aid, the nature of the evidence required should
         be adjusted to the particular features of the factual situations encountered by the Member State in question in the course
         of its recovery operations.
      
In cases in which the aid has to be recovered from undertakings which are bankrupt or subject to bankruptcy proceedings whose
         purpose is to realise the assets and clear the liabilities, the fact that undertakings are in difficulties or bankrupt does
         not affect the obligation of recovery. The restoration of the previous situation and the elimination of the distortion of
         competition resulting from the unlawfully paid aid may, in principle, be achieved by registration of the liability relating
         to the repayment of the aid in question in the schedule of liabilities.
      
The Member State concerned is therefore required to provide the Commission with evidence of the registration of the liabilities
         in question in the bankruptcy proceedings. If it is not possible to do this, the Member State must report everything capable
         of showing that it has made every effort to that end. In particular, should the application to register a liability be refused,
         it must provide proof that it has initiated all procedures under national law capable of challenging that refusal.
      
In cases in which the unlawful aid in question has to be recovered from undertakings against which individual protective or
         enforcement measures have been adopted without success, it is for the Member State concerned to take and then communicate
         to the Commission all measures enabling repayment of the unlawful aid to be obtained and, if need be, measures aimed at the
         judicial liquidation of those undertakings, so that that State can enforce its claims against their assets. Consequently,
         it is for the Member State to demonstrate, first, that bankruptcy proceedings have been taken against the undertakings concerned
         and, secondly, that the claims against them have been registered.
      
In cases in which the unlawful aid in question has to be recovered from undertakings which have ceased to exist, proof that
         they have been removed from the registers suffices to show that they do not exist and consequently that it is impossible to
         recover the aid.
      
(see paras 71-74, 76-77)
8.        For the purpose of calculating the penalty payment in cases of the recovery of unlawful aid, where orders for recovery of
         aid unlawfully paid by a Member State are challenged in the national courts, it is for the Member State concerned, in accordance
         with the requirement actually to recover aid that is incompatible with the common market, to contest any national decision
         depriving the Commission’s decision of effect, in particular on grounds relating to the application of limitation rules or
         rules of evidence.
      
(see para. 78)
9.        Having regard to the objectives of the procedure provided for in Article 228(2) EC, the Court is empowered, in the exercise
         of the discretion conferred on it in connection with that article, to impose a penalty payment and a lump sum payment cumulatively.
      
The decision whether or not to order a lump sum payment must depend in each individual case on all the relevant factors relating
         both to the characteristics of the infringement established and to the conduct of the Member State involved in the procedure
         initiated under Article EC. That provision confers a wide discretion on the Court in deciding whether or not to impose
         such a penalty.
      
If the Court decides to order a lump sum payment, it must, in the exercise of its discretion, set the payment in such a way
         that it is, first, appropriate to the circumstances and, secondly, proportionate both to the infringement that has been established
         and to the ability to pay of the Member State concerned. The relevant factors in this respect include matters such as the
         length of time for which the breach of obligations has persisted since the judgment establishing it was delivered and the
         seriousness of the infringement. Moreover, the effective prevention of future repetition of similar infringements of European
         Union law may require the adoption of a deterrent measure.
      
(see paras 82-83, 89, 93-94)
10.      In the context of the recovery of unlawful aid, the Member State must actually recover the sums owed, belated recovery after
         the prescribed time-limits have expired not satisfying the requirements of the Treaty. In this connection, a Member State
         cannot plead provisions, practices or situations prevailing in its domestic legal order to justify failure to observe obligations
         arising under European Union law.
      
Justifications put forward by that Member State, based on internal difficulties connected with the complexity of the measures
         to be taken to identify the recipients of the unlawful aid in question and recover the aid from them, cannot be accepted.
      
(see paras 86-87)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Judgment of the Court establishing a failure to fulfil obligations – Failure to comply with the judgment – Article EC – Financial penalties)
In Case C‑496/09,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on November 2009,
European Commission, represented by L. Pignataro, E. Righini and B. Stromsky, acting as Agents,
      
applicant,
v
Italian Republic, represented by G. Palmieri, acting as Agent, and F. Arena and S. Fiorentino, avvocati dello Stato,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, E. Juhász, G. Arestis, T. von Danwitz and D. Šváby (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: A. Impellizzeri, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on May 2011,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities asks the Court to:
      
–        declare that, by failing to adopt all the measures necessary to comply with the judgment of April in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy [2004] ECR I‑concerning the recovery from the recipients of aid which, by Commission Decision 2000/128/EC of May
         concerning aid granted by Italy to promote employment (OJ L 42, p. 1), had been found to be unlawful and incompatible
         with the common market, the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under that decision and under Article 228(1)
         EC;
      
–        order the Italian Republic to pay to the Commission a daily penalty payment originally set at EUR and subsequently
         reduced to EUR for the delay in complying with the judgment in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy from the date on which judgment is delivered in the present case until the judgment in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy is complied with;
      
–        order the Italian Republic to pay to the Commission a lump sum, the amount of which is to be calculated by multiplying a daily
         amount originally set at EUR and subsequently reduced to EUR by the number of days over which the failure to
         comply continues from the date of the judgment in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy until the date on which judgment is delivered in the present case concerning Decision 2000/128; and
      
–        order the Italian Republic to pay the costs.
I –  Background to the dispute
On May the Commission adopted Decision 2000/128, Articles to of the operative part of which read as follows:
      
‘Article 1.      The aid granted unlawfully by Italy since November for employment under the training and work experience contracts provided
         for in Laws Nos 863/84, 407/90, 169/and 451/is compatible with the common market and the EEA Agreement provided that
         it concerns:
      
–        the creation of jobs in the recipient firm for persons who have not yet found employment or have lost their previous employment
         within the meaning of the guidelines on aid to employment,
      
–        the employment of workers experiencing particular difficulties in entering or re-entering the labour market. For the purposes
         of this Decision, workers experiencing particular difficulties in entering or re-entering the labour market shall mean young
         persons under the age of 25, [university graduates] up to the age of and the long-term unemployed, i.e. out of employment
         for more than one year.
      
2.      Aid for training and work experience contracts which does not satisfy the conditions set out in paragraph is incompatible
         with the common market.
      
Article 1.      The aid granted by Italy under Article of Law No 196/for the conversion of training and work experience contracts into
         open-ended contracts is compatible with the common market and the EEA Agreement provided that it complies with the net job
         creation requirement as defined in the Community guidelines on aid to employment.
      
The workforce employed by a firm shall be calculated without taking account of jobs resulting from the conversion and jobs
         created through fixed-term contracts or not guaranteeing sufficiently stable employment.
      
2.      Aid for the conversion of training and work experience contracts into open-ended contracts which does not satisfy the requirement
         laid down in paragraph is incompatible with the common market.
      
Article Italy shall take all necessary measures to recover from the recipients the aid which does not satisfy the conditions of Articles
         and and has already been unlawfully paid.
      
Repayment shall be made in accordance with the procedures of Italian law. The amounts to be repaid shall bear interest from
         the date on which the aid was paid until the date on which it is effectively recovered. The interest shall be calculated on
         the basis of the reference rate used to calculate the net grant equivalent of regional aid.
      
Article Italy shall inform the Commission within two months of the date of notification of this Decision of the measures it has taken
         to comply herewith.’
      
II –  The judgment in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy
On March the Commission, pursuant to Article EC and on the basis of the second subparagraph of Article 88(2) EC,
         brought an action for failure to fulfil obligations against the Italian Republic, seeking a declaration that the Italian Republic
         had not adopted within the time-limit prescribed all necessary measures to recover from the recipients the aid which, by Decision
         2000/128, had been found to be unlawful and incompatible with the common market, and in any event had not notified the Commission
         of the measures taken.
      
In point of the operative part of the judgment in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy, the Court declared that:
      
‘… by not adopting within the time-limit prescribed all measures necessary for the recovery from the recipients of the aid
         which was found, according to [Decision 2000/128], to be unlawful and incompatible with the common market, the Italian Republic
         has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles and of that decision’.
      
III –  The administrative procedure
Following the judgment in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy and in order to speed up the recovery procedure, the Commission, by letter of July 2004, fixed the arrangements for recovery
         of the aid. In the absence of a reply from the Italian authorities, it requested, by letter of December 2004, information
         on the state of progress of the recovery procedure.
      
Following requests for information of February, April, June and August 2005, the Italian Republic informed the
         Commission that undertakings had received aid of more than EUR and undertakings aid between EUR and
         EUR 000, and that by September recovery orders had been served on out of undertakings and numerous challenges
         to them had been brought by the recipient undertakings.
      
In reply to a request by the Italian Republic, the Commission, by letter of October 2005, accepted that aid granted after
         November would not be recovered in so far as it concerned the recruitment of workers before that date. At the same time,
         the Commission also asked the Italian Republic why recovery orders had not yet been sent to their addressees and requested
         information on the amounts already recovered and the amounts remaining to be recovered. It repeated those questions by letter
         of December 2005.
      
After the Italian Republic informed the Commission that undertakings had to be excluded from the recovery procedure, the
         Commission questioned the Italian Republic as to the reasons for that exclusion, in that the verification procedures should
         have been completed before the beginning of 2005, and repeated its requests for information on the state of progress of the
         recovery.
      
By letter of March 2006, the Italian authorities informed the Commission that a further undertakings had been excluded
         from the recovery procedure, and reported that actions had been brought before the courts challenging the recovery orders.
         On April and July the Commission repeated its requests for clarification and further details and stated that it
         was willing to meet the Italian authorities.
      
At that meeting, which took place on July 2006, the Italian Republic announced that a new administrative body was being
         set up to centralise the recovery procedures.
      
On November the Italian authorities informed the Commission that the total amount to be recovered from undertakings
         was EUR 911.88, of which EUR 950.had already been recovered.
      
On December 2006, noting the lack of progress with the recovery procedure, the Commission reminded the Italian authorities
         that it was open to it to bring an action before the Court of Justice of the European Communities pursuant to Article 228(2)
         EC. In reply, those authorities informed the Commission, by letter of March 2007, that the total amount of aid to be recovered
         was EUR 761.97, of which EUR 129.had been recovered so far.
      
On July the Commission sent the Italian Republic a letter of formal notice in accordance with that provision, emphasising
         the inability of the Italian Republic to define clearly the number of recipients who were obliged to repay the unlawful aid
         concerned.
      
In reply to the letter of formal notice, the Italian Republic informed the Commission on September and December 2007,
         first, that by decree of the President of the Council of Ministers of May on the rules for making a statement in lieu
         of a notarised document in relation to certain State aid declared incompatible by the European Commission (GURI No 160, July 2007, p. 13), it was now laid down that undertakings in receipt of unlawful aid that was incompatible with the common
         market could not be granted any new State aid unless they first declared that they had repaid the previous aid and, secondly,
         that it had opened a blocked bank account with the Banco d’Italia to enable the undertakings involved in the recovery procedure
         to repay the aid. The Italian Republic also pointed to objective difficulties of recovery in view of the large number of recipients
         and the fact that Decision 2000/had introduced new criteria for ascertaining the compatibility of the aid with effect
         from November 1995, such as workers’ university degrees and the possible increase in the number of jobs following new recruitment.
      
On February the Commission sent the Italian Republic a reasoned opinion in accordance with Article 228(2) EC, taking
         note of the practical difficulties encountered by the Italian Republic in recovering the unlawfully granted aid and of the
         fact that the procedures for implementing Decision 2000/had finally been initiated, but nevertheless observing that, more
         than three years after the judgment in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy, only 0.5% of the unlawful aid in question had been recovered. The Commission invited the Italian Republic to comply with
         the reasoned opinion within two months from notification and to take the necessary measures to comply with that judgment.
      
In reply, the Italian authorities sent the Commission various items, drawing attention to the increase in the amounts recovered
         and the adoption of Decree-Law No of April on urgent provisions for implementing Community obligations and complying
         with judgments of the Court of Justice of the European Communities (GURI No 84, April 2008, p. 3), intended to solve the
         procedural problem of the suspension of recovery orders by the Italian courts. Following the sending of that decree-law, the
         Commission agreed, by letters of May and July 2008, to suspend for some months its decision to bring proceedings before
         the Court, so as to be able to assess the effect of those new rules on the recovery procedure.
      
Following a request by the Commission for a complete update of the state of progress of the recovery procedure, the Italian
         Republic on September sent items showing a total sum to be recovered of EUR 614.and amounts recovered so
         far of EUR 710.as at September 2008.
      
On November the Italian authorities sent the Commission a fresh statement of the amounts to be recovered, reducing
         them to EUR 898.76, of which EUR 730.had now been repaid, and stated on that occasion that the compulsory
         recovery of the amounts was carried out by a company which had complete freedom to determine the time-limits for recovering
         the debts but could not, however, be called on to answer for its actions until after a period of three years from the date
         of being given the case.
      
On June the Italian Republic informed the Commission that the sums to be recovered should be reduced to EUR 686.79,
         of which EUR 600.had been recovered to date.
      
In those circumstances, the Commission decided to bring the present action.
      
IV –  Failure to fulfil obligations
A –  Arguments of the parties
As regards the alleged failure to fulfil obligations, the Commission submits that on the expiry of the period prescribed in
         the reasoned opinion the Italian Republic had not recovered the entire amount of the aid unlawfully paid, namely EUR 761.97,
         the amount stated in that Member State’s letter of March 2007.
      
The Commission also rules out any absolute impossibility of recovering the aid, submitting, first, that the Italian Republic
         never raised this during the administrative procedure and, secondly, that the conditions under which such impossibility may
         be recognised are manifestly not satisfied in the present case. It argues that the Court has already, in paragraph of the
         judgment in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy, rejected the Italian Republic’s reliance in this respect on the large number of undertakings involved in the recovery procedure
         and on the even larger number of employees concerned.
      
The Italian Republic contests the total amount of the sums to be recovered, fixing it at EUR 032.37, while conceding
         that by July it had obtained repayment of only EUR 555.46, to which there should, however, be added EUR 387.on various bases, as shown by the information in a DVD annexed to the rejoinder.
      
On this point, the Commission accepted at the hearing that the total amount of the aid distributed was indeed EUR 032.and that aid to the amount of EUR 555.had indeed been recovered by the Italian Republic.
      
To contest the existence of a failure to fulfil obligations, the Italian Republic submits that the procedure for the recovery
         of the unlawful aid in question is characterised by a very special difficulty which satisfies the conditions for an absolute
         impossibility of a temporary nature. It points to the conditional character of Decision 2000/128. It further submits that
         the Italian authorities did not have the elements available for them to ascertain whether the aid was compatible with the
         common market. Moreover, it took all the necessary steps with respect to the undertakings concerned in order to carry out
         the recovery procedure. The initiation of that procedure against all the undertakings which had been exempted from social
         contributions and the adjustments to its legislation to that end had, moreover, made it possible to obtain the information
         that was essential for performing its obligation of recovery, and had led to a substantial increase in the amounts recovered.
         So, during the period in which the Italian authorities did not have sufficient information to implement the recovery procedures,
         the conditions for absolute impossibility were satisfied, while such a situation ceased once the necessary elements for those
         procedures became available.
      
B –  Findings of the Court
To determine whether the Italian Republic adopted all the necessary measures to comply with the judgment in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy, it must be ascertained whether the amounts of aid that are the subject of the present dispute were repaid by the recipient
         undertakings.
      
It should be recalled that, according to settled case-law, the reference date for assessing whether there has been a failure
         to fulfil obligations under Article 228(2) EC is the date of expiry of the period prescribed in the reasoned opinion issued
         under that provision (see Case C‑304/Commission v France [2005] ECR I‑6263, paragraph 30, and Case C‑369/Commission v Greece [2009] ECR I‑5703, paragraph 43), in this case April 2008.
      
It is common ground that on that date the aid that had been wrongly paid had not been fully recovered by the Italian authorities,
         and consequently that the judgment in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy had, in part, not yet been complied with.
      
As to the Italian Republic’s argument that it was temporarily absolutely impossible for it to recover the aid in question
         because of the large number of recipient undertakings and the non-availability of the information necessary for quantifying
         the sums to be recovered, it should be recalled at the outset that the Court previously refused to accept a similar argument,
         in paragraphs and of the judgment in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy. 
      
After taking note of the settled case-law under which, where the Commission’s decision requiring the cessation of State aid
         that is incompatible with the common market has not been the subject of a direct action or where such an action has been dismissed,
         the only defence available to a Member State against an action for failure to fulfil obligations is that it was absolutely
         impossible for it to implement the decision properly, the Court pointed out, in paragraphs and of that judgment, that
         neither the apprehension of even insuperable internal difficulties nor the fact that the Member State in question finds it
         necessary to examine the individual situation of each undertaking concerned can justify a failure by that Member State to
         comply with its obligations under European Union law.
      
Furthermore, the measures taken by the Italian Republic from to remedy the difficulties of identifying and recovering
         the unlawful aid in question proved to be capable of advancing the recovery of that aid, as the Italian Republic indeed submits,
         and the delay in implementing Decision 2000/is essentially attributable to the lateness with which that Member State acted,
         not adopting those measures until more than two years at least after delivery of the judgment in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy. It is not relevant in this respect that the Italian Republic had informed the Commission of the difficulties encountered
         in recovering the aid and the solutions adopted for remedying them.
      
Moreover, while it is true that the Italian Republic needed a longer period of time for identifying the recipients and the
         amount of the aid granted under a scheme that had been declared incompatible with the common market than if only an individual
         grant of aid had been concerned, that being a factor which may be taken into account in determining the basic amount of the
         penalty payment, it does not appear from the explanations provided by the Italian Republic that, as required for compliance
         with a judgment finding a failure to fulfil obligations in such a case, all the measures taken with a view to recovering the
         aid in question were the subject of permanent and effective monitoring.
      
The Italian Republic cannot thus validly claim that it took all the necessary measures to implement the procedure for recovery
         of the aid in question.
      
In those circumstances it must be held that, by failing, by the date of expiry of the period prescribed in the reasoned opinion
         issued by the Commission on February pursuant to Article EC, to take all the measures needed to comply with the
         judgment in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy concerning the recovery from the recipients of the aid which was found to be unlawful and incompatible with the common market
         by Decision 2000/128, the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under that decision and Article 228(1) EC.
      
V –  Financial penalties
Since the Court has found that the Italian Republic did not comply with the judgment in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy within the period prescribed in the reasoned opinion, it may, in accordance with the third subparagraph of Article 228(2)
         EC, impose a lump sum or penalty payment on that Member State.
      
It is for the Court, in each case, in the light of the circumstances of the case before it and the degree of persuasion and
         deterrence which appears to it to be required, to determine the financial penalties appropriate for making sure that the judgment
         which previously established the breach is complied with as swiftly as possible and preventing similar infringements of European
         Union law from recurring (Case C‑407/Commission v Greece [2011] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
The Commission’s suggestions cannot bind the Court and merely constitute a useful point of reference. Similarly, guidelines
         such as those in the communications of the Commission are not binding on the Court but contribute to ensuring that the action
         brought by the Commission is transparent, foreseeable and consistent with legal certainty (Case C‑369/Commission v Greece, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
A –  Penalty payment
1.     Arguments of the parties
The Commission, referring to the method of calculation set out in its communication SEC(2005) of December on
         the application of Article EC, as updated by communication SEC(2010) of July 2010, ‘Application of Article of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. Up-dating of data used to calculate lump sum and penalty payments
         to be proposed by the Commission to the Court of Justice in infringement proceedings’ (‘the communication’), considers
         that a daily penalty payment originally fixed at EUR and reduced to EUR pursuant to the communication,
         calculated on the basis of a basic flat-rate amount of EUR multiplied by a coefficient for seriousness of 8, a coefficient
         for duration of and an n factor of 17, is proportionate to the seriousness and duration of the infringement, in view of the need to give the penalty
         payment a coercive and deterrent effect.
      
The Commission submits, first, that the rules of the EC Treaty on State aid are a cornerstone of the realisation of the internal
         market, as appears in particular from the structure of Article EC and the case-law of the Court. Secondly, the harmful
         effects of the non-recovery of the unlawful aid are all the greater in that the aid amounted to a considerable sum and was
         paid to a large number of undertakings, which moreover belonged to various economic sectors. It also relies on the fact that
         the duration of the infringement on the date when the action was brought before the Court was months. It further argues
         that its assessment is confirmed by paragraphs to of the judgment in Case C‑369/Commission v Greece.
      
The Italian Republic submits that the amount of the penalty payment sought by the Commission is disproportionate and incorrect.
         The amount takes no account of the progress made in complying with the obligation incumbent on the Italian Republic, as a
         result of which the equivalent of 70% of the sums to be recovered has in fact been repaid by the undertakings concerned, or
         of the intrinsic difficulties of the recovery. It argues further that the coefficient for seriousness is disproportionate
         and that it should be fixed at 1, having regard to the coefficient of proposed by the Commission in Case C‑278/Commission v Spain [2003] ECR I‑concerning questions of human health and the environment.
      
The Italian Republic submits, finally, that the Court must adjust the amount of the penalty payment to the progress made in
         complying with the obligation incumbent on the Member State concerned, as it did in Commission v Spain. The lack of such an adjustment is in itself a serious error affecting the calculation proposed by the Commission.
      
2.     Findings of the Court 
a)     The principle of imposing a penalty payment
The Court has held that the imposition of a penalty payment is in principle justified only in so far as the failure to comply
         with an earlier judgment of the Court continues up to the time of the Court’s examination of the facts (Case C‑369/Commission v Greece, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Also, in the case of the recovery of State aid that is incompatible with the common market, the Court’s case-law and recital
         in the preamble to and Article 14(3) of Council Regulation (EC) No 659/of March laying down detailed rules
         for the application of Article of the EC Treaty (OJ L 83, p. 1) require the Member State which has paid the aid actually
         to recover it without delay, in order to ensure the effectiveness of the Commission’s decision to order recovery of the unlawfully
         paid aid (see, to that effect, Case C‑232/Commission v France [2006] ECR I‑10071, paragraphs 42, and 50).
      
In the present case it is clear that, on the date of the closure of the oral procedure, a substantial part of the aid in question
         had not been recovered, thereby impeding the restoration of effective competition as envisaged by recital in the preamble
         to Regulation No 659/1999.
      
In those circumstances, the Court considers that an order imposing a penalty payment on the Italian Republic is an appropriate
         financial means by which to encourage the Italian Republic to take the necessary measures to put an end to the infringement
         established and to ensure full compliance with Decision 2000/and the judgment in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy.
      
b)     Imposition of the penalty payment
For the purpose of imposing the penalty payment in the present case, the Court must determine first the form of the penalty
         payment, secondly the basic amount of that payment, and thirdly the conditions under which it will cease to be payable.
      
i)     The form of the penalty payment
To determine the form of the penalty payment, account must be taken of the special character, adduced by the Italian Republic,
         of the operations for recovery of the aid paid under the scheme that was declared incompatible with the common market by Decision
         2000/128.
      
As regards the invariable nature of the amount of the penalty payment proposed by the Commission, it appears that it will
         be particularly difficult for the Italian Republic in the short term to reach full compliance with Decision 2000/128, and
         hence with the judgment in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy, in view of the fact that the operations involved relate to a large number of undertakings.
      
In view of that special factor, it is conceivable that the Italian Republic will manage significantly to increase the extent
         of its implementation of Decision 2000/but not to implement it fully in the short term. If the amount of the penalty payment
         were invariable, it would continue to be due in its entirety for as long as the Member State concerned had not achieved complete
         implementation of the decision. In those circumstances, a penalty which takes account of the progress which the Member State
         may have made in complying with its obligations appears appropriate to the particular circumstances of the present case and
         hence proportionate to the infringement that has been found (see, by analogy, Commission v Spain, paragraphs and 49).
      
It must also be observed that, in the case of the recovery of unlawful State aid, it is for the Member State concerned to
         demonstrate to the Commission that the aid has been recovered, as follows from the principle of sincere cooperation, in order
         to ensure that the provisions of the Treaty are fully observed, and as follows in the present case from Article of Decision
         2000/(see, to that effect, Case C‑369/Commission v Greece, paragraph 75). Consequently, for calculating the penalty payment in the present case, recovery of the aid can be taken into
         account only on condition that the Commission has been informed of it and has been able to assess the adequacy of the evidence
         communicated to it in this respect.
      
In the light of the foregoing, for the penalty payment to be appropriate to the particular circumstances of the case and proportionate
         to the infringement that has been established, the amount of the payment must be fixed having regard to the progress made
         by the defendant Member State in implementing Decision 2000/(see, to that effect, Commission v Spain, paragraph 50), in so far as it appears from the documents in the case that that State is capable of providing direct and
         reliable evidence of implementation, so that the fixing of such a variable penalty payment proves to be practicable. In the
         present case, the Italian Republic annexed to its rejoinder a DVD containing evidence in the form of payment slips directly
         and reliably attesting the movements of funds representing the recovery of the unlawful aid repaid so far. The Commission,
         in answer to a written question, stated that those payment slips for the individual undertakings, correlated with the amounts
         stated in the summary tables also annexed to the rejoinder, bear out the Italian Republic’s claims as to the amount of aid
         so far recovered, namely EUR 555. In those circumstances, the production of such payment slips by the Italian Republic
         may be regarded as the provision of direct and reliable evidence of compliance with its obligations in the present case.
      
That being so, the Italian Republic should be ordered to pay a periodic payment calculated by multiplying a basic amount by
         the percentage of the unlawful aid that has not yet been recovered, or not shown to have been recovered, compared to the total
         amount not yet recovered on the date of delivery of the present judgment (see, by analogy, Commission v Spain, paragraph 50).
      
For calculating the penalty payment in the present case, recovery of the aid may be taken into account only on condition that
         the Commission has been informed of it and has been able to assess the adequacy of the evidence communicated to it in this
         respect (see, to that effect, Case C‑369/Commission v Greece, paragraph 75).
      
The periodicity of the penalty payment should therefore be fixed by determining it on a half-yearly basis, so as to allow
         the Commission to assess the state of progress of the recovery operations by reference to the situation prevailing at the
         end of that period, while allowing the defendant Member State the time needed to compile and transmit to the Commission the
         evidence capable of establishing, for the period in question, the recovery of the sums wrongly paid.
      
Consequently, the penalty payment will be quantified on a half-yearly basis and its amount calculated by multiplying a basic
         amount by the percentage of the unlawful aid that has not yet been recovered, or not shown to have been recovered, at the
         end of the period concerned, compared to the total amount not yet recovered on the date of delivery of the present judgment.
      
ii)  The basic amount of the penalty payment
It should be recalled that, in exercising its discretion, it is for the Court to set the penalty payment so that it is both
         appropriate to the circumstances and proportionate to the infringement established and the ability to pay of the Member State
         concerned (see Case C‑369/Commission v Greece, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In the assessment carried out by the Court, the basic criteria which must be taken into account in order to ensure that a
         penalty payment has coercive force with a view to the uniform and effective application of European Union law are, in principle,
         the duration of the infringement, its degree of seriousness and the ability of the Member State concerned to pay. In applying
         those criteria, the Court is required to have regard in particular to the effects of non-compliance on public and private
         interests and to the urgency of compliance by the Member State concerned with its obligations (Case C‑369/Commission v Greece, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
As to the duration of the infringement, it is settled case-law that it is for the Court to assess the duration by reference
         to the time at which it assesses the facts, not the time at which the case is brought before it by the Commission (see, to
         that effect, Case C‑369/Commission v Greece, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Since the Italian Republic has been unable to show that it has put an end to its failure to comply fully with the judgment
         in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy, as found in paragraph above, that failure must be regarded as having continued for more than seven years, which is a
         very considerable period of time.
      
As to the seriousness of the infringement, the vital nature of the Treaty rules on competition must be recalled, in particular
         those on State aid, which are the expression of one of the essential tasks with which the European Union is entrusted. At
         the time of the Court’s assessment of the appropriateness and the amount of the present penalty payment, that vital nature
         is apparent from Article 3(3) TEU, namely the establishment of an internal market, and from Protocol No on the internal
         market and competition, which forms an integral part of the Treaties in accordance with Article TEU, and states that the
         internal market includes a system ensuring that competition is not distorted.
      
The recovery of aid that is incompatible with the common market aims to remove the distortion of competition caused by the
         competitive advantage the recipient of the aid has enjoyed in the market compared with its competitors, thereby restoring
         the situation prior to the payment of the aid (see, to that effect, Case C‑348/Commission v Italy [1995] ECR I‑673, paragraph 27).
      
Moreover, recovery penalises not only the incompatibility of the aid but also the Member State’s failure to fulfil the twofold
         obligation set out in Article 108(3) TFEU, under which that State must, first, inform the Commission of its plans to grant
         or alter aid and, secondly, must not put the proposed measures into effect until the procedure has resulted in a final decision.
      
Finally, it should be added that in the present case, apart from the fact that the unlawful aid in question is particularly
         harmful to competition because of its large amount, the unusually large number of recipients and its being paid regardless
         of the economic sector of the recipients, as the Commission rightly points out, it is common ground that a substantial part
         of the aid has not yet been recovered, or that proof of recovery has not been provided to the Commission.
      
For all that, as became apparent at the hearing, the Italian Republic and the Commission agree on the total amount of aid
         distributed, EUR 032.37. The Commission also accepts that aid of a total amount of EUR must be regarded
         as having been recovered.
      
As to the ability to pay of the Italian Republic, the Court has repeatedly held that the method of calculation proposed by
         the Commission, in which the basic amount is multiplied by a specific coefficient applicable to the Member State concerned,
         is an appropriate means of reflecting that State’s ability to pay while keeping the variation between the Member States within
         a reasonable range (Case C‑369/Commission v Greece, paragraph and the case-law cited). The recent development of inflation and the gross domestic product in the Member
         State in question must therefore be taken into account, as the Commission did pursuant to the communication.
      
To determine the basic amount of the penalty payment in the present case, the Court must also, however, have regard to the
         particular features of the recovery of aid granted under the aid scheme that has been declared incompatible with the common
         market, as mentioned in paragraph above.
      
Applying the above considerations, the Court considers that in the present case it is appropriate to impose a penalty payment
         of a basic amount of EUR million per half-year.
      
Consequently, the Italian Republic must be ordered to pay to the Commission, into the ‘European Union own resources’ account,
         a penalty payment of an amount calculated by multiplying the basic amount of EUR million by the percentage of the unlawful
         aid that has not yet been recovered, or not shown to have been recovered, at the end of the period concerned, compared to
         the total amount not yet recovered on the date of delivery of the present judgment, for every six months of delay in implementing
         the necessary measures to comply with the judgment of April in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy, from the present judgment until compliance with the judgment of April 2004.
      
iii)  Termination of the penalty payment
As stated in paragraph above, it is for the Member State concerned to provide the Commission with direct and reliable evidence
         that Decision 2000/has been implemented and the unlawful aid actually recovered.
      
If the unlawful aid is repaid by the recipient undertaking, the Italian Republic is required to produce payment slips attesting
         to all movements of funds claimed to represent the repayment of part of the unlawful aid to be recovered.
      
In other cases, the nature of the evidence required should be adjusted to the particular features of the factual situations
         encountered by the Member State in question in the course of its recovery operations.
      
In cases in which the aid has to be recovered from undertakings which are bankrupt or subject to bankruptcy proceedings whose
         purpose is to realise the assets and clear the liabilities, it is settled case-law that the fact that undertakings are in
         difficulties or bankrupt does not affect the obligation of recovery (see, inter alia, Case C‑280/Commission v Italy, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
It is also settled case-law that the restoration of the previous situation and the elimination of the distortion of competition
         resulting from the unlawfully paid aid may in principle be achieved by registration of the liability relating to the repayment
         of the aid in question in the schedule of liabilities (Case C‑331/Commission v Poland [2011] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
For the purpose of calculating the penalty payment in the present case, the Italian Republic is therefore required to provide
         the Commission with evidence of the registration of the liabilities in question in the bankruptcy proceedings. If it is not
         possible to do this, the Italian Republic must report everything capable of showing that it has made every effort to that
         end. In particular, should the application to register a liability be refused, it must provide proof that it has initiated
         all procedures under national law capable of challenging that refusal.
      
Consequently, contrary to the Commission’s claims, the Italian Republic cannot be required, for the purpose of calculating
         the penalty payment in the present case and where bankrupt undertakings or undertakings involved in bankruptcy proceedings
         are concerned, to prove not only the registration of the liabilities against them but also the sale of their assets under
         market conditions. As the Italian Republic rightly submits, the sums which have not yet been recovered from undertakings in
         bankruptcy, but which that State has made its best efforts to recover, should not be taken into account for the purpose of
         allowing the Commission’s application relating to the payment of the penalty payments due in accordance with the present judgment.
         Otherwise that penalty payment would no longer be appropriate and proportionate to the infringement that has been found, in
         accordance with paragraph above, in that it would impose on the Italian Republic a financial burden deriving from the very
         nature of bankruptcy proceedings and from their irreducible length, over which that State has no direct influence.
      
In cases in which the unlawful aid in question has to be recovered from undertakings against which individual protective or
         enforcement measures have been adopted without success, it is for the Member State concerned to take and then communicate
         to the Commission all measures enabling repayment of the unlawful aid to be obtained and, if need be, measures aimed at the
         judicial liquidation of those undertakings, so that that State can enforce its claims against their assets (see, to that effect,
         C‑280/Commission v Italy, paragraph and the case-law cited). Consequently, it is for the Member State to demonstrate, first, that bankruptcy proceedings
         have been taken against the undertakings concerned and, secondly, that the claims against them have been registered in accordance
         with the principles set out in paragraphs to above.
      
In cases in which the unlawful aid in question has to be recovered from undertakings which have ceased to exist, proof that
         they have been removed from the registers suffices to show that they do not exist and consequently that it is impossible to
         recover the aid.
      
Finally, in cases in which orders for recovery of the unlawful aid in question are challenged in the national courts, it is
         for the Member State concerned, in accordance with the requirement actually to recover aid that is incompatible with the common
         market, to contest any national decision depriving the Commission’s decision of effect, in particular on grounds relating,
         as in the present case, to  the application of limitation rules (see, by analogy, Case C‑24/Alcan Deutschland [1997] ECR I‑1591, paragraphs and 38) or rules of evidence. Consequently, for similar reasons to those stated in paragraph
         above, proof that such efforts have been made suffices to exclude the aid concerned from the volume of as yet unrecovered
         aid to be taken into account for calculating the penalty payment.
      
B –  Lump sum
1.     Arguments of the parties
The Commission, referring to the calculation method set out in its communication of December as updated by the communication, considers that a lump sum of a daily amount originally fixed at EUR and reduced pursuant to the communication to EUR 200, calculated on the basis of a basic flat-rate amount of EUR multiplied by a coefficient for
         seriousness of 8, a coefficient for duration of and an n factor of 17, multiplied by the number of days for which the infringement has lasted from April to the date of delivery
         of the present judgment, is appropriate to the seriousness of the infringement and has the necessary deterrent force.
      
As regards its method of calculation, the Commission submits that this must depend in each individual case on all the relevant
         factors, in particular the duration of the infringement after the judgment establishing it, the public and private interests
         involved and the conduct of the Italian Republic. In view of the fact that the Italian Republic has not complied with its
         obligations years after the adoption of Decision 2000/and years after the judgment in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy, and of the fact that the aid in question was paid regardless of the economic sector of the recipients and essentially benefited
         Italian undertakings, the Commission considers that the proposal submitted to the Court is appropriate.
      
The Italian Republic submits that the amount of the lump sum is disproportionate to its conduct and the possible harm caused
         by the alleged infringement, having regard in particular to Case C‑304/Commission v France. The Italian Republic emphasises the special circumstances of the case in connection with the intrinsic complexity of Decision
         2000/and the impossibility of implementing it swiftly, and also its positive conduct during the procedure.
      
2.     Findings of the Court
a)     The principle of the imposition of a lump sum payment
Having regard to the objectives of the procedure provided for in Article 228(2) EC, the Court is empowered, in the exercise
         of the discretion conferred on it in connection with that article, to impose a penalty payment and a lump sum payment cumulatively
         (see, to that effect, Case C‑304/Commission v France, paragraph 83).
      
The imposition of a lump sum payment must depend in each individual case on all the relevant factors relating both to the
         characteristics of the infringement established and to the conduct of the Member State involved in the procedure initiated
         under Article EC. That provision confers a wide discretion on the Court in deciding whether or not to impose such a penalty
         (Case C‑369/Commission v Greece, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In the present case, besides the seriousness of the infringement as established in paragraphs to above, it should be
         noted that on the date of the closure of the oral procedure, more than years after the date of delivery of the judgment
         in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy and more than years after the adoption of Decision 2000/on May 1999, the Italian Republic was still unable to establish
         precisely the definitive total amount of the aid to be recovered, as may be seen from its rejoinder.
      
Furthermore, it was not until at best two years after the delivery of the judgment in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy that the first coherent measures were adopted by the Italian Republic to remedy the difficulties of identifying and recovering
         the aid that had been declared unlawful and incompatible by Decision 2000/128, as is apparent from paragraphs to above
         and was admitted by the Italian Republic at the hearing. In particular, Decree-Law No of April 2008, intended to solve
         the procedural problem caused by the Italian courts’ suspension of the orders for recovery of the unlawful aid in question,
         was not enacted until after the period prescribed in the reasoned opinion of February had expired, and provided only
         an imperfect solution to the delay in recovering the aid covered by that decision (see, by analogy, Case C‑304/Commission v Italy [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraphs to 42, and Case C‑305/Commission v Italy [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraphs to 40).
      
It is settled case-law that the Member State must actually recover the sums owed, belated recovery after the prescribed time-limits
         have expired not satisfying the requirements of the Treaty (see, to that effect, Case C‑305/Commission v Italy, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
The justifications put forward by the Italian Republic in this regard, namely that the delay in complying with the judgment
         was attributable to internal difficulties connected with the complexity of the measures to be taken to identify the recipients
         of the unlawful aid in question and recover the aid from them, cannot be accepted. As the Court has repeatedly held, a Member
         State cannot plead provisions, practices or situations prevailing in its domestic legal order to justify failure to observe
         obligations arising under European Union law (see, inter alia, Case C‑568/Commission v Greece [2009] ECR I‑4505, paragraph 50), and the elimination of unlawful aid by means of recovery is the logical consequence of
         the finding that it is unlawful and that consequence cannot depend on the form in which the aid was granted (see, to that
         effect, Commission v Poland, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
It is thus clear that the infringement of which the Italian Republic is accused lasted for a quite considerable period which
         in any event had no relation to the difficulties in recovering the aid paid under a scheme that had been declared unlawful
         and incompatible with the common market.
      
Moreover, the Court considers that the legal and factual context of the infringement established may be an indication that
         effective prevention of future repetition of similar infringements of European Union law may require the adoption of a deterrent
         measure (see, to that effect, Case C‑121/Commission v France [2008] ECR I‑9159, paragraph 69).
      
In particular, the Italian Republic has already been the subject of a number of judgments on the basis of Article 88(2) EC
         holding that it has failed to fulfil its obligations by not immediately and actually recovering aid paid under schemes declared
         unlawful and incompatible with the common market.
      
In addition to the finding of failure immediately and actually to implement Decision 2000/made in the judgment in Case
         C‑99/Commission v Italy, the failure to comply with which gave rise to the present proceedings, several other findings of failure to fulfil obligations
         have been made by the Court, in particular in Case C‑207/Commission v Italy, Case C‑280/Commission v Italy, Case C‑304/Commission v Italy and Case C‑305/Commission v Italy.
      
Having regard to the foregoing, the Court considers that it is justifiable in the present case to order the Italian Republic
         to pay a lump sum.
      
b)     The amount of the lump sum payment
If the Court decides to order a lump sum payment, it must, in the exercise of its discretion, set the payment in such a way
         that it is, first, appropriate to the circumstances and, secondly, proportionate both to the infringement that has been established
         and to the ability to pay of the Member State concerned (see Case C‑407/Commission v Greece, paragraph 31).
      
The relevant factors in this respect include matters such as the length of time for which the breach of obligations has persisted
         since the judgment establishing it was delivered and the seriousness of the infringement (see, to that effect, Case C‑369/Commission v Greece, paragraphs and and the case-law cited).
      
To offset the considerations set out in paragraphs to 63, and above relating to the duration and seriousness of the
         infringement, account should be taken of the points raised by the Italian Republic to show that the recovery of the unlawful
         aid in question was made more difficult by the fact that it had been paid under an aid scheme, that Decision 2000/had
         made the compatibility of the aid subject to conditions, and that implementation of the decision therefore meant that the
         Italian Republic first had to identify the recipients of the aid and the amounts received by each of them.
      
On the basis of all those factors, the Court considers that the circumstances of the case are fairly assessed by setting the
         amount of the lump sum which the Italian Republic will have to pay, under the third subparagraph of Article 228(2) EC, at
         EUR million.
      
The Italian Republic must therefore be ordered to pay to the Commission, into the ‘European Union own resources’ account,
         a lump sum of EUR million.
      
VI –  Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Italian Republic’s failure
         to fulfil its obligations has been established, the Italian Republic must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by failing, by the date of expiry of the period prescribed in the reasoned opinion issued by the Commission
            of the European Communities on February pursuant to Article EC, to take all the measures needed to comply with
            the judgment of April in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy concerning the recovery from the recipients of the aid which was found to be unlawful and incompatible with the common market
            by Commission Decision 2000/128/EC of May concerning aid granted by Italy to promote employment, the Italian Republic
            has failed to fulfil its obligations under that decision and Article 228(1) EC;
2.      Orders the Italian Republic to pay to the European Commission, into the ‘European Union own resources’ account, a penalty
            payment of an amount calculated by multiplying the basic amount of EUR million by the percentage of the unlawful aid that
            has not yet been recovered, or not shown to have been recovered, at the end of the period concerned, compared to the total
            amount not yet recovered on the date of delivery of the present judgment, for every six months of delay in implementing the
            necessary measures to comply with the judgment of April in Case C‑99/Commission v Italy, from the present judgment until compliance with the judgment of April 2004;
3.      Orders the Italian Republic to pay to the European Commission, into the ‘European Union own resources’ account, a lump sum
            of EUR million;
4.      Orders the Italian Republic to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 