
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-166/Commission of the European Communities
v
French Republic
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Article EC – Marketing of articles made of precious metals – ‘Gold’ and ‘gold alloy’)
Summary of the Judgment
Free movement of goods – Quantitative restrictions – Measures having equivalent effect – National legislation reserving the
            term ‘gold’ for articles of a fineness of parts per thousand – Not permissible – Justification – Consumer protection –
            Fair trading – None
(Art. EC)
There is a failure to fulfil obligations under Article EC when a Member State which reserves the term ‘gold’ for articles
         of a fineness of parts per thousand whilst those of a fineness of or parts per thousand, although marketed in
         their countries of origin under the term ‘gold’, are sold in that Member State under the term ‘gold alloy’, a term less attractive
         to consumers.
      
Such legislation imposes a redundant double designation for articles of the two lower levels of purity, that is to say the
         use not only of the fineness of the article but also the term ‘gold alloy’, and is therefore not proportionate to the aim
         of ensuring fair trade and consumer protection, which can be achieved by measures less restrictive to intra-Community trade.
      
(see paras 13-14, 19-21, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)July 2004(1)
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations  –  Article EC  –  Marketing of articles made of precious metals  –  ‘Gold’ and ‘gold alloy’)
 In Case C-166/03,
            
Commission of the European Communities, represented by B. Stromsky, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant,
v
French Republic, represented by G. de Bergues and F. Million, acting as Agents,
            
defendant,
 APPLICATION for a declaration that, by reserving the term ‘gold’ for articles of a fineness of parts per thousand, whilst
            those of a fineness of or parts per thousand are described as ‘gold alloy’, the French Republic has failed to fulfil
            its obligations under Article EC,
            
THE COURT (Second Chamber),,
 composed of:  C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, J.-P. Puissochet, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur), R. Schintgen
            and N. Colneric, Judges,
            
 Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs, Registrar: R. Grass,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on February 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By application lodged at the Court Registry on April 2003, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         under Article EC in which it sought a declaration that, by reserving the term ‘gold’ for articles of a fineness of parts per thousand, whilst those of a fineness of or parts per thousand are termed ‘gold alloy’, the French Republic
         has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC.
         
Legal background
            
 Article 522a of the Code général des impôts (General Tax Code), as amended by Law No 94-of January adjusting the
         legislation on guaranteed standards for precious metals and the supervisory powers of customs agents concerning the administrative
         situation of certain persons (JORF of January 1994, p. 245, hereinafter the CGI), provides:
         ‘Only articles made of gold of a fineness of more than parts per thousand may be termed “gold” when being marketed for
         retail sale to individuals.
          Those articles containing gold of a fineness of or parts per thousand are to be termed “gold alloy” and their fineness
         stated when being marketed for sale to individuals.’
         
The pre-litigation procedure
            
 As it considered that that provision was in breach of Article EC, the Commission initiated the infringement procedure under
         Article EC. Having given the French Republic formal notice that it should submit its observations, the Commission issued
         a reasoned opinion on September calling on that Member State to take the measures necessary to comply with it within
         two months of its notification. 
         
            
 By letter of February the French Republic stated that Article 522a of the CGI was necessary in order to satisfy overriding
         requirements relating to consumer protection and fair trading and requested the Commission to reconsider its assessment. The
         Commission decided to bring this action. 
         
The applicationArguments of the parties
            
 The Commission submits that Article 522a of the CGI prohibits the marketing in France as ‘gold’ of articles containing gold
         of a fineness of or parts per thousand, whereas such articles may be described as gold in their Member State of origin,
         and requires those articles to be described as ‘gold alloy’, a term less well-known to and less highly regarded by the consumer.
         The provision may make the articles more difficult to market in France and thus, at least indirectly, constitute an obstacle
         to trade between Member States. Consequently, if they cannot be justified on the ground of public interest, the contested
         rules of designation constitute measures having equivalent effect to quantitative restrictions prohibited by Article EC.
         
         
            
 The Commission considers that those rules of designation are neither necessary to ensure consumer protection and fair trading
         nor justified with regard to Article EC. It would suffice for Member States to lay down rules requiring adequate labelling
         ensuring correct information was given on the actual quantity of gold present in the different articles for sale. 
         
            
 The French Government denies that the existence of two categories of articles has an appreciable effect on intra-Community
         trade. By failing to show that there was an effect on intra-Community trade, the Commission has not discharged the burden
         of proof incumbent upon it in an action for failure to fulfil obligations.
         
            
 In the view of the French Government, the existence of two terms, ‘gold’ and ‘gold alloy’, for articles whose gold content
         is substantially different, fulfils the need to give consumers information to ensure their protection. That is where may be
         found the public interest sufficient to justify a measure relating to the designation of such articles in light of the requirements
         of Article EC.
         
            
 Furthermore, the system requiring a double description ensures that the consumer is better informed than would be the case
         were the Commission’s suggestion to be followed, namely labelling indicating only the gold content of the articles. The latter
         system gives raw technical information to consumers, whereas the double description goes further by giving them an easily-understood
         explanation as to the quality of the products in question.
         
            
 In those circumstances, the French Government takes the view that the system of designation laid down by Article 522a of the
         CGI is not in breach of Article EC.
         
Findings of the Court
            
 The Court has consistently held that any measure likely directly or indirectly to hinder, actually or potentially, intra-Community
         trade is to be deemed to be a measure having equivalent effect to quantitative restrictions and, on that basis, prohibited
         by Article EC (Case 8/Dassonville [1974] ECR 837, paragraph 5, and Case C-322/DeutscherApothekerverband [2003] ECR I-0000, paragraph 66).
         
            
 The Commission states, without contradiction from the French Government, that articles containing gold of a fineness of or parts per thousand are legally marketed under the term ‘gold’ in Member States other than France.
         
            
 It is not disputed that the term ‘gold alloy’ is less attractive to consumers than the term ‘gold’. 
         
            
 The requirement to sell such articles under the term ‘gold alloy’, imposed by Article 522a of the CGI, whereas in their countries
         of origin they are marketed under the term ‘gold’, is, in those circumstances, likely to hinder intra-Community trade. 
         
            
 It follows that that provision of the CGI should be considered a measure having equivalent effect to a quantitative restriction
         on imports within the meaning of Article EC, without it being necessary to prove that it has had an appreciable effect
         on intra-Community trade.
         
            
 As for the question whether such a rule may, nevertheless, be justified with regard to Community law, it should be remembered
         that, according to the Court’s case-law, national rules adopted in the absence of common or harmonised rules and applicable
         without distinction to national products and to products imported from other Member States may be compatible with the Treaty
         in so far as they are necessary in order to satisfy overriding requirements relating, inter alia, to fair trading and consumer
         protection, where they are proportionate to the objective pursued and that objective is not capable of being achieved by measures
         which are less restrictive of intra-Community trade (Case C-448/Guimont [2000] ECR I‑10663, paragraph 27).
         
            
 It is common ground that the terms to be used to indicate the proportion of the precious metal content of articles and the
         method by which it should be indicated are, as Community law currently stands, not harmonised. It is also common ground that
         Article 522a of the CGI is applicable without distinction to French products and to products imported from other Member States.
         
            
 Furthermore, the provision of the CGI in question is admittedly intended to ensure fair trading and consumer protection.
         
            
 However, the contested legislation imposes, in respect of articles of the two lower levels of purity marketed at the retail
         stage to individuals, a redundant double designation, since it requires the use not only of the fineness of the article, which
         gives objective information on its level of purity, but also the term ‘gold alloy’ which gives much less precise information
         on the same subject.
         
            
 It follows that the system requiring a double description laid down by Article 522a of the CGI is not proportional to the
         aim of ensuring fair trade and consumer protection, and that that aim can be achieved by measures less restrictive to intra-Community
         trade.
         
            
 Consequently, it must be held that, by reserving the term ‘gold’ for articles of a fineness of parts per thousand, whilst
         those of a fineness of or parts per thousand are termed ‘gold alloy’, the French Republic has failed to fulfil its
         obligations under Article EC.
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs, if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the French Republic has been
         unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs. 
         
On those grounds,
THE COURT (Second Chamber)
 hereby:
         
 
1.
Declares that, by reserving the term ‘gold’ for articles of a fineness of parts per thousand, whilst those of a fineness
                     of or parts per thousand are termed ‘gold alloy’, the French Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article
                     EC;
                  
 
2.
Orders the French Republic to pay the costs.
Timmermans
Puissochet
Cunha Rodrigues
Schintgen
Colneric
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on July 2004.
         
R. Grass
C.W.A. Timmermans
Registrar
President of the Second Chamber
 –
            
Language of the case: French.
Top  
 