
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-366/Gerd Gschoßmann
v
Amt für Landwirtschaft und Flurneuordnung Süd
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Verwaltungsgericht Halle)
(Common agricultural policy – Regulations (EEC) No 1765/and (EC) No 1251/– Support system for producers of arable crops – Compensatory payments for areas down to arable crops and subject to set-aside – Exclusion for land under permanent crops – Definition)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Agriculture – Common agricultural policy – Support for producers of certain arable crops – Compensatory payments for areas
            down to arable crops or subject to set-aside – Exclusion for land under permanent crops – Definition – Uncultivated land –
            Included
(Council Regulations No 1765/92, Art. 9, and No 1251/1999, Art. 7)
2.        Agriculture – Common agricultural policy – Support for producers of certain arable crops – Compensatory payments for areas
            down to arable crops or subject to set-aside – Exclusion for land under permanent crops – Event terminating use of the land
            for permanent crop of  fruit trees
(Council Regulations No 1765/92, Art. 9, and No 1251/1999, Art. 7)
3.        Agriculture – Common agricultural policy – Support for producers of certain arable crops – Compensatory payments for areas
            down to arable crops or subject to set-aside – Exclusion for land under permanent crops – Land no longer used for permanent
            crops – Use for non-agricultural purposes – Conditions
(Council Regulations No 1765/92, Art. 9, and No 1251/1999, Art. 7)
1.        Articles of Regulation No 1765/and Article of Regulation No 1251/1999, both establishing a support system for producers
         of certain arable crops, must be interpreted as meaning that, for land under permanent crops to be excluded from compensatory
         payments, there is no requirement that the land has been cultivated, and in particular that insecticides have been used or
         crops harvested, since those provisions refer merely to the land use without requiring it actually to be cultivated.
      
(see paras 15, 19, operative part 1)
2.                 Article of Regulation No 1765/and Article of Regulation No 1251/1999, both establishing a support system for producers
         of certain arable crops, which exclude from compensatory payments land under permanent crops, must be interpreted as meaning
         that the land ceases to be under permanent crops, in the case of apple production, once the apple trees have been felled,
         even if they have not been removed. However, the mere decision to fell the trees, without that decision being put into practice,
         does not mean that the land ceases to be under permanent crops.
      
(see para. 23, operative part 2)
3.        Article of Regulation No 1765/and Article of Regulation No 1251/1999, both establishing a support system for producers
         of certain arable crops, which exclude from compensatory payments land under permanent crops, must be interpreted as meaning
         that land which has ceased to be under permanent crops must be regarded as being used for non-agricultural purposes if is
         shown that it is not intended for the production of other plants or animals.
      
(see para. 27, operative part 3)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)September 2004(1)
(Common agricultural policy  –  Regulation (EEC) No 1765/and (EC) No 1251/–  Support system for producers of arable crops  –  Compensatory payments for areas down to arable crops and subject to set-aside  –  Exclusion for land under permanent crops  –  Definition)
 In Case C-366/02,REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article ECfrom the Verwaltungsgericht Halle (Germany), made by decision of September 2002, received on October 2002, in the proceedings
            
Gerd Gschoßmann
v
Amt für Landwirtschaft und Flurneuordnung Süd,
            
THE COURT (Third Chamber),,
 composed of: A. Rosas, acting for the President of the Third Chamber, R. Schintgen (Rapporteur) and N. Colneric, Judges,
            
 Advocate General: P. Léger,Registrar: R. Grass,
             having regard to the written procedure,after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
            
–
 Mr Gschoßmann, by R. Zimmermann, Rechtsanwalt,
            
–
 the Amt für Landwirtschaft und Flurneuordnung Süd, by E. Stübner, acting as Agent,
            
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by M. Niejahr, acting as Agent,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article of Council Regulation (EEC) No 1765/of
         June establishing a support system for producers of certain arable crops (OJ L 181, p. 12) and Article of Council
         Regulation (EC) No 1251/of May establishing a support system for producers of certain arable crops (OJ L
         160, p. 1).
         
            
 The reference was made in the course of proceedings between Mr Gschoßmann, a farmer, and the Amt für Landwirtschaft und Flurneuordnung
         Süd (Office for Agriculture and Land Reorganisation South, ‘the Office’) concerning a claim for repayment of compensatory
         payments.
         
Legal background
            
 According to the second recital in the preamble to Regulation No 1765/92, the support system for producers of arable crops
         established by that regulation has the purpose of ensuring better market balances by approximating Community prices to the
         prices of the world market and compensating the loss of income caused by that alignment by a compensatory payment for producers.
         
            
 Regulation No 1765/thus provides for the grant of compensatory payments for areas down to arable crops or subject to set-aside.
         Article of the regulation, however, excludes certain land from those payments:
         ‘Applications for the compensatory payment and for fulfilling the set-aside obligations may not be made in respect of land
         which was under permanent pasture, permanent crops, forest, or non-agricultural uses on December 1991.’
         
            
 That regulation was implemented inter alia by Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2780/of September on the conditions
         for the grant of compensatory payments under the support system for producers of certain arable crops (OJ L 281, p. 5).
         
            
 Point II of Annex I to Regulation No 2780/92, as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1959/of July (OJ L
         198, p. 93), defines permanent crops as follows:
         ‘Non-rotational crops other than permanent pasture that occupy the ground for five years or longer and yield repeated harvests
         with the exception of the multi-annual arable crops referred to in Annex II.’
         
            
 Regulation No 2780/was replaced by Commission Regulation (EC) No 658/of April (OJ L 91, p. 46). The definition
         of ‘permanent crops’, which appears in point of Annex I to the latter regulation, remained essentially the same however,
         namely:
         ‘Non-rotational crops other than permanent pasture that occupy the ground for five years or longer and yield repeated harvests,
         with the exception of multi-annual crops.’
         
            
 Regulation No 1765/was replaced by Regulation No 1251/1999, the first paragraph of Article of which provides as follows:
         ‘Applications for payments may not be made in respect of land that on December was under permanent pasture, permanent
         crops or trees or was used for non-agricultural purposes.’
         
            
 The detailed rules for the application of Regulation No 1251/are contained in Commission Regulation (EC) No 2316/of October (OJ L 280, p. 43), which replaced Regulation No 658/96. The definition of ‘permanent crops’ in point
         of Annex I to Regulation No 2316/corresponds to that in point of Annex I to Regulation No 658/96, namely:
         ‘Non-rotational crops other than permanent pasture that occupy the land for five years or longer and yield repeated harvests,
         with the exception of multiannual crops.’
         
The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 Mr Gschoßmann received compensatory payments from the Office for land which he formerly cultivated as fruit plantations with
         apple trees.
         
            
 According to the order for reference, that land was divided into three categories:
         
–
on the land in the first category, apple trees were still there on December and were no longer sprayed with pesticides.
               The apples were not harvested in 1991. A decision had already been made to clear the land in question, and this was subsequently
               done;
            
–
on the land in the second category, the trees had already been felled by the qualifying date, but had not been removed, which
               meant that the land could not be used. Only later were the trees cleared away;
            
–
on the land in the third category, the trees had already been felled and removed, but the land had not yet been allocated
               to a new use.
            
            
 By decision of June 2001, the Office sought partial repayment of the compensatory payments, on the ground that the land
         in question fell within the exception laid down in Article of Regulation No 1765/and Article of Regulation No 1251/1999,
         in that on December it ‘was under … permanent crops … or non-agricultural uses’.
         
            
 Since it was uncertain as to the scope of the Community provisions concerned, the Verwaltungsgericht Halle decided to stay
         the proceedings and refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
         
‘1.
Does being under permanent crops within the meaning of Article of [Regulation No 1765/92] or Article of [Regulation No
               1251/1999] require that the plants on the land, in this case apple trees, are cultivated?
            
2.
Is the land still under permanent crops if the owner or tenant does not use insecticides during the growing season and thereafter
               no longer harvests the trees?
            
3.
If the answer to Question is in the negative, does the land cease to be under permanent crops if the owner or tenant decides
               to fell the apple trees on it in the near future but does not then carry out that intention before the qualifying date? Is
               the answer different if before the qualifying date another undertaking is contracted to carry out the clearing?
            
4.
If the answer to Question is also in the negative, does the land cease to be under permanent crops if the owner or tenant
               has felled the trees, with no intention of planting new trees; in other words, in such a case is the deadline for clearing,
               December 1991, also the relevant deadline for the purposes of the support system?
            
5.
If the answer to Question is also in the negative, does the land cease to be under permanent crops if it is cleared of the
               felled trees before the qualifying date to prepare it for use as arable land?
            
6.
Should any of the above circumstances mean that the land ceases to be under permanent crops, the question arises whether,
               once it is no longer under permanent crops, the land is to be classified as being used for non-agricultural purposes on the
               qualifying date, within the meaning of either of the above regulations, and if so, is any of the aforesaid circumstances capable
               of causing it no longer to be so classified?’
            
The questions referred for a preliminary rulingQuestions and By its first and second questions, which should be examined together, the national court asks whether Article of Regulation
         No 1765/and Article of Regulation No 1251/must be interpreted as meaning that the exclusion of land under permanent
         crops from compensation payments requires that the land in question has been cultivated, and in particular that insecticides
         have been used during the growing period and harvests have been made.
         
            
 As the Commission and the Advocate General, in point et seq. of his Opinion, have observed, Article of Regulation No
         1765/and Article of Regulation No 1251/refer merely to the land being under permanent pasture, permanent crops,
         forest, or non-agricultural uses, without requiring it actually to be cultivated.
         
            
 After all, permanent pasture and forest may be used as such without the land being cultivated. In those circumstances, in
         the absence of any contrary indication in the relevant Community provisions, it would be inconsistent to require land to be
         cultivated where it is under permanent crops but not where it is under permanent pasture or forest.
         
            
 Moreover, a requirement that the land be cultivated would be difficult to reconcile with the Community legislature’s concern,
         expressed in the 17th recital in the preamble to Regulation No 1765/and the 26th recital in the preamble to Regulation
         No 1251/1999, to exclude from compensatory payments land which was not cultivated immediately before the entry into force
         of the support system in question. To require land to be cultivated in order for it to be excluded from compensatory payments
         would have the consequence of making eligible land which was not sown with a crop before December but was converted
         into arable land with the sole purpose of receiving those payments.
         
            
 Since, to be excluded from receiving compensatory payments, it suffices that the land in question was under permanent crops,
         without necessarily being cultivated, a fortiori there is no requirement that insecticides must have been used or crops harvested.
         
            
 The answer to Questions and must therefore be that Article of Regulation No 1765/and Article of Regulation No 1251/must be interpreted as meaning that, for land under permanent crops to be excluded from compensatory payments, there is no
         requirement that the land has been cultivated, and in particular that insecticides have been used or crops harvested.
         
Questions 3, and By its third, fourth and fifth questions, which are closely connected, the national court essentially asks whether Article
         of Regulation No 1765/and Article of Regulation No 1251/must be interpreted as meaning that land ceases to be
         under permanent crops, in the case of apple production, at the time when the producer decides to fell the apple trees or have
         that done by a contractor, the time of actual felling of the apple trees, or the time when the felled trees are removed.
         
            
 Since it is clear from the answer to Question that, to be excluded from receiving compensatory payments, it suffices that
         the land was under permanent crops, without necessarily being cultivated, that condition is clearly no longer satisfied, in
         the case of fruit plantations, once the fruit trees have been felled but not removed.
         
            
 On the other hand, the mere decision to fell the trees, without that decision being put into practice, does not mean that
         the land ceases to be under permanent crops.
         
            
 The answer to Questions 3, and must therefore be that Article of Regulation No 1765/and Article of Regulation No
         1251/must be interpreted as meaning that the land ceases to be under permanent crops, in the case of apple production,
         once the apple trees have been felled, even if they have not been removed. However, the mere decision to fell the trees, without
         that decision being put into practice, does not mean that the land ceases to be under permanent crops.
         
Question By its sixth question the national court asks whether Article of Regulation No 1765/and Article of Regulation No 1251/must be interpreted as meaning that, where land has ceased to be under permanent crops, it must be regarded as being used
         for non-agricultural purposes.
         
            
 As the Advocate General observes in point of his Opinion, agricultural use of land presumes that the land is used for the
         production of plants or animals.
         
            
 Consequently, land which has ceased to be under permanent crops may be regarded as being used for non-agricultural purposes
         only if it is shown that it is not used for the production of other plants or animals. It is for the national court to ascertain
         whether that condition was satisfied in the present case.
         
            
 The answer to Question must therefore be that Article of Regulation No 1765/and Article of Regulation No 1251/must be interpreted as meaning that land which has ceased to be under permanent crops must be regarded as being used for non-agricultural
         purposes if is shown that it is not intended for the production of other plants or animals.
         
Costs
            
 Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
         
 On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) rules as follows:
         
 
1.
Article of Council Regulation (EEC) No 1765/of June establishing a support system for producers of certain arable
                     crops and Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 1251/of May establishing a support system for producers of
                     certain arable crops must be interpreted as meaning that, for land under permanent crops to be excluded from compensatory
                     payments, there is no requirement that the land has been cultivated, and in particular that insecticides have been used or
                     crops harvested.
                  
 
2.
Article of Regulation No 1765/and Article of Regulation No 1251/must be interpreted as meaning that the land ceases
                     to be under permanent crops, in the case of apple production, once the apple trees have been felled, even if they have not
                     been removed. However, the mere decision to fell the trees, without that decision being put into practice, does not mean that
                     the land ceases to be under permanent crops.
                  
 
3.
Article of Regulation No 1765/and Article of Regulation No 1251/must be interpreted as meaning that land which
                     has ceased to be under permanent crops must be regarded as being used for non-agricultural purposes if is shown that it is
                     not intended for the production of other plants or animals.
                  
 Signatures.
      
 –
            
Language of the case: German.
Top  
 