
Avis juridique important
|
61999OOrder of the President of the Court of March 2002.  -  Anklagemyndigheden v Tonny Haugsted Hansen.  -  Reference for a preliminary ruling: Københavns Byret - Denmark.  -  Removal from the register.  -  Case C-233/99.  
European Court reports Page I-Parties
Grounds
Operative part
Keywords
Preliminary rulings - Withdrawal by the national court of the questions referred to the Court - Removal from the register(Art. EC) 
Parties
In Case C-233/99,REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by Københavns Byret (Denmark) for a preliminary ruling in the criminal proceedings before that court againstTonny Haugsted Hansen,on the interpretation of Articles 5, 7, and of European Parliament and Council Directive 94/62/EC of December on packaging and packaging waste (OJ L 365, p. 10), and of Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC),THE PRESIDENT OF THE COURTafter hearing Advocate General Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,makes the followingOrder 
Grounds
By order of June 1999, received at the Court on June 1999, Københavns Byret referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC three questions on the interpretation of Articles 5, 7, and of European Parliament and Council Directive 94/62/EC of December on packaging and packaging waste (OJ L 365, p. 10), and of Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC).By letter of February 2002, received at the Court on February 2002, Københavns Byret informed the Court that it wished to withdraw its application.In the circumstances, the present case must be removed from the register.The costs incurred by the Danish, Netherlands and United Kingdom Governments and by the Commission, which have submitted observations to the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
Operative part
On those grounds,THE PRESIDENT OF THE COURThereby orders:Case C-233/is removed from the register. 
Top  
 