
Order of the Court (Fourth Chamber) of October – Portela v Commission
(Case C‑85/P)
Appeal – Non‑contractual liability – Claim for compensation for damage sustained on account of various omissions by the Commission in the application of Directive
         93/42/EEC – No causal connection between the omission alleged and the damage suffered by the applicant in the marketing of defective
         digital thermometers – Appeal manifestly unfounded
      
1.                     Appeals – Grounds – Inadequate or contradictory grounds – Scope of the objection to state reasons – Reliance by the Court
            of First Instance on implied reasoning – Whether permissible – Conditions (see paras 31-32)
2.                     Non-contractual liability – Conditions – Unlawfulness – Injury/damage – Causal link – One of the conditions not satisfied
            – Claim for compensation dismissed in its entirety (Art. 288, second para., EC) (see para. 34)
Re: 
Appeal brought against the order of the Court of First Instance (Eighth Chamber) of December in Case T-137/Portela
 v 
Commission
, in which the Court rejected as, in part, manifestly inadmissible and, for the remainder, manifestly unfounded an application
                  claiming, primarily, that the Court of First Instance should impose on the Commission the obligation to act in accordance
                  with Article 14b of Council Directive 93/42/EEC of June concerning medical devices (OJ L 169, p. 1), as amended
                  by Directive 98/79/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of October on in vitro diagnostic medical devices
                  (OJ L 331, p. 1), by ordering the certification company TÜV Rheinland Product Safety GmbH, through the Federal Republic
                  of Germany, to activate, in favour of the appellant, the mandatory civil liability insurance provided for in point of Annex
                  XI to Directive 93/42, concluded by that company or, if the alleged damage could not be remedied by the main claim, a claim
                  for compensation for the damage sustained by the applicant on account of the various omissions on the part of the Commission.
               
Operative part
The Court: 
1.
	Dismisses the appeal;
2.
	Orders Portela – Comércio de artigos ortopédicos e hospitalares, Lda to pay the costs.
Top  
 