
         				Ordonnance de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-169/Dansk PostordreforeningvSkatteministeriet(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Østre Landsret (Denmark))
         
«(Removal from the register)»
Opinion of Advocate General Geelhoed delivered on April Order of the President of the Court, November Summary of the Order
Preliminary rulings – Withdrawal by the national court of the questions referred to the Court – Removal from the register(Art. EC)
  
ORDER OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE COURTNovember (1)
((Removal from the register))
In Case C-169/02, 
 REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Østre Landsret (Denmark) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending
         before that court between
         
 Dansk Postordreforening
and
 Skatteministeriet,
 on the interpretation of Article 13A(1)(a) of the Sixth Council Directive (77/388/EEC) of May on the harmonisation
         of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes ─ Common system of value added tax: uniform basis of assessment
         (OJ L 145, p. 1),
         
THE PRESIDENT OF THE COURT,
after hearing Advocate General Geelhoed, makes the following 
Order
            
 By order of May 2002, received at the Court Registry on May 2002, the Østre Landsret (Eastern Regional Court) referred
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC two questions on the interpretation of Article 13A(1)(a) of the
         Sixth Council Directive (77/388/EEC) of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover
         taxes ─ Common system of value added tax: uniform basis of assessment (OJ L 145, p. 1). 
         
            
 By letter of September 2003, received by the Court Registry on October 2003, the Østre Landsret informed the Court that
         it was withdrawing the reference for a preliminary ruling which it had sent to the Court, since the applicant in the main
         proceedings had discontinued its action. 
         
            
 Accordingly, the removal of the present case from the Court's register must be ordered. 
         
            
 The costs incurred by the Italian Government and the Commission of the European Communities, which have submitted observations
         to the Court, are not recoverable.  Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action
         pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE PRESIDENT OF THE COURT
 hereby orders:
         Case C-169/is removed from the Court's register. Luxembourg, November 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
V. Skouris  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: Danish.
Top  
 