
Order of the Court (Sixth Chamber) of October – ThyssenKrupp Acciai Speciali Terni and Others v Commission
(Joined Cases C-448/P to C-450/P)
Appeal – Compensation for expropriation on grounds of public interest – Temporal extension of a preferential tariff for the supply of electricity – Decision declaring the aid incompatible with the common market and ordering its recovery – Notion of advantage – Principle of the protection of legitimate expectations – Interpretation of national law – Distortion – Definition – Appeal manifestly inadmissible and manifestly unfounded
1.                     Appeals – Grounds – Mistaken assessment of the facts – Inadmissibility – Review by the Court of the assessment of the facts
            and evidence – Possible only where the clear sense of the evidence has been distorted (Art. TFEU; Statute of the Court
            of Justice, Art. 58, first para.) (see paras 32, 34, 46)
2.                     Appeals – Grounds – Distortion of the sense of the national law relied on as evidence – Admissibility (see para. 33)
3.                     Appeals – Grounds – Mere repetition of the pleas and arguments put forward before the General Court – Error of law relied
            on not identified – Inadmissibility (Art. TFEU; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.; Rules of Procedure
            of the Court of Justice, Art. 112(1), first para., (c)) (see paras 62, 66-67)
Re: 
Appeal brought against the judgments of the General Court (Fifth Chamber) of July in Case T-62/ThyssenKrupp Acciai Speciali Terni
 v 
Commission
, Case T‑63/Cementir Italia 
v 
Commission
, and Case T‑64/Nuova Terni Industrie Chimiche
 v 
Commission 
by which that court dismissed the applications for annulment of Commission Decision 2008/408/EC of November on the
                  State aid C 36/A/(ex NN 38/06) implemented by Italy in favour of ThyssenKrupp, Cementir and Nuova Terni Industrie Chimiche
                  (OJ L 144, p. 37).
               
Operative part
1.
	The appeals are dismissed. 
2.
	ThyssenKrupp Acciai Speciali Terni SpA, Cementir Italia Srl and Nuova Terni Industrie Chimiche SpA are ordered to pay the
                     costs.
                  
Top  
 