
Joined Cases C-399/P and C-403/P
Faraj Hassan
v
Council of the European Union and European Commission
and
Chafiq Ayadi
v
Council of the European Union
(Common foreign and security policy (CFSP) – Restrictive measures taken against persons and entities associated with Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaeda network and the Taliban
         – Regulation (EC) No 881/− Freezing of the funds and economic resources of a person following his inclusion in a list
         drawn up by a body of the United Nations − Sanctions Committee − Subsequent inclusion in Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 881/− Action for annulment − Fundamental rights − Right to respect for property, right to be heard and right to effective judicial
         review)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Appeals – Interest in bringing proceedings – Examination by the Court of its own motion
2.        Community law – Principles – Fundamental rights – Obligation to observe – Condition of lawfulness of every Community measure,
            including measures giving effect to Security Council resolutions adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
            – Observance ensured by the Community judicature
(Arts EC and EC; Art. 6(1) TEU; Council Regulation No 881/2002)
3.        European Communities – Judicial review of the legality of the acts of the institutions – Regulation imposing restrictive measures
            taken against certain persons and entities associated with Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaeda network and the Taliban – Rights
            of the defence – Scope
(Council Regulation No 881/2002)
4.        European Communities – Judicial review of the legality of the acts of the institutions – Regulation imposing restrictive measures
            taken against certain persons and entities associated with Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaeda network and the Taliban – General
            and continuing freezing of the funds, assets and other economic resources of those persons and entities without those persons
            or entities having been heard – Breach of the right to property
(Council Regulation No 881/2002)
1.        The Court may, of its own motion, raise the objection that a party has no interest in bringing or in maintaining an appeal
         because an event occurring after the judgment of the General Court removes the prejudicial effect thereof as regards the appellant,
         and declare the appeal inadmissible or devoid of purpose for that reason.
      
The adoption of Regulation No 954/amending for the 114th time Regulation No 881/imposing certain specific restrictive
         measures directed against certain persons and entities associated with Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaeda network and the Taliban
         cannot be considered to constitute a fact occurring after the judgments dismissing the actions brought by the appellants for
         annulment of that regulation capable of rendering the appeals brought against those judgments devoid of purpose.
      
The adoption of Regulation No 954/2009, which retroactively replaces Regulation No 881/2002, is not to be regarded as equivalent
         to annulment pure and simple of that latter regulation in so far as it concerns the appellants by which they have obtained
         the only result that their actions could have secured for them, and which would mean that there was no longer any need for
         the Court to adjudicate.
      
(see paras 58, 61-62, 64)
2.        The Community judicature must, in accordance with the powers conferred on it by the Treaty, ensure the review, in principle
         the full review, of the lawfulness of all Community acts in the light of the fundamental rights forming an integral part of
         the general principles of Community law, including review of Community measures which, like Regulation No 881/imposing
         certain specific restrictive measures directed against certain persons and entities associated with Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaeda
         network and the Taliban, are designed to give effect to resolutions adopted by the Security Council under Chapter VII of the
         Charter of the United Nations.
      
(see para. 71)
3.        Because, when adopting restrictive measures, such as those imposed by Regulation No 881/imposing certain specific restrictive
         measures directed against certain persons and entities associated with Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaeda network and the Taliban,
         the Council neither communicated to the persons concerned the evidence used against them to justify the restrictive measures
         imposed on them nor afforded them the right to be informed of that evidence within a reasonable period after those measures
         were enacted, those persons did not have the opportunity to make their point of view in that respect known to advantage. Their
         rights of defence, in particular the right to be heard, were therefore not respected. 
      
Moreover, given the failure to inform them of the evidence adduced against them and having regard to the relationship between
         the rights of defence and the right to an effective legal remedy, the parties concerned were also unable to defend their rights
         with regard to that evidence in satisfactory conditions before the Community judicature, with the result that it must be held
         that their right to an effective legal remedy was infringed also.
      
(see paras 83-86)
4.        The imposition of restrictive measures, such as the freezing of funds, laid down by Regulation No 881/imposing certain
         specific restrictive measures directed against certain persons and entities associated with Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaeda
         network and the Taliban, in respect of certain persons, by including them in the list contained in Annex I to that regulation,
         constitutes an unjustified restriction of their right to property, for that regulation was adopted without furnishing any
         guarantee enabling them to put their case to the competent authorities, in a situation in which the restriction of their property
         rights must be regarded as significant, having regard to the general application and actual continuation of the freezing measures
         affecting them.
      
(see paras 92-93)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
December (*)
      
(Common foreign and security policy (CFSP) – Restrictive measures taken against persons and entities associated with Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaeda network and the Taliban
         – Regulation (EC) No 881/− Freezing of the funds and economic resources of a person following his inclusion in a list
         drawn up by a body of the United Nations − Sanctions Committee − Subsequent inclusion in Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 881/− Action for annulment − Fundamental rights − Right to respect for property, right to be heard and right to effective judicial
         review)
      
In Cases C‑399/P and C-403/P,
TWO APPEALS under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, brought on and September 2006, respectively,
Faraj Hassan, residing in Leicester (United Kingdom), represented by E. Grieves, Barrister, instructed by H. Miller, Solicitor, and subsequently
         by J. Jones, Barrister, instructed by M. Arani, Solicitor, 
      
appellant,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
Council of the European Union, represented by S. Marquardt, M. Bishop and E. Finnegan, acting as Agents,
      
European Commission, represented by P. Hetsch and P. Aalto, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendants at first instance,
supported by:
French Republic,      
      
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,      
      
interveners on appeal (C‑399/P),
Chafiq Ayadi, residing in Dublin (Ireland), represented by S. Cox, Barrister, instructed by H. Miller, Solicitor, 
      
appellant,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
Council of the European Union, represented by M. Bishop and E. Finnegan, acting as Agents,
      
defendant at first instance,
supported by:
French Republic,      
      
intervener on appeal,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,      
      
European Commission, represented by P. Hetsch and P. Aalto, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
interveners at first instance (C-403/P),
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of J.-C. Bonichot, President of the Fourth Chamber, acting as President of the Second Chamber, C. Toader, C.W.A.
         Timmermans (Rapporteur), K. Schiemann and P. Kūris, Judges,
      
Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro,
Registrar: M.-A. Gaudissart, Head of Unit,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2009, in Case C‑399/P, 
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By their appeals, Mr Hassan (Case C‑399/P) and Mr Ayadi (Case C‑403/P) seek to have set aside the judgments of the Court
         of First Instance of the European Communities of July in Case T‑49/Hassan v Council and Commission [2006] ECR II‑(‘Hassan’) and in Case T‑253/Ayadi v Council [2006] ECR II‑(‘Ayadi’) (together, ‘the judgments under appeal’).
      
By the judgments under appeal the Court of First Instance dismissed the actions brought by Mr Hassan and Mr Ayadi for annulment
         of Council Regulation (EC) No 881/of May imposing certain specific restrictive measures directed against certain
         persons and entities associated with Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaeda network and the Taliban, and repealing Council Regulation
         (EC) No 467/prohibiting the export of certain goods and services to Afghanistan, strengthening the flight ban and extending
         the freeze of funds and other financial resources in respect of the Taliban of Afghanistan (OJ L 139, p. 9, ‘the contested
         regulation’), in so far as that act concerned them. Mr Hassan’s action was particularly directed against the contested regulation
         as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 2049/(OJ L 303, p. 20). By its judgment in Hassan the Court of First Instance also dismissed Mr Hassan’s claim for compensation. 
      
 History of the cases 
The history of the cases was set out in Hassan, paragraphs to 34, and in Ayadi, paragraphs to 49.
      
For the purpose of this judgment, those histories may be briefly summarised as follows.
      
On October 2001, the committee established by Resolution (1999) of the Security Council of the United Nations (‘the
         Sanctions Committee’) published an addendum to its consolidated list of March of entities and individuals to be subject
         to the freezing of funds under Resolutions (1999) and (2000) of the Security Council of the United Nations (see
         press release SC/7180), including inter alia the name of Mr Ayadi, who was identified as being a person associated with Usama
         bin Laden.
      
On the same day, the Commission of the European Communities adopted Regulation (EC) No 2062/of October amending,
         for the third time, Council Regulation (EC) No 467/(OJ L 277, p. 25). By Regulation No 2062/Mr Ayadi’s name
         was added, with others, to the list forming Annex I to Council Regulation No 467/of March (OJ L 67, p. 1).
      
On January the Security Council of the United Nations (‘the Security Council’) adopted Resolution (2002), which
         lays down the measures to be directed against Usama bin Laden, members of the Al-Qaeda network and the Taliban and other associated
         individuals, groups, undertakings and entities. Paragraphs and of that resolution provide, in essence, that the measures,
         in particular the freezing of funds, imposed by paragraph 4(b) of Resolution (1999) and by paragraph 8(c) of Resolution
         (2000) are to be maintained.
      
Considering that action by the European Community was necessary in order to implement Resolution (2002), on May the Council of the European Union adopted Common Position 2002/402/CFSP concerning restrictive measures against Usama bin
         Laden, members of the Al-Qaeda organisation and the Taliban and other individuals, groups, undertakings and entities associated
         with them and repealing Common Positions 96/746/CFSP, 1999/727/CFSP, 2001/154/CFSP and 2001/771/CFSP (OJ L 139, p. 4).
         Article of Common Position 2002/prescribes, inter alia, the continuation of the freezing of the funds and other financial
         assets or economic resources of the individuals, groups, undertakings and entities referred to in the list drawn up by the
         Sanctions Committee in accordance with Security Council Resolutions (1999) and (2000).
      
On May the Council adopted the contested regulation on the basis of Articles EC, EC and EC.
      
According to the fourth recital in the preamble to that regulation, the measures laid down, inter alia, by Resolution (2002) ‘fall [within] the scope of the [EC] Treaty and, therefore, notably with a view to avoiding distortion of competition,
         Community legislation is necessary to implement the relevant decisions of the Security Council as far as the territory of
         the Community is concerned.’
      
Article of the contested regulation defines the concepts of ‘funds’ and ‘freezing of funds’ in terms substantially identical
         to those in Article of Regulation 467/2001. In addition, it defines what is meant by ‘economic resources’. 
      
Article of the contested regulation states:
      
‘1.      All funds and economic resources belonging to, or owned or held by, a natural or legal person, group or entity designated
         by the Sanctions Committee and listed in Annex I shall be frozen.
      
2.      No funds shall be made available, directly or indirectly, to, or for the benefit of, a natural or legal person, group or entity
         designated by the Sanctions Committee and listed in Annex I.
      
3.      No economic resources shall be made available, directly or indirectly, to, or for the benefit of, a natural or legal person,
         group or entity designated by the Sanctions Committee and listed in Annex I, so as to enable that person, group or entity
         to obtain funds, goods or services.’
      
Annex I to Regulation No 881/contains the list of persons, entities and groups affected by the freezing of funds imposed
         by Article of that regulation. That list includes, inter alia, Mr Ayadi’s name.
      
While Mr Ayadi’s name remains to this day included in that list, the wording of the entry referring to him has on several
         occasions been replaced by Commission regulations adopted on the basis of Article 7(1) of the contested regulation and conferring
         on the Commission the power to amend or add to Annex I to that regulation, most recently by Regulation (EC) No 76/of
         January (OJ L 12, p. 7).
      
On December the Security Council adopted Resolution (2002), intended to facilitate the implementation of counter‑terrorism
         obligations. Paragraph of that resolution provides for a number of derogations from and exceptions to the freezing of funds
         and economic resources imposed by Resolutions (1999) and (2002), which may be granted by the Member States on humanitarian
         grounds, on condition that the Sanctions Committee gives its consent.
      
On January the Security Council adopted Resolution (2003), intended to improve the implementation of the measures
         imposed in paragraph 4(b) of Resolution (1999), paragraph 8(c) of Resolution (2000) and paragraphs and of Resolution
         (2002). In accordance with paragraph of Resolution (2003), those measures were again to be improved after months
         or earlier if necessary
      
Taking the view that action by the Community was necessary in order to implement Security Council Resolution (2002),
         the Council adopted Common Position 2003/140/CFSP of February concerning exceptions to the restrictive measures imposed
         by Common Position 2002/402/CFSP (OJ L 53, p. 62). Article of Common Position 2003/provides that, when implementing
         the measures set out in Article of Common Position 2002/402, the European Community is to provide for the exceptions permitted
         by that resolution.
      
On March the Council adopted Regulation (EC) No 561/amending, as regards exceptions to the freezing of funds
         and economic resources, Regulation (EC) No 881/(OJ L 82, p. 1). In the fourth recital in the preamble to that regulation,
         the Council states that it is necessary, in view of Resolution (2002), to adjust the measures imposed by the Community.
      
On November the Sanctions Committee adopted an addendum to its consolidated list of entities and individuals to be
         subject to the freezing of funds under Resolutions (1999), (2000) and (2002). That addendum includes, inter
         alia, the name of Mr Hassan, identified as being a person associated with the Al-Qaeda organisation.
      
On November the Commission adopted Regulation No 2049/amending for the 25th time Regulation No 881/2002. By Regulation
         No 2049/Mr Hassan’s name was added, with others, to the list forming the Annex to the contested regulation.
      
On January the Security Council adopted Resolution (2004), designed, first, to improve the implementation of
         the measures imposed by paragraph 4(b) of Resolution (1999), paragraph 8(c) of Resolution (2000) and paragraphs
         and of Resolution (2002), and, secondly, to strengthen the mandate of the Sanctions Committee. In accordance with
         Paragraph of Resolution (2004), those measures were to be further improved in months, or sooner if necessary. 
      
On July the Security Council adopted Resolution (2005). This provides, inter alia, for the continuation of the
         measures imposed by paragraph 4(b) of Resolution (1999), paragraph 8(c) of Resolution (2000) and paragraphs and
         of Resolution (2002). In accordance with paragraph of Resolution (2005), those measures were to be reviewed
         within months with a view to their possible further strengthening or sooner if necessary.
      
Mr Ayadi remains included in the list forming Annex I to the contested regulation. The entry concerning him has been replaced
         by Commission Regulation No 1210/of August (EC) amending for the 67th time Regulation (EC) No 881/(OJ L 219,
         p. 14).
      
Similarly, while Mr Hassan’s name too still appears in that list, the entry concerning him has been replaced by Commission
         Regulation (EC) No 46/of January amending for the 90th time Regulation (EC) No 881/(OJ L 16, p. 11. 
      
 The actions before the Court of First Instance and the judgments under appeal
By application lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on February 2004, Mr Hassan brought an action against
         the Council and the Commission for annulment of the contested regulation and claimed that the Court of First Instance should:
         
      
–        principally, annul in whole or in part the contested regulation as amended by Regulation No 2049/2003, or the latter regulation
         only;
      
–        or, alternatively, declare the contested regulation and Regulation No 2049/inapplicable to him;
–        take such further action as it might deem appropriate;
–        order the Council to pay the costs and
–        order the Council to pay him damages.
At the hearing before the Court of First Instance, Mr Hassan stated that his action challenged the contested regulation and
         Regulation No 2049/only in so far as they were of direct and individual concern to him. 
      
By application lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on August 2002, Mr Ayadi brought an action against
         the Council for annulment of the contested regulation, claiming that the Court of First Instance should:
      
–        annul Article of the contested regulation and, in so far as it refers to Article 2, Article thereof;
–        or, alternatively, annul the entry mentioning him in the list forming Annex I to the contested regulation, and
–        order the Council to pay the costs.
At the hearing before the Court of First Instance, Mr Ayadi stated that his action challenged the contested regulation only
         in so far as it was of direct and individual concern to him.
      
In the case concerning Mr Ayadi, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Commission were granted
         leave to intervene before the Court of First Instance in support of the forms of order sought by the Council.
      
In support of his claims, Mr Hassan raised a single plea in law alleging breach of certain of his fundamental rights and of
         the general principle of proportionality. His complaints related more particularly to the alleged breach of the right to respect
         for property and of the right to respect for private and family life, on the one hand, and to the alleged breach of the right
         to be heard and of the right to a fair hearing, on the other. 
      
Mr Ayadi, for his part, based his claims on three pleas in law, the first alleging that the Council was not competent to adopt
         Articles and of the contested regulation and a misuse of powers, the second alleging breach of the fundamental principles
         of subsidiarity, proportionality and respect for his fundamental rights and the third alleging infringement of an essential
         procedural requirement.
      
Because, without prejudice to the claim for compensation in Mr Hassan’s appeal, these appeals are confined to the parts of
         the judgments under appeal relating to the pleas in law alleging breach of the appellants’ fundamental rights, only those
         parts of those judgments will be summarised below. 
      
With regard to those pleas in law, the Court of First Instance held in Hassan, paragraph 91, and Ayadi, paragraph 115, that, subject only to a single point of law specific to each of those cases, all the points of law raised
         by the applicants had already been settled in its judgments of September in Case T‑306/Yusuf and Al Barakaat International Foundation v Council and Commission [2005] ECR II‑(‘Yusuf at first instance’), paragraphs to 346, and Case T‑315/Kadi v Council and Commission [2005] ECR II‑(‘Kadi at first instance’), paragraphs to (together, ‘Yusuf and Kadi at first instance’). 
      
In paragraph of Hassan, as in paragraph of Ayadi, similarly worded, it was noted that, in Yusuf and Kadi at first instance, the Court of First Instance had in particular ruled as follows:
      
‘–      …
from the standpoint of international law, the obligations of the Member States of the United Nations under the Charter of
         the United Nations clearly prevail over every other obligation of domestic law or of international treaty law including, for
         those of them that are members of the Council of Europe, their obligations under the [European Convention for the Protection
         of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, signed at Rome on November (‘the ECHR’),] and, for those that are also members
         of the Community, their obligations under the EC Treaty (Yusuf at first instance, paragraph 231, and Kadi at first instance, paragraph 181);
      
–      that primacy extends to decisions contained in a resolution of the Security Council, in accordance with Article of the
         Charter of the United Nations (Yusuf at first instance, paragraph 234, and Kadi at first instance, paragraph 184);
      
–      although not a member of the United Nations, the Community must be considered to be bound by the obligations under the Charter
         of the United Nations in the same way as its Member States, by virtue of the Treaty establishing it (Yusuf at first instance, paragraph 243, and Kadi at first instance, paragraph 193);
      
–      first, the Community may not infringe the obligations imposed on its Member States by the Charter of the United Nations or
         impede their performance and, second, in the exercise of its powers it is bound, by the very Treaty by which it was established,
         to adopt all the measures necessary to enable its Member States to fulfil those obligations (Yusuf at first instance, paragraph 254, and Kadi at first instance, paragraph 204);
      
–      as a result, the arguments challenging the contested regulations and based, on the one hand, on the autonomy of the Community
         legal order vis-à-vis the legal order under the United Nations and, on the other, on the necessity of transposing Security
         Council resolutions into the domestic law of the Member States, in accordance with the constitutional provisions and fundamental
         principles of that law, must be rejected (Yusuf at first instance, paragraph 258, and Kadi at first instance, paragraph 208);
      
–      [the contested] regulation …, adopted in the light of Common Position 2002/402, constitutes the implementation at Community
         level of the obligation placed on the Member States of the Community, as Members of the United Nations, to give effect, if
         appropriate by means of a Community act, to the sanctions against Usama bin Laden, members of the Al-Qaeda network and the
         Taliban and other associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, which have been decided and later strengthened
         by several resolutions of the Security Council adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations (Yusuf at first instance, paragraph 264, and Kadi at first instance, paragraph 213);
      
–      in that situation, the Community institutions acted under circumscribed powers, with the result that they had no autonomous
         discretion (Yusuf at first instance, paragraph 265, and Kadi at first instance, paragraph 214);
      
–      in light of the considerations set out above, the claim that the Court of First Instance has jurisdiction to review indirectly
         the lawfulness of decisions of the Security Council or of the Sanctions Committee according to the standard of protection
         of fundamental rights as recognised by the Community legal order cannot be justified either on the basis of international
         law or on the basis of Community law (Yusuf at first instance, paragraph 272, and Kadi at first instance, paragraph 221);
      
–      the resolutions of the Security Council at issue therefore fall, in principle, outside the ambit of the Court’s judicial review
         and the Court has no authority to call in question, even indirectly, their lawfulness in the light of Community law; on the
         contrary, the Court is bound, so far as possible, to interpret and apply that law in a manner compatible with the obligations
         of the Member States under the Charter of the United Nations (Yusuf at first instance, paragraph 276, and Kadi at first instance, paragraph 225);
      
–      none the less, the Court is empowered to check, indirectly, the lawfulness of the resolutions of the Security Council in question
         with regard to jus cogens, understood as a body of higher rules of public international law binding on all subjects of international
         law, including the bodies of the United Nations, and from which no derogation is possible (Yusuf at first instance, paragraph 277, and Kadi at first instance, paragraph 226);
      
–      the freezing of funds provided for by [the contested r]egulation … infringes neither the fundamental right of the persons
         concerned to make use of their property nor the general principle of proportionality, measured by the standard of universal
         protection of the fundamental rights of the human person covered by jus cogens (Yusuf at first instance, paragraphs and 289, and Kadi at first instance, paragraphs and 238);
      
–      since the Security Council resolutions concerned do not provide a right for the persons concerned to be heard by the Sanctions
         Committee before their inclusion in the list in question and since it appears that no mandatory rule of public international
         law requires a prior hearing for the persons concerned in circumstances such as those of this case, the arguments alleging
         breach of such a right must be rejected (Yusuf at first instance, paragraphs 306, and 321, and Kadi at first instance, paragraphs and 268);
      
–      in these circumstances in which what is at issue is a temporary precautionary measure restricting the availability of the
         property of the persons concerned, observance of their fundamental rights does not require the facts and evidence adduced
         against them to be communicated to them, once the Security Council or its Sanctions Committee is of the view that there are
         grounds concerning the international community’s security that militate against it (Yusuf at first instance, paragraph 320, and Kadi at first instance, paragraph 274);
      
–      nor were the Community institutions obliged to hear the persons concerned before [the contested r]egulation … was adopted
         (Yusuf at first instance, paragraph 329) or in the context of the adoption and implementation of that act (Kadi at first instance, paragraph 259);
      
–      in dealing with an action for annulment such as the present action, the Court carries out a complete review of the lawfulness
         of that regulation with regard to observance by the institutions of the rules of jurisdiction and the rules of external lawfulness
         and the essential procedural requirements which bind their actions; the Court also reviews the lawfulness of the contested
         regulations having regard to the Security Council’s regulations which that act is supposed to put into effect, in particular
         from the viewpoints of procedural and substantive appropriateness, internal consistency and whether those regulations are
         proportionate to the resolutions; the Court reviews the lawfulness of the contested regulations and, indirectly, the lawfulness
         of the resolutions of the Security Council at issue, in the light of the higher rules of international law falling within
         the ambit of jus cogens, in particular the mandatory prescriptions concerning the universal protection of the rights of the
         human person (Yusuf at first instance, paragraphs 334, and 337, and Kadi at first instance, paragraphs 279, and 282);
      
−      on the other hand, it is not for the Court to review indirectly whether the Security Council’s resolutions in question are
         themselves compatible with fundamental rights as protected by the Community legal order; nor does it fall to the Court to
         verify that there has been no error of assessment of the facts and evidence relied on by the Security Council in support of
         the measures it has taken or, subject to the limited extent defined in paragraph above, to check indirectly the appropriateness
         and proportionality of those measures (Yusuf at first instance, paragraphs and 339, and Kadi at first instance, paragraphs and 284);
      
–      to that extent, there is no judicial remedy available to the persons concerned, the Security Council not having thought it
         advisable to establish an independent international court responsible for ruling, in law and on the facts, in actions brought
         against individual decisions taken by the Sanctions Committee (Yusuf at first instance, paragraph 340, and Kadi at first instance, paragraph 285);
      
–      the lacuna thus found to exist in the previous indent in the judicial protection available to the persons involved is not
         in itself contrary to jus cogens, for (a) the right of access to the courts is not absolute; (b) the limitation of the right
         of the persons concerned to access to a court, as a result of the immunity from jurisdiction enjoyed as a rule, in the domestic
         legal order of the Member States, by resolutions of the Security Council adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
         Nations, is inherent in that right; (c) such a limitation is justified both by the nature of the decisions that the Security
         Council is led to take under Chapter VII and by the legitimate objective pursued, and (d) in the absence of an international
         court having jurisdiction to ascertain whether acts of the Security Council are lawful, the setting-up of a body such as the
         Sanctions Committee and the opportunity, provided for by the legislation, of applying at any time to that committee in order
         to have any individual case re-examined, by means of a procedure involving the governments concerned, constitute another reasonable
         method of affording adequate protection of the fundamental rights of the persons concerned as recognised by jus cogens (Yusuf [at first instance], paragraphs to 345, and Kadi [at first instance], paragraphs to 290);
      
–      the arguments relied on to challenge the contested regulations alleging breach of the right to an effective judicial remedy
         must consequently be rejected (Yusuf [at first instance], paragraph 346, and Kadi [at first instance], paragraph 291).’
      
In paragraphs to of Hassan, the Court of First Instance added a number of points in response to the arguments more specifically propounded by Mr Hassan
         at the hearing concerning, on the one hand, the allegedly excessive strictness of the measure freezing all his funds and economic
         resources and, on the other, the alleged invalidity, in the circumstances, of the conclusions reached by the Court of First
         Instance in Yusuf and Kadi at first instance concerning the compatibility with jus cogens of the lacuna found in those judgments to exist in the judicial
         protection of the persons concerned.
      
Similarly, in paragraphs to of Ayadi, the Court of First Instance added a number of points to those set out in paragraph above in response to the arguments
         more specifically propounded by Mr Ayadi concerning, on the one hand, the alleged ineffectiveness of the exemptions to and
         derogations from the freezing of funds provided for by Regulation No 561/2003, especially as regards carrying on a trade or
         business and, on the other, the alleged invalidity, in the circumstances, of the conclusions reached by the Court in Yusuf and Kadi at first instance concerning the compatibility with jus cogens of the lacuna found to exist in the judicial protection of
         the persons concerned. 
      
The Court of First Instance examined those arguments, concluding that they could not call in question the assessment it had
         made of the points of law raised in Yusuf and Kadi at first instance.
      
In paragraphs to of Hassan, the Court of First Instance went on to examine Mr Hassan’s complaints relating to a breach of his right to respect for private
         and family life and an attack on his reputation, and rejected them for the essential reason that, according to the standard
         of jus cogens, it must be held that that applicant had not suffered any arbitrary interference with the exercise of those
         rights.
      
Similarly, in paragraph of Ayadi, the Court of First Instance rejected the argument, not yet examined in Yusuf and Kadi at first instance, that the Member States of the United Nations are not bound to apply as they stand the measures that the
         Security Council ‘calls upon’ them to adopt.
      
The Court of First Instance therefore dismissed the appellants’ claims for annulment as unfounded.
      
Lastly, the Court of First Instance declared inadmissible Mr Hassan’s claim for compensation because it lacked all detail,
         adding that with regard to the other evidence he had produced the claim was on any view unfounded.
      
In consequence, the Court of First Instance dismissed the two actions in their entirety.
      
 Procedure before the Court
By order of the President of the Court of November 2008, the French Republic and the United Kingdom were given leave to
         intervene in support of the form of order sought by the Council and the Commission in Case C‑399/P. By order of the President
         of the Court of March 2009, the French Republic was given leave to intervene in support of the form of order sought by
         the Council in Case C‑403/P. 
      
By application lodged at the Court Registry on January 2009, Mr Ayadi applied for the legal aid provided for by Article
         of the Court’s Rules of Procedure.
      
By order of September the Court granted his application.
      
The parties and the Advocate General having been heard on this point, these cases must, on account of the connection between
         them, be joined for the purposes of the judgment, in accordance with Article of the Court’s Rules of Procedure.
      
 Forms of order sought by the parties to the appeals
By his appeal, Mr Hassan claims that the Court should:
      
–        set aside the judgment in Hassan;
      
–        annul the contested regulation and/or Regulation No 2049/in their entirety or in respect of the measures directed against
         him;
      
–        or, alternatively, declare those regulations inapplicable to him;
–        take such further action as the Court may deem appropriate;
–        order the Council to pay the costs and
–        order the Council to pay him damages.
By his appeal, Mr Ayadi claims that the Court should:
      
–        set aside the judgment in Ayadi in its entirety;
      
–        declare null and void Articles and of and Annex I to the contested regulation in so far as they are of direct and individual
         concern to him and
      
–        order the Council to pay the costs of the proceedings before the Court and the Court of First Instance.
In the two cases the Council and the Commission contend that the Court should dismiss the appeals, with the exception of the
         grounds similar to those held to be well founded by the Court in its judgment of September in Joined Cases C‑402/P and C‑415/P Kadi and Al Barakaat v Council and Commission [2008] ECR I‑(‘Kadi on appeal’) and order the appellants to pay so much of the costs as the Court may deem appropriate.
      
 The grounds put forward in support of the appeals
In his first ground of appeal Mr Hassan argues that the Court of First Instance erred in law in its examination of the pleas
         he raised before it with regard to the breach of certain of his fundamental rights, in that it did not determine directly
         whether the Security Council offered protection equivalent to that offered by the ECHR, more particularly by Articles 6, and thereof and by Article of Protocol of the ECHR, but rather examined indirectly the actions of the Security Council
         by virtue of the principle of jus cogens.
      
In his second ground of appeal Mr Hassan maintains that the Court of First Instance erred in law in considering that restriction
         of the use of property was not relevant with regard to the actual substance of the right to property.
      
It is clear from Mr Ayadi’s reply that, in the light of Kadi on appeal, he now means to submit only two grounds of appeal, the first of which is that the Court of First Instance erred
         in law in finding that the Community judicature may evaluate the lawfulness of a Community measure giving effect to a resolution
         of the Security Council only with regard to jus cogens and in not holding that it could annul such a measure in order to guarantee
         the protection of the fundamental rights recognised by the legal order of the United Nations, and the second of which is that
         the Court of First Instance erred in law in not holding that the parts of the contested regulation which are under challenge
         constitute a breach of Mr Ayadi’s fundamental rights.
      
 Concerning the appeals
 The effect of Regulation (EC) No 954/on whether it is necessary to adjudicate
By Regulation (EC) No 954/of October amending for the 114th time Regulation No 881/(OJ L 269, p. 20), the decisions to include Mr Hassan and Mr Ayadi in the list forming Annex
         I to the contested regulation were replaced by fresh decisions confirming and amending their inclusion.
      
According to the preamble to Regulation No 954/2009, the Commission adopted that regulation, having regard to the case-law
         of the Court of Justice, in particular to Kadi on appeal, after apprising Mr Hassan and Mr Ayadi of the grounds for their inclusion in the list, as provided by the Sanctions
         Committee and after examining the comments made by the appellants concerning those grounds.
      
In that preamble it is also stated that, after careful examination of those comments, the Commission considered, given the
         preventive nature of freezing of funds and economic resources, that the inclusion of the two appellants in the list in question
         was justified by reason of their association with the Al-Qaeda network.
      
In accordance with Article of Regulation No 954/2009, the latter entered into force on the day following its publication
         in the Official Journal of the European Union, that is to say, October 2009, and has applied as from May as regards Mr Ayadi and from November as regards
         Mr Hassan.
      
The question therefore arises whether, in the light of the withdrawal of the contested regulation and its retroactive replacement
         by Regulation No 954/with effect from those dates with regard to the appellants, it is still necessary to adjudicate
         on these cases. 
      
It is to be borne in mind that the Court may, of its own motion, raise the objection that a party has no interest in bringing
         or in maintaining an appeal because an event occurring after the judgment of the Court of First Instance removes the prejudicial
         effect thereof as regards the appellant, and declare the appeal inadmissible or devoid of purpose for that reason (see, in
         particular, Case C‑535/P Moser Baer India v Council [2009] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 24, and the case-law cited). 
      
In the present case, Article of Regulation No 954/provides that the latter is to apply from the original inclusion
         of Mr Ayadi and Mr Hassan in the list forming Annex I to the contested regulation, that is to say, since May and November respectively. 
      
Mr Ayadi and Mr Hassan have been included in that list for a period of seven and six years respectively and have, therefore,
         been subject to the restrictive measures provided by the contested regulation which the Court has held to have a considerable
         impact on the rights and freedoms of the persons concerned (see Kadi on appeal, paragraph 375), while they have maintained, first before the Court of First Instance and then before the Court
         of Justice in proceedings covering nearly the whole of those periods, that the inclusion of their names in that list was unlawful,
         for it failed, in particular, to have regard to their fundamental rights, which is not now denied by either the Council or
         the Commission, in the light of Kadi on appeal.
      
Regulation No 954/has kept the names of Mr Ayadi and Mr Hassan in that list with retroactive force, so that the resulting
         restrictive measures continued to apply to them for the period for which the contested regulation, as referred to in their
         actions, was applicable, although the purpose of their actions is to have their names removed from that list.
      
The adoption of Regulation No 954/cannot, therefore, be considered to constitute a fact occurring after the judgments
         under appeal and capable of rendering the appeals devoid of purpose. 
      
Furthermore, Regulation No 954/is not yet definitive, inasmuch as it may be the object of an action for annulment. It
         is therefore not inconceivable that, supposing that that measure were annulled as a result of such proceedings, the contested
         regulation might come back into force so far as the appellants are concerned. 
      
Those matters supply confirmation that the adoption of Regulation No 954/cannot be regarded as equivalent to annulment
         pure and simple of the contested regulation in so far as it concerns the appellants by which they have obtained the only result
         that their actions could have secured for them and that there is accordingly no longer any need for the Court to adjudicate.
         In that regard the contested regulation differs from the measure at issue in the order of March in Case C‑123/Lezzi Pietro v Commission [1993] ECR I‑809.
      
In these particular circumstances, the appeals have not become devoid of purpose and it is necessary for the Court to adjudicate
         on them in that regard.
      
 Substance
A preliminary point to be noted is, in the first place, that at the hearing before the Court of Justice Mr Hassan expressly
         withdrew his ground of appeal relating to the claim for compensation. There is, therefore, no longer any need to consider
         that ground in this appeal.
      
In the second place, as regards the subject-matter of the grounds of appeal, it must be observed that that must be understood
         to concern, in so far as it relates to each of the appellants respectively, the contested regulation as amended, in connection
         with Mr Ayadi’s case, by Regulation No 1210/and, in Mr Hassan’s, by Regulation No 46/2008.
      
 The appellants’ grounds of appeal relating to the contested regulation’s failure to observe their fundamental rights
It is necessary to consider the grounds advanced by the appellants in support of their appeals, in which they object that
         the Court of First Instance dismissed their pleas in law alleging that the contested regulation failed to observe their fundamental
         rights.
      
In the judgments under appeal, and relying on its judgments in Yusuf and Kadi, the Court of First Instance essentially held that it follows from the principles governing the relationship between the
         international legal order under the United Nations and the Community legal order that the contested regulation, because it
         is designed to give effect to a resolution adopted by the Security Council under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
         Nations affording no latitude in that respect, may not be the subject of judicial review of its internal lawfulness save with
         regard to its compatibility with the norms of jus cogens and therefore enjoys, subject to that reservation, immunity from
         jurisdiction (Hassan, paragraph 92, and Ayadi, paragraph 116).
      
Again relying on its judgments in Yusuf and Kadi, the Court of First Instance held, therefore, that it is with regard to jus cogens, understood as a public international order binding on all subjects of international law, including the bodies of the United
         Nations, and from which no derogation is possible, that the lawfulness of the contested regulation may be examined, in relation
         also to the appellants’ pleas alleging breach of their fundamental rights (Hassan, paragraph 92, and Ayadi, paragraph 116).
      
It is apparent from paragraphs and of Kadi on appeal that that reasoning amounts to an error of law. The Community judicature must, in accordance with the powers conferred
         on it by the Treaty, ensure the review, in principle the full review, of the lawfulness of all Community acts in the light
         of the fundamental rights forming an integral part of the general principles of Community law, including review of Community
         measures which, like the contested regulation, are designed to give effect to the resolutions adopted by the Security Council
         under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
      
The Court concluded, in paragraph of Kadi on appeal, that the grounds of appeal put forward by the persons concerned being well founded on that point, it was necessary
         to set aside Yusuf and Kadi at first instance in that respect.
      
In addition, the Court held, in paragraph of Kadi on appeal, that because in the latter parts of Yusuf and Kadi at first instance, relating to the specific fundamental rights invoked by the appellants, the Court of First Instance had
         confined itself to examining the lawfulness of the contested regulation in the light of the rules of jus cogens alone, when
         it was its duty to carry out an examination, in principle a full examination, in the light of the fundamental rights forming
         part of the general principles of Community law, the latter parts of those judgments also had to be set aside. 
      
It follows that, given that the legal grounds of the judgments under appeal are, as pointed out in paragraphs and above,
         the same as those relied on in Yusuf and Kadi at first instance, the judgments under appeal are marred by the same error in law and must, therefore, for the same reasons,
         be set aside in so far as they contain the Court of First Instance’s response to the appellants’ arguments alleging breach
         of certain of their fundamental rights.
      
That conclusion is not called in question by the addition, in paragraphs to of Hassan and in paragraphs to of Ayadi, of a number of points in response to the arguments more specifically propounded by the appellants, given that the Court
         of First Instance concluded that those points demonstrate the correctness of the legal grounds of Yusuf and Kadi at first instance and, in consequence, of the judgments under appeal.
      
Lastly, it is to be noted that at the hearing before the Court Mr Hassan acknowledged that the head of claim raised before
         the Court of First Instance and dismissed by the latter, relating to the alleged breach of his right to respect for private
         and family life, guaranteed by Article of the ECHR, had not been included in his appeal. In the circumstances, there is
         no need to examine it.
      
The grounds of appeal put forward by the appellants are therefore well founded with the result that the judgments under appeal
         must be set aside.
      
 Concerning the actions before the Court of First Instance
As provided in the second sentence of the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, the latter,
         when it quashes the decision of the Court of First Instance, may give final judgment in the matter where the state of proceedings
         so permits
      
In the circumstances, the Court considers that the actions for annulment of the contested regulation brought by the appellants
         are ready for judgment and that it is necessary to give final judgment in them.
      
It is appropriate to examine, in the first place, the claims made by the appellants with regard to the breach of the rights
         of defence, in particular the right to be heard, and of the right to effective judicial review, caused by the measures for
         the freezing of funds as they were imposed on the appellants by the contested regulation.
      
In this regard it has to be found that it is not disputed that the actual circumstances surrounding the inclusion of the appellants’
         names in the list of persons and entities covered by the restrictive measures contained in Annex I to the contested regulation
         are identical to those in which the names of the parties concerned in the cases giving rise to Kadi on appeal had been entered in that list.
      
In the light of those circumstances, the Court held in paragraph of Kadi on appeal that the rights of defence, in particular the right to be heard, and the right to effective judicial review of
         observance of those rights, had patently not been respected.
      
In paragraph of that judgment the Court likewise held that, because the Council had neither communicated to the persons
         concerned the evidence used against them to justify the restrictive measures imposed on them nor afforded them the right to
         be informed of that evidence within a reasonable period after those measures were enacted, those persons had not had the opportunity
         to make their point of view in that respect known to advantage. The Court concluded in that paragraph that their rights of
         defence, in particular the right to be heard, had not been respected. 
      
That conclusion must be reached in the instant cases, and for the same reasons, so that it must be found that the appellants’
         rights of defence have not been respected.
      
Moreover, the Court ruled in paragraph of Kadi on appeal that, given the failure to inform them of the evidence adduced against them and having regard to the relationship,
         referred to in paragraphs and of that judgment, between the rights of defence and the right to an effective legal
         remedy, the parties concerned had also been unable to defend their rights with regard to that evidence in satisfactory conditions
         before the Community judicature, with the result that it must be held that their right to an effective legal remedy had also
         been infringed.
      
The same conclusion must be reached in the instant cases with regard to the appellants’ right to an effective legal remedy,
         so that it must be found that, in the circumstances, that fundamental right of Mr Hassan and Mr Ayadi has not been respected.
      
It must, furthermore, be stated that that infringement has not been remedied in the course of these actions. Indeed, given
         that, according to the fundamental position adopted by the Council, no evidence of that kind may be the subject of investigation
         by the Community judicature, the Council has adduced no evidence to that effect (see, by analogy, Kadi on appeal, paragraph 350). What is more, although the Council took formal note in these appeals of the guidance given in
         Kadi on appeal, it must be found that it has produced no information concerning the evidence adduced against the appellants. 
      
The Court cannot, therefore, do other than find that it is not able to undertake the review of the lawfulness of the contested
         regulation in so far as it concerns the appellants, with the result that it must be held that, for that reason too, the fundamental
         right to an effective legal remedy which they enjoy has not, in the circumstances, been observed (see, by analogy, Kadi on appeal, paragraph 351).
      
It must, therefore, be held that the contested regulation, in so far as it concerns the appellants, was adopted without any
         guarantee being given as to the communication of the evidence adduced against them or as to their being heard in that connection,
         so that it must be found that that regulation was adopted according to a procedure in which the appellants’ rights of defence
         were not observed, which has had the further consequence that the principle of effective judicial protection has been infringed
         (see, by analogy, Kadi on appeal, paragraph 352).
      
It follows from all the foregoing considerations that the pleas in law raised by Mr Hassan and Mr Ayadi in support of their
         actions for annulment of the contested regulation and alleging breach of their rights of defence, especially the right to
         be heard, and of the principle of effective judicial protection, are well founded (see, by analogy, Kadi on appeal, paragraph 353).
      
In the second place, so far as the heads of claim relating to a breach of the right to respect for property caused by the
         fund-freezing measures imposed by the contested regulation are concerned, the Court held, in paragraph of Kadi on appeal, that the restrictive measures imposed by that regulation constituted restrictions of the right to property which
         might, in principle, be justified.
      
It is, however, established that the contested regulation, in so far as it concerns Mr Hassan and Mr Ayadi, was adopted without
         furnishing any guarantee enabling them to put their case to the competent authorities, in a situation in which the restriction
         of their property rights must be regarded as significant, having regard to the general application and actual continuation
         of the freezing measures affecting them (see, by analogy, Kadi on appeal, paragraph 369).
      
It must therefore be held that, in the circumstances of these cases, the imposition of the restrictive measures laid down
         by the contested regulation in respect of Mr Hassan and Mr Ayadi, by including them in the list contained in Annex I to that
         regulation, constitutes an unjustified restriction of their right to property (see, by analogy, Kadi on appeal, paragraph 370).
      
The appellants’ claims that their fundamental right to respect for property has been infringed are therefore well founded.
      
In the circumstances, it is no longer necessary to examine Mr Hassan’s heads of claim concerning the alleged breach of his
         right to respect for his private and family life, guaranteed by Article of the ECHR.
      
It follows from all the foregoing that the contested regulation, so far as it concerns the appellants, must be annulled, account
         being taken of the clarification in paragraph above as to the version of that regulation concerned by the appellants’ respective
         appeals.
      
 Costs
Under the first paragraph of Article of the Rules of Procedure, where the appeal is well founded and the Court of Justice
         itself gives final judgment in the case, it is to make a decision as to costs. Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure,
         applicable to appeal proceedings by virtue of Article thereof, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs
         if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. The first paragraph of Article 69(4) provides that the
         Member States which have intervened in the proceedings are to bear their own costs.
      
Because Mr Hassan and Mr Ayadi’s appeals must be upheld and because the contested regulation must be annulled in so far as
         it concerns the appellants and within the limits described in paragraph above, the Council must be ordered to pay, in addition
         to its own costs, those incurred by Mr Hassan and Mr Ayadi, both at first instance and on appeal in accordance with the forms
         of order sought by the appellants. 
      
The United Kingdom is to bear its own costs both at first instance and in the appeals.
      
The French Republic is to bear its own costs relating to the appeals.
      
The Commission is to bear its own costs at first instance and in the appeal in the case concerning Mr Hassan. In the case
         concerning Mr Ayadi, the Commission is to bear its own costs, in respect both of its intervention before the Court of First
         Instance and of the proceedings before the Court. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Sets aside the judgments of the Court of First Instance of the European Communitiesof July in Case T‑49/Hassan v Council and Commission and in Case T‑253/Ayadi v Council;
2.      Annuls Council Regulation (EC) No 881/of May imposing certain specific restrictive measures directed against
            certain persons and entities associated with Usama bin Laden, the Al-Qaeda network and the Taliban, and repealing Council
            Regulation (EC) No 467/prohibiting the export of certain goods and services to Afghanistan, strengthening the flight
            ban and extending the freeze of funds and other financial resources in respect of the Taliban of Afghanistan, as amended by
            Commission Regulation (EC) No 46/of January 2008, in so far as it concerns Mr Hassan;
3.      Annuls Regulation No 881/2002, as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1210/of August 2006, in so far as it concerns
            Mr Ayadi;
4.      Orders the Council of the European Union to pay, in addition to its own costs, the costs incurred by Mr Hassan and Mr Ayadi
            both at first instance and in these appeals; 
5.      Orders the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to bear its own costs, both at first instance in the case
            concerning Mr Ayadi and in these appeals; 
6.      Orders the French Republic to bear its own costs;
7.      Orders the European Commission to bear its own costs both at first instance and in the appeal in the case concerning Mr Hassan.
            Orders the European Commission, in the case concerning Mr Ayadi, to bear its own costs, in respect both of its intervention
            before the Court of First Instance of the European Communities and of the proceedings before the Court of Justice of the European
            Union.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 