
Case C-6/Daiichi Sankyo Company
v
Comptroller General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the High Court of Justice (England and Wales), Chancery Division (Patents Court))
(Article 104(3), first subparagraph, of the Rules of Procedure – Medicinal products for human use – Supplementary protection certificate – Regulation (EC) No 469/– Articles and – Conditions for obtaining a certificate – Concept of a ‘product protected by a basic patent in force’ – Criteria – Existence of further or different criteria for a medicinal product comprising more than one active ingredient)
Summary of the Order
Approximation of laws – Uniform legislation – Industrial and commercial property – Patent law – Supplementary protection certificate
            for medicinal products – Conditions for granting – Product covered by a basic patent in force
(European Parliament and Council Directive No 469/2009, Art. 3(a))
Article 3(a) of Regulation No 469/concerning the supplementary protection certificate for medicinal products must be
         interpreted as precluding the competent industrial property office of a Member State from granting a supplementary protection
         certificate relating to active ingredients which are not identified in the wording of the claims of the basic patent relied
         on in support of the application for such a certificate.
      
(see para. 30, operative part)
  
  
ORDER OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Article 104(3), first subparagraph, of the Rules of Procedure – Medicinal products for human use – Supplementary protection certificate – Regulation (EC) No 469/– Articles and – Conditions for obtaining a certificate – Concept of a ‘product protected by a basic patent in force’ – Criteria – Existence of further or different criteria for a medicinal product comprising more than one active ingredient)
In Case C‑6/11,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the High Court of Justice of England and Wales, Chancery Division
         (Patents Court) (United Kingdom), made by decision of December 2010, received at the Court on January 2011, in the proceedings
      
Daiichi Sankyo Company
v
Comptroller General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of J.-C. Bonichot, President of the Chamber, A. Prechal, L. Bay Larsen, C. Toader (Rapporteur), and E. Jarašiūnas,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
the Court proposing to give its decision by reasoned order in accordance with the first subparagraph of Article 104(3) of
         its Rules of Procedure, 
      
after hearing the Advocate General,
makes the following
Order
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article of Regulation (EC) No 469/of the European
         Parliament and of the Council of May concerning the supplementary protection certificate for medicinal products (OJ
         L 152, p. 1). 
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between Daiichi Sankyo Company (‘Daiichi Sankyo’) and the Comptroller General of
         Patents, Designs and Trade Marks (‘the Patent Office’) concerning the latter’s refusal to grant Daiichi Sankyo’s application
         for a supplementary protection certificate (‘SPC’). 
      
 Legal context
 European Union law
Recital and recitals to in the preamble to Regulation No 469/are worded as follows: 
      
‘(1)      Council Regulation (EEC) No 1768/of June concerning the creation of a supplementary protection certificate for
         medicinal products [OJ L 182, p. 1] has been substantially amended several times. In the interests of clarity and rationality
         the said Regulation should be codified. 
      
…
(4)      At the moment, the period that elapses between the filing of an application for a patent for a new medicinal product and authorisation
         to place the medicinal product on the market [“MA”] makes the period of effective protection under the patent insufficient
         to cover the investment put into the research. 
      
(5)      This situation leads to a lack of protection which penalises pharmaceutical research. 
(6)      There exists a risk of research centres situated in the Member States relocating to countries that offer greater protection.
         
      
(7)      A uniform solution at Community level should be provided for, thereby preventing the heterogeneous development of national
         laws leading to further disparities which would be likely to create obstacles to the free movement of medicinal products within
         the Community and thus directly affect the functioning of the internal market. 
      
(8)      Therefore, the provision of a [SPC] granted, under the same conditions, by each of the Member States at the request of the
         holder of a national or European patent relating to a medicinal product for which [MA] has been granted is necessary. A regulation
         is therefore the most appropriate legal instrument. 
      
(9)      The duration of the protection granted by the certificate should be such as to provide adequate effective protection. For
         this purpose, the holder of both a patent and a certificate should be able to enjoy an overall maximum of years of exclusivity
         from the time the medicinal product in question first obtains [MA] in the Community. 
      
(10)      All the interests at stake, including those of public health, in a sector as complex and sensitive as the pharmaceutical sector
         should nevertheless be taken into account. For this purpose, the certificate cannot be granted for a period exceeding five
         years. The protection granted should furthermore be strictly confined to the product which obtained authorisation to be placed
         on the market as a medicinal product.’ 
      
Article of Regulation No 469/2009, headed ‘Definitions’, provides as follows:
      
‘For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions shall apply:
(a)      “medicinal product” means any substance or combination of substances presented for treating or preventing disease in human
         beings …; 
      
(b)      “product” means the active ingredient or combination of active ingredients of a medicinal product; 
(c)      “basic patent” means a patent which protects a product as such, a process to obtain a product or an application of a product,
         and which is designated by its holder for the purpose of the procedure for grant of a certificate;
      
(d)      “certificate” means the supplementary protection certificate; 
…’
Article of Regulation No 469/2009, entitled ‘Scope’, is worded as follows:
      
‘Any product protected by a patent in the territory of a Member State and subject, prior to being placed on the market as
         a medicinal product, to an administrative authorisation procedure as laid down in Directive 2001/81/EC of the European Parliament
         and of the Council of November on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use [OJ L 311, p.
         67] or Directive 2001/82/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of November on the Community code relating
         to veterinary medicinal products [OJ L 311, p. 1] may, under the terms and conditions provided for in this Regulation,
         be the subject of a certificate.’
      
Article of Regulation No 469/2009, entitled ‘Conditions for obtaining a certificate’, provides as follows:
      
‘A certificate shall be granted if, in the Member State in which the application referred to in Article is submitted and
         at the date of that application: 
      
(a)      the product is protected by a basic patent in force; 
(b)      a valid authorisation to place the product on the market as a medicinal product has been granted in accordance with Directive
         2001/83/EC or Directive 2001/82/EC, as appropriate; 
      
(c)      the product has not already been the subject of a certificate; 
(d)      the authorisation referred to in point (b) is the first authorisation to place the product on the market as a medicinal product.’
         
      
Article of Regulation No 469/2009, entitled ‘Subject matter of protection’, is worded as follows:
      
‘Within the limits of the protection conferred by the basic patent, the protection conferred by a certificate shall extend
         only to the product covered by the authorisation to place the corresponding medicinal product on the market and for any use
         of the product as a medicinal product that has been authorised before the expiry of the certificate.’ 
      
Article of Regulation No 469/2009, entitled ‘[e]ffects of the certificate’, provides that ‘[s]ubject to the provisions of
         Article 4, the certificate shall confer the same rights as conferred by the basic patent and shall be subject to the same
         limitations and the same obligations’.
      
 The European Patent Convention 
Under the heading ‘Extent of Protection’, Article of the Convention on the Grant of European Patents, signed on October
         1973, in the amended version applicable at the time of the facts in the main proceedings (‘the European Patent Convention’),
         provides as follows:
      
‘(1)      The extent of the protection conferred by a European patent or a European patent application shall be determined by the claims.
         Nevertheless, the description and drawings shall be used to interpret the claims. 
      
(2)      For the period up to grant of the European patent, the extent of the protection conferred by the European patent application
         shall be determined by the claims contained in the application as published. However, the European patent as granted or as
         amended in opposition, limitation or revocation proceedings shall determine retroactively the protection conferred by the
         application, in so far as such protection is not thereby extended.’ 
      
Article of the Protocol on the Interpretation of Article of the European Patent Convention, which forms an integral part
         of the convention in accordance with Article 164(1) thereof, provides as follows: 
      
‘Article should not be interpreted as meaning that the extent of the protection conferred by a European patent is to be
         understood as that defined by the strict, literal meaning of the wording used in the claims, the description and drawings
         being employed only for the purpose of resolving an ambiguity found in the claims. Nor should it be taken to mean that the
         claims serve only as a guideline and that the actual protection conferred may extend to what, from a consideration of the
         description and drawings by a person skilled in the art, the patent proprietor has contemplated. On the contrary, it is to
         be interpreted as defining a position between these extremes which combines a fair protection for the patent proprietor with
         a reasonable degree of legal certainty for third parties.’ 
      
 National law
Section of the United Kingdom Patents Act (‘UK Patents Act 1977’), headed ‘[m]eaning of infringement’, provides as
         follows:
      
‘(1)      Subject to the provisions of this section, a person infringes a patent for an invention if, but only if, while the patent
         is in force, he does any of the following things in the United Kingdom in relation to the invention without the consent of
         the proprietor of the patent, that is to say: 
      
(a)      where the invention is a product, he makes, disposes of, offers to dispose of, uses or imports the product or keeps it whether
         for disposal or otherwise; 
      
…’
Section of the UK Patents Act 1977, headed ‘[e]xtent of invention’, is worded as follows:
      
‘(1)      For the purposes of this Act an invention … for which a patent has been granted, shall, unless the context otherwise requires,
         be taken to be that specified in a claim of the specification of the … patent … as interpreted by the description and any
         drawings contained in that specification, and the extent of the protection conferred by a patent … shall be determined accordingly.
         
      
…
(3)      The Protocol on the Interpretation of Article of the European Patent Convention (which Article contains a provision corresponding
         to subsection (1) above) shall, as for the time being in force, apply for the purposes of subsection (1) above as it applies
         for the purposes of that Article.’ 
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Daiichi Sankyo is the holder of European patent EP 0503785, entitled ‘Biphenylimidazole derivatives, their preparation and
         their therapeutic use’. The referring court states that the principle ingredient olmesartan medoxomil is specifically disclosed
         in the wording of claim of the patent. That active ingredient is an angiotensin II receptor antagonist and is used as a
         medicinal product for the treatment and prophylaxis of hypertension. 
      
The active ingredient hydrochlorothiazide is a diuretic which can also be used as an antihypertensive agent. 
      
On November 2003, the Patent Office granted to Daiichi Sankyo a SPC (SPC/GB03/24), due to expire on February 2017, for
         which the ‘product’ within the meaning of Regulation No 469/is the active ingredient olmesartan medoxomil. In support
         of its SPC application, Daiichi Sankyo submitted the MA in force in the United Kingdom for the medicinal product Olmotec,
         containing olmesartan as the sole active ingredient, that authorisation having been granted by the national authorities on
         May 2003, and, as the first MA for that medicinal product in the European Union, the authorisation for a corresponding
         medicinal product granted by the German authorities on August 2002. 
      
On February 2006, Daiichi Sankyo obtained in the United Kingdom a MA for Olmetec Plus, a medicinal product comprising a
         combination of the two active ingredients olmesartan medoxomil and hydrochlorothiazide. That medicinal product enables those
         active ingredients to be administered to patients in a single dose as part of dual therapy. The referring court points out
         in that regard that Daiichi Sankyo invested considerable time and resources in undertaking clinical trials and studies in
         order to secure a MA in respect of such a combination therapy. 
      
Relying on its patent, on the basis of which the SPC relating to Olmetec had been granted, and on the MA for Olmetec Plus,
         together with a MA for a corresponding medicinal product granted by the German authorities on May 2005, Daiichi Sankyo
         filed a SPC application with the Patent Office for the combination of the active ingredients olmesartan medoxomil and hydrocholorothiazide
         (SPC/GB06/019). If granted, the SPC would expire on February 2017, that is, the same date as the SCP granted on November
         2003. 
      
By decision of February 2010, the Patent Office refused to grant the SPC that is the subject of application SPC/GB06/on the ground that the product concerned, namely the combination of the active ingredients olmesartan medoxomil and hydrocholorothiazide,
         was not, in the light of Article 3(a) of Regulation No 469/2009, protected by the basic patent held by Daiichi Sankyo, because
         that patent disclosed only the ingredient olmesartan medoxomil, not that active ingredient in conjunction with one or more
         active ingredients. 
      
The referring court points out that SPCs parallel to that refused by the Patent Office have nevertheless been granted in several
         Member States, including by the competent authorities of the Kingdom of Belgium, the Italian Republic, the Grand Duchy of
         Luxembourg, the Republic of Finland and the Kingdom of Norway. However, in France a similar application has been rejected
         by the Director of the National Institute for Industrial Property. By judgment of November 2009, the cour d’appel de Paris
         (Court of Appeal, Paris) (France) upheld that decision, taking the view inter alia that ‘the combination of olmesartan medoxomil
         and hydrocholorothiazide is not protected by the basic patent, since that combination does not form part of the patent claims’
         and that ‘lastly, olmesartan medoxomil, alone covered by the patent, has already been the subject of MA No NL of August
         and SPC No 03Cgranted on February on the basis of the same patent’. The referring court states that Daiichi
         Sankyo appealed against that judgment to the Cour de cassation (Court of Cassation) (France) and will request a stay of those
         proceedings pending the ruling of the Court in the present case. 
      
In those circumstances, the High Court of Justice of England and Wales, Chancery Division (Patents Court) decided to stay
         the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘(1)      Regulation No 469/… recognises amongst the other purposes identified in the recitals, the need for the grant of a SPC
         by each of the Member States of the Community to holders of national or European patents to be under the same conditions,
         as indicated in recitals and [of the Regulation]. In the absence of Community harmonisation of patent law, what is meant
         in Article 3(a) of the Regulation by “the product is protected by a basic patent in force” and what are the criteria for deciding
         this? 
      
(2)      In a case like the present one involving a medicinal product comprising more than one active ingredient, are there further
         or different criteria for determining whether or not “the product is protected by a basic patent” according to Article 3(a)
         of … Regulation [No 469/2009] and, if so, what are those further or different criteria? 
      
(3)      In order for a combination of active ingredients cited in a [MA] to be the subject of a SPC, and having regard to the wording
         of Article of the Regulation, is the condition that the product be “protected by a basic patent” within the meaning of Articles
         and of the Regulation satisfied if the product infringes the basic patent under national law? 
      
(4)      In order for a combination of active ingredients cited in a [MA] to be the subject of a SPC, and having regard to the wording
         of Article of … Regulation [No 469/2009], does satisfaction of the condition that the product be “protected by a basic patent”
         within the meaning of Articles and of the Regulation depend upon whether the basic patent contains one (or more) claims
         which specifically mention a combination of (1) a class of compounds which includes one of the active ingredients in the said
         product and (2) a class of further active ingredients which may be unspecified but which includes the other active ingredient
         in the said product; or is it sufficient that the basic patent contains one (or more) claims which (1) claim a class of compounds
         which includes one of the active ingredients in the said product and (2) use specific language which as a matter of national
         law extends the scope of protection to include the presence of further other unspecified active ingredients including the
         other active ingredient in the said product?’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred
The first subparagraph of Article 104(3) of its Rules of Procedure provides that where a question referred for a preliminary
         ruling is identical to a question on which the Court has already ruled, or where the answer to such a question may be clearly
         deduced from existing case-law, the Court may, after hearing the Advocate General, at any time give its decision by reasoned
         order. The Court considers that that is the case here. 
      
The questions referred in the present case by the High Court of Justice are, for all essential purposes, similar to those
         referred by the Court of Appeal (England and Wales) (Civil Division) in the case which gave rise to the judgment of November
         in Case C‑322/Medeva [2011] ECR I‑0000. 
      
Consequently, the answers and clarifications given by the Court in that judgment are equally valid as regards the question
         raised by the referring court in the present case.
      
By its questions, which it is appropriate to consider together, the referring court asks, in essence, whether Article 3(a)
         of Regulation No 469/must be interpreted as precluding the competent industrial property office of a Member State from
         granting a SPC where the active ingredients specified in the SPC application include active ingredients not identified in
         the wording of the claims of the basic patent relied on in support of that application. 
      
As regards whether national rules on infringement may be used for the purpose of determining whether a product is ‘protected
         by a basic patent in force’ within the meaning of Article 3(a) of Regulation No 469/2009, it should be noted that, as European
         Union law currently stands, the provisions concerning patents have not yet been made the subject of harmonisation at European
         Union level or of an approximation of laws (see Case C‑392/Farmitalia [1999] ECR I‑5553, paragraph 26, and Medeva, paragraph 22).
      
Accordingly, in the absence of European Union harmonisation of patent law, the extent of patent protection can be determined
         only in the light of the non‑European Union rules which govern patents (see Farmitalia, paragraph 27, and Medeva, paragraph 23).
      
It should be noted that Regulation No 469/establishes a uniform solution at European Union level by creating a SPC which
         may be obtained by the holder of a national or European patent under the same conditions in each Member State. It thus aims
         to prevent the heterogeneous development of national laws leading to further disparities which would be likely to create obstacles
         to the free movement of medicinal products within the European Union and thus directly affect the establishment and functioning
         of the internal market (see Case C‑350/Spain v Council [1995] ECR I‑1985, paragraphs and 35; Case C‑127/Hässle [2003] ECR I‑14781, paragraph 37; Case C‑482/AHP Manufacturing [2009] ECR I‑7295, paragraph 35; and Medeva, paragraph 24). 
      
Moreover, it should be recalled that Article of Regulation No 469/provides that any SPC confers the same rights as
         conferred by the basic patent and is subject to the same limitations and the same obligations. It follows that Article 3(a)
         of the regulation precludes the grant of a SPC relating to active ingredients which are not specified in the wording of the
         claims of the basic patent (Medeva, paragraph 25). 
      
That being so, it should be noted, as the Czech Government correctly submitted, that, in accordance with Article of Regulation
         No 469/2009, a SPC granted in connection with a product confers, upon the expiry of the basic patent, the same rights as were
         conferred by that patent in relation to the product, within the limits of the protection conferred by the basic patent, as
         provided for in Article of the regulation. Accordingly, if, during the period in which the patent was valid, the holder
         of that patent could oppose, on the basis of his patent, all use or certain uses of his product in the form of a medicinal
         product consisting of such a product or containing it, the SPC granted in relation to that product would confer on the holder
         the same rights for all uses of the product, as a medicinal product, which were authorised before the expiry of the certificate
         (see Medeva, paragraph 39). 
      
In view of the foregoing, the answer to the questions referred is that Article 3(a) of Regulation No 469/must be interpreted
         as precluding the competent industrial property office of a Member State from granting a SPC relating to active ingredients
         which are not identified in the wording of the claims of the basic patent relied on in support of the SPC application. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
 Article 3(a) of Regulation (EC) No 469/of the European Parliament and of the Council of May concerning the supplementary
            protection certificate for medicinal products must be interpreted as precluding the competent industrial property office of
            a Member State from granting a supplementary protection certificate relating to active ingredients which are not identified
            in the wording of the claims of the basic patent relied on in support of the application for such a certificate. 
[Signatures]
*  Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 