
Case C-278/Carol Marilyn Robins and Others
v
Secretary of State for Work and Pensions
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the High Court of Justice of England and Wales, Chancery Division)
(Protection of employees in the event of the employer’s insolvency – Directive 80/987/EEC – Transposition – Article – Supplementary company or inter-company pension schemes – Old-age benefits – Protection of acquired rights – Extent of protection – Liability of a Member State by reason of the incorrect transposition of a directive – Conditions)
Opinion of Advocate General Kokott delivered on July Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), January Summary of the Judgment
1.     Social policy – Approximation of laws – Protection of employees in the event of the employer’s insolvency – Directive 80/(Council Directive 80/987, Art. 8)
2.     Social policy – Approximation of laws – Protection of employees in the event of the employer’s insolvency – Directive 80/(Council Directive 80/987, Art. 8)
3.     Community law – Rights conferred upon individuals – Infringement by a Member State – Obligation to compensate for damage caused
            to individuals 
(Council Directive 80/987, Art. 8)
1.     On a proper construction of Article of Directive 80/on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to
         the protection of employees in the event of the insolvency of their employer, where the employer is insolvent and the assets
         of the supplementary company or inter-company pension schemes are insufficient, accrued pension rights need not necessarily
         be funded by the Member States themselves or be funded in full.
      
The wording of Article of the directive, inasmuch as it states in a general manner that the Member States ‘shall ensure
         that the necessary measures are taken’, does not oblige those States themselves to fund the rights to benefits that must be
         protected by virtue of the directive, but leaves them some latitude as to the means to be adopted for the purposes of that
         protection.   In so far as it does no more than prescribe in general terms the adoption of the measures necessary to ‘protect
         the interests’ of the persons concerned, Article of the directive gives the Member States, for the purposes of determining
         the level of protection, considerable latitude which excludes an obligation to guarantee in full.
      
(see paras 35-36, 45-46, operative part 1)
2.     Article of Directive 80/on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the protection of employees
         in the event of the insolvency of their employer, which requires Member States to ensure that the necessary measures are taken
         to protect the interests of those employees in respect of rights conferring on them entitlement to old-age benefits under
         supplementary pension schemes, precludes a system of protection capable of leading, in certain situations, to a guarantee
         of benefits limited to less than half of the benefits to which an employee was entitled.
      
Even if neither that article nor any other provision of the said directive contains elements which make it possible to establish
         with any precision the minimum level required in order to protect entitlement to benefits under supplementary pension schemes,
         such a system cannot, having regard to the express wish of the Community legislature, be considered to fall within the definition
         of the word ‘protect’ used in Article of the directive.
      
(see paras 56-57, 62, operative part 2)
3.     For a Member State to incur liability for damage caused to individuals by a breach of Community law it is necessary that the
         rule of law infringed should be intended to confer rights on individuals, that the breach should be sufficiently serious,
         and that  there should be a direct causal link between the breach of the obligation incumbent on the State and the damage sustained
         by the injured parties. The condition requiring a sufficiently serious breach of Community law implies manifest and grave
         disregard by the Member State for the limits set on its discretion, the factors to be taken into consideration in this connection
         being, inter alia, the degree of clarity and precision of the rule infringed and the measure of discretion left by that rule
         to the national authorities. That discretion, which constitutes an important criterion, is broadly dependent on the degree
         of clarity and precision of the rule infringed.
      
On account of the general nature of its wording, Article of Directive 80/on the approximation of the laws of the Member
         States relating to the protection of employees in the event of the insolvency of their employer, which requires Member States
         to ensure that the necessary measures are taken to protect the interests of those employees in respect of rights conferring
         on them entitlement to old-age benefits under supplementary pension schemes, allows the Member States considerable discretion
         for the purposes of determining the level of protection of entitlement to benefits.  Therefore, if Article of the directive
         has not been properly transposed into domestic law, the liability of the Member State concerned is contingent on a finding
         of manifest and grave disregard by that State for the limits set on its discretion.
      
In order to determine whether that condition is satisfied, the national court hearing a claim for reparation must take account
         of all the factors which characterise the situation put before it. Those factors include, in particular, in addition to the
         clarity and precision of the rule infringed and the measure of discretion left by that rule to the national authorities, whether
         the infringement or the damage caused was intentional or involuntary, whether any error of law was excusable or inexcusable,
         and the fact that the position taken by a Community institution may have contributed towards the adoption or maintenance of
         national measures or practices contrary to Community law.
      
(see paras 69-70, 72-77, 82, operative part 3)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
January (*)
      
(Protection of employees in the event of the employer’s insolvency – Directive 80/987/EEC – Transposition – Article – Supplementary company or inter-company pension schemes – Old-age benefits – Protection of rights conferring immediate entitlement – Extent of protection – Liability of a Member State by reason of the incorrect transposition of a directive – Conditions)
In Case C-278/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, from the High Court of Justice of England and Wales, Chancery Division
         (United Kingdom), made by decision of June 2005, received at the Court on July 2005, in the proceedings
      
Carol Marilyn Robins and Others
v
Secretary of State for Work and Pensions,
 
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of: C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, J. Klučka, R. Silva de Lapuerta, J. Makarczyk and L. Bay Larsen
         (Rapporteur), Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on June 2006,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Ms Robins and Others, by I. Walker, Solicitor, D. Anderson QC and P. Newman, Barrister, 
–       the United Kingdom Government, by C. White, acting as Agent, D. Pannick QC and D. Wyatt QC, and by R. Hitchcock and K. Smith,
         Barristers,
      
–       Ireland, by D.J. O’Hagan, acting as Agent, and P. McGarry, BL,
–       the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster, acting as Agent,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by G. Rozet and J. Enegren, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on July gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Council Directive 80/987/EEC of October on
         the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the protection of employees in the event of the insolvency
         of their employer (OJ L 283, p. 23, ‘the Directive’).
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between Ms Robins and other members of two private occupational pension
         schemes (‘the claimants in the main proceedings’) and the Secretary of State for Work and Pensions, who is responsible for
         employment and pension matters in the United Kingdom, regarding the reduction of their entitlement to old-age benefits following
         the insolvency of their employer.
      
 The legal framework of the dispute
 The relevant provisions of Community law
Article 1(1) of the Directive provides:
‘This Directive shall apply to employees’ claims arising from contracts of employment or employment relationships and existing
         against employers who are in a state of insolvency within the meaning of Article 2(1).’
      
Article of the Directive states:
‘For the purposes of this Directive, an employer shall be deemed to be in a state of insolvency:
(a)      where a request has been made for the opening of proceedings involving the employer’s assets, as provided for under the laws,
         regulations and administrative provisions of the Member State concerned, to satisfy collectively the claims of creditors and
         which make it possible to take into consideration the claims referred to in Article 1(1), and, 
      
(b)      where the authority which is competent pursuant to the said laws, regulations and administrative provisions has:
–       either decided to open the proceedings, 
–       or established that the employer’s undertaking or business has been definitively closed down and that the available assets
         are insufficient to warrant the opening of the proceedings:
      
2.      This Directive is without prejudice to national law as regards the definition of the terms “employee”, “employer”, “pay”,
         “right conferring immediate entitlement” and “right conferring prospective entitlement”.’
      
In accordance with Article of the Directive, Member States are to take the measures necessary to ensure that guarantee institutions
         guarantee, subject to Article 4, payment of employees’ outstanding claims resulting from contracts of employment or employment
         relationships and relating to pay for the period prior to a given date. This date is one of those listed in Article 3(2),
         at the choice of the Member States. 
      
Under Article 4(1) and (2) of the Directive, Member States have the option to limit the liability of the guarantee institutions
         referred to in Article to the payment of outstanding claims up to, as the case may be, months’, months’ or weeks’
         pay.
      
Under Article 7, ‘Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that non-payment of compulsory contributions due
         from the employer, before the onset of his insolvency, to their insurance institutions under national statutory social security
         schemes does not adversely affect employees’ benefit entitlement in respect of these insurance institutions inasmuch as the
         employees’ contributions were deducted at source from the remuneration paid’.
      
According to Article 8, ‘Member States shall ensure that the necessary measures are taken to protect the interests of employees
         and of persons having already left the employer’s undertaking or business at the date of the onset of the employer’s insolvency
         in respect of rights conferring on them immediate or prospective entitlement to old-age benefits, including survivors’ benefits,
         under supplementary company or inter-company pension schemes outside the national statutory social security schemes’.
      
Article states that the Directive is not to affect the option of Member States to apply or introduce laws, regulations or
         administrative provisions which are more favourable to employees.
      
 The relevant provisions of domestic law 
 Guaranteed contributions to pension schemes
Under the Employment Rights Act and the Pension Schemes Act (‘the PSA 1993’), the Redundancy Payments Directorate,
         on behalf of the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, makes payments from the National Insurance Fund (‘the NIF’) to
         former employees in the event of their employer’s insolvency in order to preserve their rights. It then becomes a creditor
         in the insolvency proceedings in the group action brought against the employer, in the place and stead of the employees. 
      
Section of the PSA enables ‘relevant contributions’ to be paid out of the NIF to a pension scheme where there is
         a shortfall of contributions made by an insolvent employer.
      
‘Relevant contributions’, as defined in section 124(2) of the PSA 1993, are contributions either:
–       payable by an employer on his own account, or
–       payable on behalf of an employee, provided that a sum equal to that amount has actually been deducted by the employer from
         the pay of the employee by way of a contribution from him.
      
The amount of contributions due from an employer on his own account is defined in section 124(3) of the PSA as being
         the least of:
      
–       the amount unpaid on the date the employer became insolvent which had been payable in the months preceding that date;
–       the amount, where the scheme’s benefits are calculated by reference to the salary of a member, certified by an actuary as
         necessary to meet the scheme liabilities on dissolution to or in respect of employees of the company, and
      
–       10% of the total amount of remuneration paid or payable to employees in the months preceding the date of insolvency.
The amount that may be claimed on an employee’s behalf in respect of unpaid contributions is defined by section 124(5) of
         the PSA as corresponding to the amounts deducted from the employee’s pay in the months preceding the date of the insolvency.
      
Section 177(2)(b) of the PSA provides for payments made by the Secretary of State to be paid out of the NIF, and section
         provides for subrogation.
      
 The Pensions Compensation Board and the Fraud Compensation Scheme
Sections to of the Pensions Act 1995, as amended by the Welfare Reform and Pensions Act 1999, also made provision for
         actions for compensation in respect of pension benefits from the Pensions Compensation Board, when the employer was insolvent
         and the scheme’s assets had been reduced by an offence involving dishonesty, including intention to defraud.
      
As of September 2005, the Pensions Compensation Board was replaced, in cases of want of assets due to fraud, by the Fraud
         Compensation Scheme, by virtue of sections to of the Pensions Act 2004.
      
 Buy-back of rights in the general pension scheme
By virtue of section of the PSA 1993, as amended by section of the Pensions Act 1995, and by the Occupational Pensions
         Schemes (Contracting-out) (Amount Required for Restoring State Scheme Rights and Miscellaneous Amendment) Regulations (SI 1998/1397), members of schemes meeting certain conditions may re-establish all or some of their rights in the general
         pension scheme, when proceedings to wind up the membership scheme were initiated no earlier than April and that scheme
         does not possess sufficient funds.
      
 Holding of the scheme’s financial resources in independent trust funds
Section of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act permitted employers and employees to benefit from tax relief on the
         amounts paid into pension schemes where the scheme funds are held in an independent trust fund and are therefore not available
         to other creditors in the case of insolvency. As a general rule, supplementary pension schemes respected that obligation due
         to the tax relief granted.
      
Since April it is no longer required that the funds of a scheme should be held in an independent trust fund in order
         to benefit from tax relief. None the less, pursuant to section 252(2) of the Pensions Act 2004, which entered into force on
         September 2005, pension schemes must be set up as independent trusts in order for the trustees to be able to accept payments
         funding the scheme.
      
 Minimum Funding Requirement (MFR) and the employer’s debt
Section of the Pensions Act requires occupational pension schemes, with the exception of some, to ensure that the
         value of the assets of the scheme is not less than the sum of their liabilities as assessed on the basis of the Minimum Funding
         Requirement.
      
Section of the Pensions Act and the Occupational Pension Schemes (Deficiency on Winding Up etc.) Regulations (SI 1996/3128), as amended by the Occupational Pension Schemes (Minimum Funding Requirement and Miscellaneous Amendments)
         Regulations (SI 2002/380) (together ‘the Deficiency Regulations’), provide that if a salary-related occupational pension
         scheme to which section applies is wound up, or if the employer becomes insolvent as defined in section 75, and at the
         applicable time its assets are less than its liabilities, an amount equal to the difference is to be treated as a debt due
         from the employer to the trustees of the scheme, so enabling the trustees to take action to pursue the debt.
      
As of April 2005, section of the Pensions Act was amended by section of the Pensions Act and the Deficiency
         Regulations were replaced by the Occupational Pension Schemes (Employer Debt) Regulations (SI 2005/678), as amended by
         the Occupational Pension Schemes (Employer Debt etc.) (Amendment) Regulations (SI 2005/2224). However, the earlier rules
         remain unchanged in substance.
      
Moreover, certain employer contributions owed to an occupational pension scheme or to a State scheme are preferential debts
         under Category of the Insolvency Act 1986, Schedule 6, including:
      
–       employee contributions to an occupational pension scheme that have been deducted from the employee’s pay during the last four
         months preceding the relevant insolvency date but that have not yet been paid over by the employer to the scheme, and
      
–       contributions due from the employer to an occupational pension scheme contracted out of the state earnings related pension
         scheme (SERPS) in respect of the 12-month period preceding the relevant date of insolvency, where they are attributable to
         the provision of Guaranteed Minimum Pensions (under section 8(2) PSA 1993) or protected rights (section PSA 1993) under
         the scheme.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings
The claimants in the main proceedings are former employees of ASW Limited, a company placed in insolvent liquidation by order
         of April 2003.
      
They were members of pension schemes sponsored by that company, namely, the ASW Pension Plan and the ASW Sheerness Steel Group
         Pension Fund (‘the pension schemes’).
      
Those schemes had the following characteristics, common to all private final salary pension schemes:
–       the benefits, known as ‘final salary benefits’, are calculated by reference to an accrual rate and on the basis of each member’s
         final salary and length of service with the company;
      
–       members contribute a percentage of their salary to the schemes, and the employer is obliged to contribute at a rate necessary
         to enable the benefits to be maintained and provided, these schemes being known as ‘balance of costs’ schemes;
      
–       the employer company sponsoring the schemes is entitled to give notice of ceasing contributions, triggering winding up of
         the schemes;
      
–       once the schemes have started to be wound up, the provisions of section of the Pensions Act that cover a statutory
         debt owed by the company to the schemes are triggered.
      
The schemes were terminated in July and are in the process of being wound up. The trustees are now obliged to apply the
         assets of the schemes to secure the accrued benefits of the members according to certain priority categories laid down by
         the schemes’ rules, as amended by legislation. First, the assets of the schemes are used to secure the benefits of those members
         whose pensions had come into payment at the date the schemes went into winding-up, and then, to the extent that there are
         any assets left in the schemes, to secure the benefits of those members whose pensions had not yet come into payment at the
         date the schemes went into winding-up.
      
According to the most recent valuations of the schemes carried out by the pension schemes’ actuaries, there will be insufficient
         assets to cover all the benefits of all members, and the benefits of non-pensioners will therefore be reduced.
      
Considering that the legislation in force in the United Kingdom did not provide them with the level of protection prescribed
         by Article of the Directive, the claimants in the main proceedings have brought an action for compensation for the loss
         suffered against the United Kingdom Government in the person of the Secretary of State.
      
The High Court of Justice of England and Wales, Chancery Division, hearing the case, has decided to stay proceedings and to
         refer to the Court of Justice the following questions for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Is Article of [the Directive] to be interpreted as requiring Member States to ensure, by whatever means necessary, that
         employees’ accrued rights under supplementary company or inter-company final salary pension schemes are fully funded by Member
         States in the event that the employees’ private employer becomes insolvent and the assets of their schemes are insufficient
         to fund those benefits?
      
(2)      If the answer to Question is “no”, are the requirements of Article sufficiently implemented by legislation such as that
         in force in the United Kingdom as described above?
      
(3)      If the United Kingdom legislative provisions fail to comply with Article 8, what test should be applied by the national court
         in considering whether the consequent infringement of Community law is sufficiently serious to attract liability in damages?
         In particular, is the mere infringement enough to establish the existence of a sufficiently serious breach, or must there
         also have been a manifest and grave disregard by the Member States for the limits on its rule-making powers, or is some other
         test to be applied and if so which?’
      
 Concerning the first question
By its first question the national court seeks in essence to ascertain whether, on a proper construction of Article of the
         Directive, where the employer is insolvent and the assets of the supplementary company or inter-company pension schemes are
         insufficient, accrued pension rights must be funded by the Member States themselves and also whether they must be funded in
         full.
      
 Observations submitted to the Court
The claimants in the main proceedings argue that the structure of the Directive and the wording of its Article impose on
         the Member States an obligation of result. If need be, accrued rights must therefore be fully funded by the Member States.
         
      
The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Ireland, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Commission of the
         European Communities take the view that Article of the Directive does not oblige the Member States to guarantee in full
         the accrued rights of employees. It leaves the Member States some latitude.
      
 The Court’s answer
The wording of Article of the Directive, inasmuch as it states in a general manner that the Member States ‘shall ensure
         that the necessary measures are taken’, does not oblige those States themselves to fund the rights to benefits that must be
         protected by virtue of the Directive. 
      
The words used leave the Member States some latitude as to the means to be adopted for the purposes of that protection.
A Member State may therefore impose, for example, an obligation on employers to insure or provide for the setting up of a
         guarantee institution in respect of which it will lay down the detailed rules for funding, rather than provide for funding
         by the public authorities.
      
With regard to the degree of protection required by the Directive, it is to be borne in mind that, by virtue of the first
         recital in the preamble thereto, the measures necessary to protect employees in the event of their employer’s insolvency are
         to be adopted ‘while taking account of the need for balanced economic and social development in the Community’.
      
The Directive is thus designed to reconcile the interests of employees with the need for balanced economic and social development.
Directive 80/is intended to guarantee employees a minimum level of protection under Community law in the event of the
         insolvency of their employer (Joined Cases C‑6/and C‑9/Francovich and Others [1991] ECR I‑5357, paragraph 3), without prejudice, in accordance with its Article 9, to more favourable provisions which
         the Member States may apply or introduce.
      
The level of protection required by the Directive for each of the specific guarantees that it establishes must be determined
         having regard to the words used in the corresponding provision, interpreted, if need be, in the light of those considerations.
      
So far as the guaranteeing of rights to old-age benefits under supplementary pension schemes is concerned, Article of the
         Directive cannot be interpreted as demanding a full guarantee of the rights in question.
      
Admittedly, Article 8, like Article of the Directive on national statutory social security schemes, but unlike Articles
         and of the Directive on outstanding claims relating to pay, does not provide any express option for Member States to limit
         the degree of protection.
      
However, the absence of any explicit indication to that effect does not in itself imply, irrespective of the wording of the
         provision concerned, that the Community legislature intended to require an obligation to guarantee rights to benefits in their
         entirety.
      
In this regard, in so far as it does no more than prescribe in general terms the adoption of the measures necessary to ‘protect
         the interests’ of the persons concerned, Article of the Directive gives the Member States, for the purposes of determining
         the level of protection, considerable latitude which excludes an obligation to guarantee in full.
      
The answer to be given to the first question must therefore be that, on a proper construction of Article of the Directive,
         where the employer is insolvent and the assets of the supplementary company or inter-company pension schemes are insufficient,
         accrued pension rights need not necessarily be funded by the Member States themselves or be funded in full.
      
 Concerning the second question
By its second question, the national court seeks in essence to ascertain whether a system of protection such as that at issue
         in the case in the main proceedings is incompatible with Article of the Directive.
      
 Observations submitted to the Court
The claimants in the main proceedings argue that the national system at issue may lead to a reduction of 80% in entitlement
         to benefits. Such a system would render Article of the Directive for all practical purposes meaningless. The provisions
         adopted did not ensure adequate transposition of the Directive.
      
The United Kingdom considers that the various elements of the system at issue in the main proceedings, described in paragraphs
         to above, are sufficient to provide the minimum degree of protection required by Article of the Directive.
      
It adds that the Financial Assistance Scheme (‘FAS’) has been established, as from September 2005, by virtue of Article
         of the Pensions Act and the Financial Assistance Scheme Regulations (SI /1986) This scheme provides assistance
         to certain members of pension schemes where the employer is insolvent. It applies to occupational pension schemes in respect
         of which liquidation proceedings were initiated between January and April 2005. It supplements retirement pensions
         at a level of about 80% of the pension expected.
      
Ireland and the Kingdom of the Netherlands also take the view that provisions such as those adopted by the United Kingdom
         constitute adequate transposition of the Directive into domestic law.
      
So far as the claimants in the main proceedings are concerned, the Commission notes that the system in existence has not prevented
         substantial losses to their entitlements. That situation is not easily to be reconciled with the aim of Article of the Directive.
      
It states that it is difficult to establish the precise level of protection required by that provision. However, the level
         of protection afforded the claimants in the main proceedings is not sufficient.
      
 The Court’s answer
According to unchallenged statements in the documents before the Court, two of the claimants in the main proceedings will
         receive only and 49% respectively of the benefits to which they were entitled.
      
There being no obligation to guarantee entitlement to benefits in full, it remains to determine the minimum level of protection
         required by the Directive.
      
It must be pointed out that, unlike Articles and of the Directive, the words of which make it possible, notwithstanding
         the latitude given to the Member States, to determine the minimum guarantee of outstanding claims relating to pay (see Francovich, paragraphs to 20), neither Article of the Directive nor any other provision therein contains elements which make it
         possible to establish with any precision the minimum level required in order to protect entitlement to benefits under supplementary
         pension schemes.
      
Nevertheless, having regard to the express wish of the Community legislature, it must be held that provisions of domestic
         law that may, in certain cases, lead to a guarantee of benefits limited to or 49% of the benefits to which an employee
         was entitled, that is to say, of less than half of that entitlement, cannot be considered to fall within the definition of
         the word ‘protect’ used in Article of the Directive.
      
On that point, it may be noted that in 2004, according to unchallenged figures communicated to the Commission by the United
         Kingdom: 
      
–       about members of pension schemes suffered the loss of more than 20% of expected benefits; 
–       some of them, that is to say, nearly 54% of the total, suffered losses exceeding 50% of those benefits.
It must therefore be concluded that a system such as that established by the United Kingdom legislation does not ensure the
         protection provided for by the Directive and does not constitute proper implementation of Article thereof.
      
That conclusion is not shaken by the introduction from September of a scheme such as the FAS, even though that scheme
         is applicable to winding-up procedures initiated between January and April 2005. 
      
It is apparent from unchallenged information contained in the documents before the Court that the FAS: 
–       does not cover members of the scheme who were more than three years away from retirement on May 2004; 
–       helps only about of the non-pensioner members of the schemes concerned, that is to say, less than 13% of the total
         number of members.
      
The answer to the second question must therefore be that a system of protection such as that at issue in the main proceedings
         is incompatible with Article of the Directive.
      
 Concerning the third question
By its third question the national court seeks in essence to ascertain whether, if Article of the Directive has not been
         properly transposed into domestic law, the Member State concerned incurs liability by the mere fact of that infringement of
         Community law, or whether its liability is contingent on a finding of manifest and grave disregard by that State for the limits
         set on its discretion.
      
 Observations submitted to the Court
The claimants in the main proceedings assert that the existence of a sufficiently serious breach of Community law requires
         a manifest and grave disregard by a Member State for the limits on its discretion, within the meaning of the judgment in Joined
         Cases C-46/and C-48/Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame [1996] ECR I-1029, paragraph 55), only if the Member State did enjoy broad discretion. 
      
They maintain that in this case a clear obligation of result was imposed on the Member State by Article of the Directive.
         The United Kingdom did not, therefore, enjoy broad discretion.
      
They propose application of the principle set out in Case C-5/Hedley Lomas [1996] ECR I-2553, paragraph 28, Joined Cases C-178/94, C-179/and C‑188/to C‑190/Dillenkofer and Others [1996] ECR I‑4845, paragraph 25, and Case C‑150/Stockholm Lindöpark [2001] ECR I-493, paragraph 40, that if the Member State in question was not called upon to make any legislative choices
         and had only considerably reduced, or even no, discretion, the mere infringement of Community law may be sufficient to establish
         the existence of a sufficiently serious breach.
      
They consider, therefore, that failure properly to implement Article of the Directive constitutes a breach sufficiently
         serious to give rise to liability on the part of the Member State.
      
The United Kingdom, Ireland and the Commission argue that the Member State’s liability is subject to the condition, set out
         in Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame, that the Member State should have manifestly and gravely disregarded the limits of its discretion. That condition is not
         satisfied in the circumstances of the case in the main proceedings.
      
 The Court’s answer
According to settled case-law (see, in particular, Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame, paragraph 51; Hedley Lomas, paragraph 25; Case C-424/Haim [2000] ECR I‑5123, paragraph 36; and Case C-63/Evans [2003] ECR I‑14447, paragraph 83), for a Member State to incur liability for damage caused to individuals by a breach of
         Community law it is necessary that:
      
–       the rule of law infringed should be intended to confer rights on individuals;
–       the breach should be sufficiently serious;
–       there should be a direct causal link between the breach of the obligation incumbent on the State and the damage sustained
         by the injured parties.
      
The condition requiring a sufficiently serious breach of Community law implies manifest and grave disregard by the Member
         State for the limits set on its discretion, the factors to be taken into consideration in this connection being, inter alia,
         the degree of clarity and precision of the rule infringed and the measure of discretion left by that rule to the national
         authorities (Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame, paragraphs and 56).
      
If, however, the Member State was not called upon to make any legislative choices and had only considerably reduced, or even
         no, discretion, the mere infringement of Community law may be sufficient to establish the existence of a sufficiently serious
         breach (see Hedley Lomas, paragraph 28).
      
The discretion enjoyed by the Member State thus constitutes an important criterion in determining whether there has been a
         sufficiently serious breach of Community law.
      
That discretion is broadly dependent on the degree of clarity and precision of the rule infringed.
It is apparent from consideration of the first question that, on account of the general nature of the wording of Article of the Directive, that provision allows the Member States considerable discretion for the purposes of determining the level
         of protection of entitlement to benefits.
      
Accordingly, the liability of a Member State by reason of incorrect transposition of that provision is conditional on a finding
         of manifest and serious disregard by that State for the limits set on its discretion.
      
In order to determine whether that condition is satisfied, the national court hearing a claim for reparation must take account
         of all the factors which characterise the situation put before it (Case C-224/Köbler [2003] ECR I-10239, paragraph 54).
      
Those factors include, in particular, in addition to the clarity and precision of the rule infringed and the measure of discretion
         left by that rule to the national authorities, whether the infringement or the damage caused was intentional or involuntary,
         whether any error of law was excusable or inexcusable, and the fact that the position taken by a Community institution may
         have contributed towards the adoption or maintenance of national measures or practices contrary to Community law (Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame, paragraph 56; Köbler, paragraph 55).
      
In the present case the national court will have to take into account the clarity and precision of Article of the Directive
         with regard to the level of protection required.
      
In that respect, it is to be emphasised that the parties in the main proceedings, the Member States which have submitted observations
         and the Commission have none of them been able to suggest with precision the minimum degree of protection that in their view
         is required by the Directive, if it should be considered that the latter does not impose a full guarantee.
      
Furthermore, as held in paragraph above, neither Article of the Directive nor any other provision therein contains anything
         that makes it possible to establish with any precision the minimum level required in order to protect entitlement to benefits.
      
The national court may also take into consideration Commission report COM(95) final of June (not published in
         the Official Journal of the European Communities), concerning the transposition of the Directive by the Member States, which has been cited in observations submitted to the
         Court and in which the Commission had then concluded (p. 52): ‘The abovementioned rules [adopted by the United Kingdom] appear
         to meet the requirements of Article [of the Directive]’. As the Advocate General has observed in point of her Opinion,
         that wording may, although careful, have reinforced the view of the Member State concerned with regard to the transposition
         of the Directive into domestic law.
      
The answer to be given to the third question must therefore be that, if Article of the Directive has not been properly transposed
         into domestic law, the liability of the Member State concerned is contingent on a finding of manifest and grave disregard
         by that State for the limits set on its discretion.
      
 Concerning the request for temporal limitation of the effects of this judgment
The United Kingdom and Ireland have requested that, if the Court were to adopt an interpretation of the Directive favourable
         to the claimants in the main proceedings, the Court should limit in time the effects of its judgment solely to proceedings
         brought before the date of delivery.
      
In light of the answers given to the three questions referred, there is no need to grant that request.
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      On a proper construction of Article of Council Directive 80/987/EEC of October on the approximation of the laws
            of the Member States relating to the protection of employees in the event of the insolvency of their employer, where the employer
            is insolvent and the assets of the supplementary company or inter-company pension schemes are insufficient, accrued pension
            rights need not necessarily be funded by the Member States themselves or be funded in full.
2.      A system of protection such as that at issue in the main proceedings is incompatible with Article of Directive 80/987.
3.      If Article of Directive 80/has not been properly transposed into domestic law, the liability of the Member State concerned
            is contingent on a finding of manifest and grave disregard by that State for the limits set on its discretion.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 