
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
December (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Environment – Directive 2000/60/EC – Articles and – Status of inland surface water – Establishment and making operational of monitoring programmes – Failure – Submission of summary reports on those monitoring programmes – Failure)
In Case C‑351/09,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on August 2009,
European Commission, represented by S. Pardo Quintillán and K. Xuereb, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Republic of Malta, represented by S. Camilleri, D. Mangion, P. Grech and Y. Rizzo, acting as Agents,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of A. Tizzano, President of the Chamber, J.‑J. Kasel, M. Ilešič, M. Safjan (Rapporteur) and M. Berger, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on November 2010,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities requests the Court to declare that, in having failed, firstly,
         to establish monitoring programmes on the status of inland surface water and make them operational in accordance with Article
         8(1) and (2) of Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of October establishing a framework
         for Community action in the field of water policy (OJ L 327, p. 1) and, secondly, to submit summary reports on the monitoring
         programmes on the status of inland surface water in accordance with Article 15(2) of that directive, the Republic of Malta
         has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles and of that directive.
      
 Legal context 
In accordance with Article thereof, the purpose of Directive 2000/is to establish a framework for the protection of inland
         surface waters, transitional waters, coastal waters and groundwater.
      
Article of that directive includes the following definition:
      
‘(10) “Body of surface water” means a discrete and significant element of surface water such as a lake, a reservoir, a stream, river
         or canal, part of a stream, river or canal, a transitional water or a stretch of coastal water’.
      
Article of that directive, entitled ‘Monitoring of surface water status, groundwater status and protected areas’, provides,
         at paragraphs and 2:
      
‘1.      Member States shall ensure the establishment of programmes for the monitoring of water status in order to establish a coherent
         and comprehensive overview of water status within each river basin district:
      
–        for surface waters such programmes shall cover:
(i)      the volume and level or rate of flow to the extent relevant for ecological and chemical status and ecological potential, and
(ii)      the ecological and chemical status and ecological potential;
–        for groundwaters such programmes shall cover monitoring of the chemical and quantitative status,
–        for protected areas the above programmes shall be supplemented by those specifications contained in Community legislation
         under which the individual protected areas have been established.
      
2.      These programmes shall be operational at the latest six years after the date of entry into force of this Directive unless
         otherwise specified in the legislation concerned. Such monitoring shall be in accordance with the requirements of Annex V.’
      
Article of that directive, entitled ‘Reporting’, provides, at paragraph 2:
      
‘Member States shall submit summary reports of:
–        the analyses required under Article 5, and
–        the monitoring programmes designed under Article 8,
undertaken for the purposes of the first river basin management plan within three months of their completion.’
Directive 2000/entered into force on December 2000. Consequently, Member States were obliged to establish and make operational
         the monitoring programmes required under Article 8(1) of that directive by December at the latest and to submit summary
         reports on those monitoring programmes to the Commission, in accordance with Article 15(2) of that directive, by March
         at the latest.
      
 The background to the dispute and the pre-litigation procedure
The Republic of Malta, pursuant to Article 15(2) of Directive 2000/60, submitted, in October 2007, a summary report on the
         monitoring programmes required under Article 8(1) of that directive. 
      
Taking the view that the report failed to deal with surface water, the Commission commenced proceedings for failure to fulfil
         obligations under the first paragraph of Article EC. In accordance with that provision and after giving the Republic of
         Malta formal notice on June to submit its observations, the Commission sent a reasoned opinion on February requesting that Member State to take the necessary measures to comply with its obligations under Articles and of Directive
         2000/within two months of receipt of the opinion.
      
On July 2009, the Republic of Malta replied to the reasoned opinion that, in respect of inland surface water, the summary
         report required pursuant to Article of Directive 2000/would be submitted to the Commission in March 2010, at the same
         time as the first water catchment management plan. 
      
Being of the opinion, in those circumstances, that the Republic of Malta had failed in its obligations under Articles and
         of Directive 2000/60, the Commission brought this action. 
      
 The action 
 Arguments of the parties 
In its application, the Commission emphasises that the obligation to submit summary reports on monitoring programmes on the
         status of inland water, in accordance with Article 15(2) of Directive 2000/60, is distinct from the submission of the first
         water catchment management plan.
      
Therefore, in failing to submit summary reports on the monitoring programmes on the status of inland surface water by the
         date specified by Directive 2000/60, the Republic of Malta had failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 15(2) of that
         directive.
      
The Commission also considers that, in the absence of information concerning those reports, the Republic of Malta has failed
         to fulfil the obligation to establish and make operational the monitoring programmes on the status of inland surface water
         required under Article 8(1) and (2) of Directive 2000/60. 
      
In its defence, the Republic of Malta indicated that it expected to submit monitoring programmes on the status of surface
         water by the end of October 2009, rather than March 2010, as it had previously indicated. It added that it would submit summary
         reports on the monitoring programmes on the status of inland surface water by the end of October 2009.
      
In its reply, the Commission examines the document entitled ‘Summary Report for Surface Waters – Inland and Transitional Waters’,
         dated October 2009, which was submitted to it by the Republic of Malta. The Commission submits that that report does not contain
         the monitoring programmes on the status of surface water mentioned in the defence.
      
Furthermore, the Commission disputes the reasoning expounded in that report, according to which the fulfilment of its obligations
         under Council Directive 92/43/EEC of May on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora (OJ L 206, p. 7) would dispense the Republic of Malta from having to fulfil its obligations under Directive 2000/60.
      
In its rejoinder, the Republic of Malta disputes the substance of the Commission’s action, and submits two pleas in law supporting
         its position. 
      
The Republic of Malta submits, firstly, that, because of its very small size and Mediterranean climate, its bodies of inland
         surface water, which are extremely small, do not lend themselves to the application of Directive 2000/as regards both the
         monitoring system classifications and the intercalibration process.
      
It states that, in relation to the characteristics of those water bodies, it bases its submissions on the scientific report
         written by Professor Schembri, dated April and entitled ‘The applicability of the monitoring and management criteria
         of the Water Framework Directive (2000/60/EC) to the inland surface water bodies identified for Malta. Report commissioned
         by the Malta Environment and Planning Authority’. 
      
Secondly, in the alternative, the Republic of Malta submits that the Member States must have the discretion to decide whether
         the objectives of Directive 2000/can be achieved without the identification of every minor element of internal surface
         water as a ‘surface water body’, within the meaning of that directive. In this regard, Maltese internal surface waters, although
         distinct and significant, are minor given their extremely small size. In any event, given that the water bodies in question
         are extremely small, the application of Directive 92/and of Council Directive 79/409/EEC of April on the conservation
         of wild birds (OJ L 103, p. 1), as well as national legislation would allow the Republic of Malta to fulfil its obligations
         under Directive 2000/60.
      
 Findings of the Court 
As regards the pleas in defence in respect of the substance of the case relied upon by the Republic of Malta, it must be pointed
         out that, under Article 42(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, no new plea in law may be introduced in the
         course of proceedings unless it is based on matters of law or of fact which come to light in the course of the procedure.
      
In this case, those pleas in defence in respect of the substance of the case were advanced for the first time in the rejoinder.
      
Further, those pleas in defence are not based on matters of law or of fact which have come to light in the course of the procedure.
         Essentially, those pleas relate to the characteristics of Maltese surface water, which are described in Professor Schembri’s
         report. That report, to which the Republic of Malta refers on numerous occasions in its rejoinder and which, according to
         the Republic of Malta, is the scientific basis of its reasoning, is dated April 2008, which is over a year before this application
         was commenced.
      
Therefore, the claims for dismissal of the substance of the action and the underlying pleas advanced for the first time in
         the rejoinder must be considered as late and, therefore, inadmissible (see Case C‑471/Commission v Belgium [2002] ECR I-9681, paragraphs to 43, and Case C‑526/Commission v Luxembourg [2010] ECR I-0000, paragraphs to 50).
      
It must therefore be examined whether the failure to fulfil obligations has been established on the basis of the grounds put
         forward by the Commission, without taking account of the arguments raised by the Republic of Malta in its rejoinder.
      
In this regard, it is undisputed that, at the date relevant for ascertaining whether there was a failure to fulfil obligations,
         which is determined by the expiry of the deadline laid down in the reasoned opinion (see, in particular, Case C‑173/Commission v Greece [2002] ECR I-6129, paragraph 7, and Case C‑487/Commission v Spain [2010] ECR I-0000, paragraph 34), the Republic of Malta, firstly, had not established monitoring programmes for the status
         of inland surface water and made them operational in accordance with Article 8(1) and (2) of Directive 2000/and, secondly,
         had failed to submit summary reports on those monitoring programmes in accordance with Article 15(2) of that directive.
      
The failure to fulfil its obligations has, in those circumstances, been established.
      
In light of the considerations set out above, it is held that, in failing, firstly, to establish monitoring programmes on
         the status of inland surface water and make them operational in accordance with Article 8(1) and (2) of Directive 2000/and, secondly, to submit summary reports on the monitoring programmes on the status of inland surface water in accordance
         with Article 15(2) of that directive, the Republic of Malta has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles and of
         that directive.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs against the Republic of Malta
         and the latter has been unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber):
1.      Declares that, in failing, firstly, to establish monitoring programmes on the status of inland surface water and make them
            operational in accordance with Article 8(1) and (2) of Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
            of October establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy, and, secondly, to submit summary
            reports on the monitoring programmes on the status of inland surface water in accordance with Article 15(2) of that directive,
            the Republic of Malta has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles and of that directive.
2.      Orders the Republic of Malta to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 