
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-118/Industrias de Deshidratación Agrícola SA
v
Administración del Estado
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Tribunal Supremo)
(Regulations (EC) No 603/and No 785/– Dried fodder – Aid scheme – Conditions to be met by processing undertakings – Additional requirements imposed under national rules)
Summary of the Judgment
Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Dried fodder – Aid scheme – National rules imposing specific requirements
            with respect to green or fresh fodder for processing – Compatibility with the common organisation of the markets
(Council Regulation No 603/95; Commission Regulation No 785/95)
Regulation No 603/on the common organisation of the market in dried fodder, which establishes a system of flat-rate aid
         for certain products made from the processing of dried fodder, and Regulation No 785/95, laying down detailed rules for the
         application of that regulation, must be interpreted as meaning that they do not preclude national provisions which lay down
         specific requirements with respect to green or fresh fodder, linked to the method of delivery, the moisture content, the time
         within which processing must take place and the growth of such fodder within a specified area.
      
(see para. 26, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)March 2004(1)
(Regulations (EC) No 603/and No 785/–  Dried fodder  –  Aid scheme  –  Conditions to be met by processing undertakings  –  Additional requirements imposed under national rules)
 In Case C-118/02,
             REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Tribunal Supremo (Spain) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending
            before that court between
            
Industrias de Deshidratación Agrícola SA
and
Administración del Estado,
            
 on the interpretation of, in particular, Council Regulation (EC) No 603/of February on the common organisation
            of the market in dried fodder (OJ L 63, p. 1) and Commission Regulation (EC) No 785/of April laying down detailed
            rules for the application of Regulation No 603/(OJ L 79, p. 5),
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
 composed of: P. Jann (Rapporteur), acting for the President of the Fifth Chamber, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas, A. La Pergola
            and S. von Bahr, Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: C. Stix-Hackl, Registrar: R. Grass,
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
–
 Industrias de Deshidratación Agrícola SA, by J.-A. Leciñena Martinez, abogado,
               
–
 the Kingdom of'Spain, by N. Díaz Abad, acting as Agent,
               
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by S. Pardo Quintillán, acting as Agent,
               
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting of September 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By order of February 2002, received at the Court on March 2002, the Tribunal Supremo (Spanish Supreme Court) referred
         for a preliminary ruling several questions on the interpretation of, in particular, Council Regulation (EC) No 603/of February on the common organisation of the market in dried fodder (OJ L 63, p. 1) (hereinafter the ‘parent regulation’)
         and Commission Regulation (EC) No 785/of April laying down detailed rules for the application of Regulation No 603/(OJ L 79, p. 5) (hereinafter the ‘implementing regulation’). These questions were raised in proceedings brought by a
         processing undertaking relating to a Royal Decree applying to the dried fodder sector. 
         
Legal background
Community legislation
            
 The common organisation of the market in dried fodder was established by the parent regulation. Article of that regulation
         establishes a system of flat-rate aid for certain products made from the processing of dried fodder, namely:
         
–
Flours and pellets of lucerne artificially heat-dried
–
Flours and pellets of lucerne otherwise dried and ground 
–
Lucerne, sainfoin, clover, lupins, vetches and similar fodder products, artificially heat-dried, except hay and fodder kale
               and products containing hay 
            
–
LucerneLuceL, sainfoin, clovers, lupins, vetches, honey lotus, chickling pea and birdsfoot, otherwise dried and ground
–
ProteiPProtein concentrates obtained from lucerne juice and from grass juice 
–
Dehydrated products obtained exclusively from solid residue and juice resulting from the preparation of the concentrates referred
               to in the first indent. 
            
            
 The amount for which aid may be granted is subject to restrictions, in order to limit the production of dried fodder in the
         Community. Two maximum guaranteed quantities are fixed for that purpose, one for artificially heat-dried fodder and the other
         for sun-dried fodder, and those quantities are distributed among the Member States. Should those quantities be exceeded, the
         aid for dried fodder is reduced in the Member States. 
         
            
 Article of the parent regulation lays down a number of conditions that require to be met if there is to be an entitlement
         to aid under Article of that regulation. Article sets out, in particular, requirements as to the maximum moisture content
         and the minimum crude protein content, and provides that the dried fodder must be of sound, genuine and merchantable quality.
         
            
 By the implementing regulation, the Commission of the European Communities laid down rules for the application of the parent
         regulation.
         
National legislation
            
 In Spain, Royal Decree No 283/of February (Boletín Oficial del Estado  No 46/of February 1999, p. 7463) (hereinafter the ‘Royal Decree’) sets out the national rules relating to the aid
         scheme for dried fodder. Article of the Royal Decree relates to the requirements to be met by processing undertakings. Article
         5(3) provides:
         ‘Fodder for dehydration is fodder which arrives at the processing plant chopped, not baled, with a moisture content of at
         least per cent, which is held for a maximum period between entering the processing plant and beginning the processing treatment
         of less than hours, and which comes from plots of land situated no more than kilometres from the corresponding processing
         plant, save, with respect to the lastmentioned condition, where the use of appropriate specialised transport justifies a greater
         distance. Furthermore, only consignments of fodder having an average moisture content of at least per cent on entering
         the processing plant, measured at least every days, will qualify for aid.’
         
The main proceedings and the questions referred
            
 By application lodged with the Tribunal Supremo on March 1999, the company Industrias de Deshidratación Agrícola SA brought
         proceedings for the annulment of Article 5(3) of the Royal Decree.
         
            
 It claims that the adoption of this provision exceeds the competence of the Member States in the field of the common organisation
         of the market in question. 
         
            
 As it had doubts as to the extent of that competence, the Tribunal Supremo, by order of February 2002, decided to stay the
         proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
         
‘(1) 
Is a national provision which makes the grant of aid for the drying of green or fresh fodder subject to the condition that
               the fodder for drying is delivered to processing undertakings chopped, and not baled, compatible with the second paragraph
               of Article EC, Article EC, the second subparagraph of Article 34(2) EC, Regulation [No 603/95] and Regulation [No 785/95]?
            
(2)
Is a national provision which makes the grant of aid for the drying of green or fresh fodder subject to the condition that
               the fodder must reach the processing plant with a moisture content of over 30% and an average moisture content, on entry to
               the processing undertaking, of at least 35%, measured at least every ten days, compatible with the second paragraph of Article
               EC, Article EC, the second subparagraph of Article 34(2) EC, Regulation [No 603/95] and Regulation [No 785/95]?
            
(3)
Is a national provision which makes the grant of aid for the drying of green or fresh fodder subject to the condition that
               the fodder must be kept at the processing plant for a maximum of hours before it is processed compatible with the second
               paragraph of Article EC, Article EC, the second subparagraph of Article 34(2) EC, Regulation [No 603/95] and Regulation
               [No 785/95]?
            
(4)
Is a national provision which makes the grant of aid for the drying of green or fresh fodder subject to the condition that
               the fodder must come from plots of land situated at a maximum distance of kilometres from the corresponding processing
               plant, unless, in the latter case, a greater distance may be justified by the use of appropriate specialised transport, compatible
               with the second paragraph of Article EC, Article EC, the second subparagraph of Article 34(2) EC, Regulation [No 603/95]
               and Regulation [No 785/95]?’ 
            
The questions referred
            
 By these questions, which it is appropriate to consider together, the national court is essentially asking whether the parent
         regulation and the implementing regulation should be interpreted as meaning that they preclude national provisions which lay
         down specific requirements with respect to green or fresh fodder for processing, linked to the manner of delivery, the moisture
         content, the time for processing and their growth within a specified area. 
         
Observations submitted to the Court
            
 According to the applicant in the main proceedings, the answer to the questions should be that the national legislation in
         question is not compatible with Community law. It submits that Article 5(3) of the Royal Decree exceeds the competence of
         the Spanish State, which is limited to monitoring the use of aid granted for the drying of fodder and to administering the
         system of payments in the context of the common organisation of the market in question. 
         
            
 The parent regulation specifies the various conditions to be met by the processing undertakings and crops processed by them
         in order to benefit from aid. These do not, however, include any provisions regulating the method of harvesting of fodder
         for drying or requiring that one method of harvesting be used rather than one or more other methods, nor do they specify a
         maximum period during which raw materials may be kept at the processing plant before being dried, nor, furthermore, do they
         include any provisions limiting the maximum distance between the producers of the raw materials and the processing plant.
         As the Community legislation constitutes an exhaustive scheme, it is not within the competence of the Member States to impose
         additional conditions of this nature. 
         
            
 The Spanish Government and the Commission take the opposite view.
         
            
 They argue that where a market is subject to common organisation, the Member States have in principle only a residual legislative
         competence, but that they remain free to regulate matters that are not governed by Community law. 
         
            
 In the present case, neither the parent regulation nor the implementing regulation currently define the notion of green or
         of fresh fodder, and, accordingly, the raw materials. It is only the finished product, namely dried fodder, which qualifies
         for aid under Article of the parent regulation, which is exhaustively described in the implementing regulation.
         
            
 In such circumstances, Member States have a residual competence in order to give content to the notion of fresh fodder, subject
         to the condition that any rules introduced for that purpose do not conflict with Community law and do not impede the proper
         working of the common organisation of the market. 
         
            
 As regards the last point, the Commission notes that practices resulting in loss of moisture in green and fresh fodder for
         drying have arisen in Spain, involving not only a reduction in the work required for artificial drying, which is the justification
         for the high level of aid for that type of product, but also an increase in the production of dried fodder, leading to a risk
         of the maximum guaranteed quantities being exceeded, and, ultimately, the penalisation of producers in other Member States,
         who will suffer from the overall reduction in the maximum quantities. The Spanish Government can, therefore, take steps to
         prevent this by introducing appropriate legislative measures.
         
            
 The Spanish Government submits that the legislation in question was drawn up with the essential aim in mind of combating abuse
         and fraud, and of guaranteeing the quality of the products, as Article of the parent regulation requires. 
         
Answer of the Court
            
 It should be pointed out that the Court has held that where there is common organisation of the market in a given sector,
         the Member States can in principle no longer take action through national provisions adopted unilaterally (Case 154/Dechmann [1978] ECR 1573, paragraph 16). Their legislative competence can only be residual and is limited to situations which are
         not governed by the Community rules and to cases where those rules expressly give them power to act (Case 48/Commission  v Germany [1986] ECR 2549, paragraph 12).
         
            
 It should also be noted that where there is a regulation on the common organisation of the market in a given sector, Member
         States are under an obligation to refrain from taking any measures which might undermine or create exceptions to it. Rules
         which interfere with the proper functioning of a common organisation of the market are also incompatible with such common
         organisation, even if the matter in question has not been exhaustively regulated by it (Case C-507/Denkavit [2002] ECR I-169, paragraph 32, and Case C-332/Belgium  v Commission [2002] ECR I-3609, paragraph 29).
         
            
 In the present case, as Article of the parent regulation makes clear, the common organisation of the market in the dried
         fodder sector covers a number of products made from the processing of green or fresh fodder. As the Advocate General noted
         at points and of her Opinion, fresh fodder does not itself form part of this common organisation of the market. 
         
            
 Accordingly, neither the parent regulation nor the implementing regulation lay down conditions which fresh fodder for drying
         requires to meet, of the kind specified in Article 5(3) of the Royal Decree. Likewise, Article of the parent regulation,
         which lays down the minimum quality standards to be complied with, expressly refers to dried fodder and not to fresh fodder.
         
            
 The Member States thus remain free in principle to lay down the specific conditions which apply to the latter category of
         products. Any inequality in treatment arising as a result would, as the Advocate General notes at point of her Opinion,
         not go beyond what necessarily results from this situation. The second paragraph of Article EC, Article EC and the
         second subparagraph of Article 34(2) EC are therefore not affected. 
         
            
 As regards the question of whether the conditions specified in the national legislation are capable of impeding the proper
         working of the common organisation of the market in question, the Spanish Government and the Commission have emphasised, without
         being challenged, that the essential aim of the legislation was to combat abuse and fraud, and to guarantee the quality of
         the raw materials for the products entitled to aid. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, and for the reasons set out by the Advocate General at points to of her Opinion, the conditions
         laid down in the national legislation in question do not impede the proper working of the common organisation of the market
         in question. 
         
            
 The answer to the questions must therefore be that the parent regulation and the implementing regulation must be interpreted
         as meaning that they do not preclude national provisions which lay down specific requirements with respect to green or fresh
         fodder for processing, linked to the method of delivery, the moisture content, the time within which processing must take
         place and the growth of such fodder within a specified area. 
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the Spanish Government and by the Commission, which have submitted observations to the Court, are not
         recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings pending before
         the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court.
         
On those grounds,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
 in answer to the questions referred to it by the Tribunal Supremo by order of February 2002, hereby rules:
         Council Regulation (EC) No 603/of February on the common organisation of the market in dried fodder and Commission
               Regulation (EC) No 785/of April laying down detailed rules for the application of Regulation No 603/must be interpreted as meaning that they do not preclude national provisions which lay down specific requirements with respect
               to green or fresh fodder for processing, linked to the method of delivery, the moisture content, the time within which processing
               must take place and the growth of such fodder within a specified area.
Jann
Timmermans
Rosas
La Pergola
von Bahr
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on March 2004.
         
R. Grass
V. Skouris
Registrar
President
 –
            
Language of the case: Spanish.
Top  
 