
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber) 
October Case C-16/P
Marguerite Chetcuti
v
Commission of the European Communities 
(Appeal – Civil service – Competition internal to the institution – Rejection of candidature – Conditions of admission)
Appeal: against the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities in Case T-357/Chetcuti v Commission [2006] ECR-SC I-A-2-and II-A-2-1323, seeking to have that judgment set aside.
      
Held: Appeal dismissed.
      
Summary
1.        Officials – Conditions of employment of other servants – Temporary staff – Member of the auxiliary staff – Difference
(Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the European Communities, Arts and 3)
2.        Officials – Recruitment – Competition internal to the institution – Extension of entitlement to participate to members of
            the auxiliary staff – Obligation – None
1.        It is clear from the provisions of the Staff Regulations and the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the European
         Communities that there are differences between the administrative status, recruitment requirements and conditions of engagement
         of auxiliary staff and those of officials and temporary staff. It follows from those differences that auxiliary staff are
         not recruited to fulfil a permanent role within the Community institutions. On the contrary, the outstanding feature of contracts
         for auxiliary staff is their precariousness since they may be used only to provide a temporary replacement or to ensure the
         performance of administrative duties which are of a transitory nature or which fulfil an urgent need or which are not clearly
         defined. Auxiliary staff therefore constitute a separate category which meets separate requirements of the institutions which
         employ such staff. 
      
2.        In accordance with the scheme and aims of the Staff Regulations and the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the
         European Communities, although the appointing authority has the right to allow the participation of auxiliary staff in a competition
         internal to the institution, that does not mean that it is required to open each internal competition to all persons within
         the service. Such a requirement would undermine the wide discretion which is accorded to the Community institutions in organising
         their services and, in particular, in determining the procedure and conditions of competitions in the interests of the service.
         
      
Top  
 