
Case C-28/G.J. Dokter and Others
v
Minister van Landbouw, Natuur en Voedselkwaliteit
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
College van Beroep voor het bedrijfsleven)
(Agriculture – Control of foot-and-mouth disease – Directive 85/511/EEC – Directive 90/425/EEC – Examinations to detect foot-and-mouth disease carried out by a laboratory not listed in the annex to Directive 85/511/EEC
         – National authorities’ discretion – Principle of proportionality – Principle of respect for the rights of the defence)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Agriculture – Approximation of laws – Control of foot-and-mouth disease – Directive 85/(Council Directive 85/511, as amended by Directive 90/423, Arts 11(1), first indent, 13(1), second indent, and 17)
2.        Agriculture – Approximation of laws – Control of foot-and-mouth disease – Directive 85/(Council Directives 85/511, as amended by Directive 90/423, and 90/425, Art. 10(1))
3.        Agriculture – Approximation of laws – Control of foot-and-mouth disease – Directive 85/(Council Directive 85/511, as amended by Directive 90/423)
4.        Agriculture – Approximation of laws – Control of foot-and-mouth disease – Directive 85/(Council Directives 85/511, as amended by Directive 90/423, Art. 5, and 90/425, Art. 10(1); Commission Decision 2001/246,
            Art. 2)
1.        Directive 85/introducing Community measures for the control of foot-and-mouth disease, as amended by Directive 90/423,
         must be interpreted as meaning that changes to the particulars of a laboratory included in Annex B thereto, which were not
         entered in accordance with the procedure provided for in Article of the directive, lead to that laboratory’s losing its
         status as a laboratory included in that annex only if those changes are likely to have repercussions on the safety of the
         laboratory as regards the risk of dissemination of the foot-and-mouth virus during the examinations performed by the laboratory
         and thus increase the risk of contamination of susceptible local animals.
      
This requirement of registration of changes concerning a laboratory listed in Annex B to Directive 85/must be considered
         in the light of the core objective of that directive, which is the effective control of foot-and-mouth disease which implies,
         in particular, that measures must be taken upon the first sign of the disease. In this regard, the effectiveness of such control
         requires that the public authorities are able to have a diagnosis established to detect the disease in a timely manner. If
         a failure to register changes concerning a laboratory listed in Annex B meant every time that that laboratory would lose its
         status as a listed laboratory, the national authorities would be required, under the first indent of Article 11(1) and the
         second indent of Article 13(1) of Directive 85/511, not to have any more examinations carried out by that laboratory until
         the change in question had been entered in the list. A requirement such as that would lead to an emphasis on formalities which
         would be likely to prevent those authorities from having a laboratory nearby with which to detect the virus in a timely manner,
         which would run counter to the objective of effective control of foot-and-mouth disease. Accordingly, the requirement that
         those changes be entered must not go beyond what is necessary to safeguard the interests it seeks to guarantee, namely the
         prevention of the risk of dissemination of the virus during laboratory examinations.
      
(see paras 34-36, 59, operative part 1)
2.        Directive 85/introducing Community measures for the control of foot-and-mouth disease, as amended by Directive 90/423,
         does not preclude a Member State from taking the measures to control foot-and-mouth disease provided for in Article 10(1)
         of Directive 90/concerning veterinary and zootechnical checks applicable in intra-Community trade in certain live animals
         and products with a view to the completion of the internal market, on the basis of results of an examination carried out by
         a laboratory which is not included in Annex B to Directive 85/511.
      
Given the objective of effective control of foot-and-mouth disease, the means of diagnosis referred to in point (c) of the
         second paragraph of Article of Directive 85/must be interpreted broadly. Point (c) of the second paragraph of Article
         uses the term ‘laboratory’ without providing further specification and its wording therefore does not indicate that measures
         may be taken only on the basis of results from a laboratory included in the list in Annex B to Directive 85/511.
      
Thus, the measures to control foot-and-mouth disease provided for in Article of that directive may be taken on the basis
         of results from a laboratory which is not listed in Annex B thereto. The additional nature of the measures which the competent
         authorities have power to adopt under Article 10(1) of Directive 90/to control the disease implies that those authorities
         may take measures analogous to those provided for in Article of Directive 85/on the basis of the same laboratory results
         as those on the basis of which the latter measures were taken and, therefore, also on the basis of results from a laboratory
         which is not included in Annex B to Directive 85/511.
      
(see paras 51-52, 54, 59, operative part 1)
3.        In the context of Directive 85/introducing Community measures for the control of foot-and-mouth disease, as amended by
         Directive 90/423, the competent national authority is required to follow up the results of examinations provided by a laboratory
         which has the status of a laboratory listed in Annex B to Directive 85/and to adopt, in principle, the measures provided
         for in that directive or any other measure required, given the need to control foot-and-mouth disease promptly and effectively.
         It is only if the competent authority has evidence casting serious doubt on the reliability of the results from such a laboratory
         that it may refrain from taking those measures immediately. In such a case, it may inter alia obtain another diagnosis to
         confirm or contradict those results.
      
The competent authority is required to take into consideration even results provided by a laboratory which does not have the
         status of a laboratory listed in Annex B to Directive 85/in order to adopt, where necessary, the appropriate measures
         provided for by Community legislation. However, as that laboratory no longer necessarily offers the same guarantees of reliability
         as a laboratory having the status of a laboratory listed in Annex B, the competent authority must make sure, before taking
         the appropriate measures, that those results are reliable. 
      
In any event, the competent authority may adopt measures to control foot-and-mouth disease only in compliance with the general
         principles of Community law, including in particular the principle of proportionality and fundamental rights.
      
 (see paras 67, 79, operative part 2)
4.        Given the important consequences for breeders flowing from decisions taken by the competent authority on the basis of Article
         of Directive 85/introducing Community measures for the control of foot-and-mouth disease, as amended by Directive 90/423,
         of Article of Decision 2001/laying down the conditions for the control and eradication of foot-and-mouth disease in
         the Netherlands in application of Article of Directive 85/511, and of Article 10(1) of Directive 90/concerning veterinary
         and zootechnical checks applicable in intra-Community trade in certain live animals and products with a view to the completion
         of the internal market, the principle of  respect for the rights of the defence requires, in connection with the control of
         foot-and-mouth disease, that the addressees of such decisions be, in principle, placed in a position in which they may effectively
         make known their views on the evidence against them on which the contested measure is based. 
      
However, since fundamental rights, such as respect for the rights of the defence, may be restricted, provided that the restrictions
         in fact correspond to objectives of general interest pursued by the measure in question and that they do not constitute, with
         regard to the objectives pursued, a disproportionate and intolerable interference which infringes upon the very substance
         of the rights guaranteed, the protection of public health justifies, in principle, that the competent authority adopts appropriate
         measures against foot-and-mouth disease, even without first obtaining the views of interested parties on the elements on which
         the measures are based. Such a restriction would, moreover, be a disproportionate and intolerable intervention infringing
         upon the very substance of the rights of the defence only if the interested parties were given no opportunity to contest those
         measures in subsequent proceedings and to make their views known effectively at that stage. Moreover, given the imperative
         need to act promptly against foot-and-mouth disease, the principle of respect for the rights of the defence does not necessarily
         require that the implementation of those measures be postponed until those proceedings have come to an end.
      
(see paras 74-77)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
June (*)
      
(Agriculture – Control of foot-and-mouth disease – Directive 85/511/EEC – Directive 90/425/EEC– Examinations to detect foot-and mouth-disease carried out by a laboratory not listed in the annex to Directive 85/511/EEC
         – National authorities’ discretion – Principle of proportionality – Principle of respect for the rights of the defence)
      
In Case C-28/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the College van Beroep voor het bedrijfsleven (Netherlands),
         made by decision of January 2005, received at the Court on January 2005, in the proceedings
      
G.J. Dokter,
Maatschap Van den Top,
W. Boekhout
v
Minister van Landbouw, Natuur en Voedselkwaliteit,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of A. Rosas, President of the Chamber, J. Malenovský (Rapporteur), A. Borg Barthet, U. Lõhmus and A. Ó Caoimh, Judges,
Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on December 2005,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        G.J. Dokter, by N.W.A. Tollenaar, advocaat,
–        the Netherlands Government, by H. Sevenster and C. ten Dam, acting as Agents,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by T. van Rijn, F. Erlbacher and M. van Heezik, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Council Directive 85/511/EEC of November introducing
         Community measures for the control of foot-and-mouth disease (OJ L 315, p. 11), as amended by Council Directive 90/423/EEC
         of June (OJ L 224, p. 13) (‘Directive 85/511’).
      
The reference was made in the context of proceedings between G.J. Dokter, Maatschap Van den Top and W. Boekhout (‘the claimants
         in the main proceedings’) and the Minister van Landbouw, Natuur en Voedselkwaliteit (Minister for Agriculture, Nature and
         Food Quality) concerning the slaughter of animals belonging to the claimants in the main proceedings.
      
 Legal framework 
Points (c) to (e) of the second paragraph of Article of Directive 85/contain the following definitions:
      
‘(c)      “infected animal” means any animal of a susceptible species:
–        in which clinical symptoms or post-mortem lesions which may arise from foot-and-mouth disease have been ascertained,
         or
–        in which the presence of foot-and-mouth disease has been officially ascertained following a laboratory examination;
(d)      “animal suspected of being infected” means any animal of a susceptible species showing clinical symptoms or post-mortem lesions
         which are such that the presence of foot-and-mouth disease may reasonably be suspected;
      
(e)      “animal suspected of being contaminated” means any animal of a [susceptible] species which may – according to the epizootiological
         information collected – have been directly or indirectly exposed to the foot-and-mouth virus.’
      
According to Article 4(1) of that directive:
      
‘Member States shall ensure that, where a holding contains one or more animals suspected of being infected or of being contaminated
         with foot-and-mouth disease, official means of investigation to confirm or rule out the presence of the disease are set in
         motion immediately and, in particular, that the official veterinarian takes the necessary samples, or has them taken, for
         laboratory examination. 
      
…’ 
According to Article of the directive, ‘As soon as it has been confirmed that one or more of the animals defined in Article
         2(c) are on a holding’, the competent authority is to introduce the measures provided for in Article 5, including that all
         animals of susceptible species on the holding are to be slaughtered on the spot under official supervision in such a way as
         to avoid all risk of spreading the foot-and-mouth virus.
      
Article 11(1) of the directive provides:
      
‘Member States shall ensure that: 
–        laboratory testing to detect the presence of foot-and-mouth disease is carried out by a national laboratory indicated in Annex
         B, which may be amended or supplemented in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 17. This laboratory testing
         should, if necessary and especially on the first appearance of the disease, show the type, subtype or, where appropriate,
         the variant of the relevant virus which may be confirmed, if necessary, by a reference laboratory designated by the Community;
         
      
…’
According to Article 13(1) and (2) of the directive:
      
‘1.      Member States shall ensure that: 
–        …
–        the manipulation of foot-and-mouth virus for research, diagnosis and/or manufacture of vaccines shall be carried out only
         in approved establishments and laboratories listed in Annexes A and B; 
      
–        …
–        the establishments and laboratories referred to in the second indent shall be approved only if they fulfil the minimum standards
         recommended by the [Food and Agriculture Organisation] FAO for laboratories working on foot-and-mouth viruses in vitro and in vivo. 
      
2.      Veterinary experts from the Commission, in collaboration with the competent authorities of the Member States, shall carry
         out spot-checks to ascertain whether the security systems applied in the establishments and laboratories referred to in Annexes
         A and B comply with the FAO’s minimum standards.
      
The Commission shall carry out these checks at least once a year …
…’
Annex B to Directive 85/511, entitled ‘National laboratories dealing with foot-and-mouth disease’, under the heading ‘Netherlands’,
         refers to the ‘Centraal Diergeneeskundig Instituut, Lelystad’.
      
The list of laboratories in that annex is regularly updated, pursuant to the second subparagraph of Article 13(2) of Directive
         85/511, according to a comitology procedure provided for in Article of that directive. In that procedure, the Commission
         submits a draft of the measures to be adopted to the Standing Veterinary Committee composed of representatives of the Member
         States and, where necessary, to the Council of the European Union.
      
According to the third recital in the preamble to Directive 90/423:
      
‘… [in] a Commission study ... it has been concluded that a risk exists in the manipulation of virus in laboratories due to
         the possibility of escape to local susceptible animals and in the use of vaccine if inactivation procedures do not ensure
         its safety[.]’
      
Article 10(1) of Council Directive 90/425/EEC of June concerning veterinary and zootechnical checks applicable in
         intra-Community trade in certain live animals and products with a view to the completion of the internal market (OJ L
         224, p. 29) states:
      
‘Each Member State shall immediately notify the other Member States and the Commission of any outbreak in its territory, in
         addition to an outbreak of diseases referred to in [Council Directive 82/894/EEC of December on the notification of
         animal diseases within the Community (OJ L 378, p. 58)] of any zoonoses, diseases or other cause likely to constitute
         a serious hazard to animals or to human health.
      
The Member State of dispatch shall immediately implement the control or precautionary measures provided for in Community rules,
         in particular the determination of the buffer zones provided for in those rules, or adopt any other measure which it deems
         appropriate.
      
…’
According to the fourth recital in the preamble to Commission Decision 2001/246/EC of March laying down the conditions
         for the control and eradication of foot-and-mouth disease in the Netherlands in application of Article of Directive 85/511/EEC
         (OJ L 88, p. 21):
      
‘In addition to the measures within the framework of Directive 85/511/EEC, the Netherlands apply as a precautionary measure
         the pre-emptive killing of susceptible animals in holdings situated in close proximity to infected or suspect holdings, taking
         into account the epidemiological situation and the high density of susceptible animals in certain parts of the territory.’
      
According to Article of that decision:
      
‘For the purpose of this Decision the following definitions shall apply:
1.      “Pre-emptive killing” shall mean the killing of susceptible animals on holdings within a certain radius around holdings placed
         under the restrictions laid down in Article or of Directive 85/511/EEC. 
      
…
2.      “Suppressive vaccination” shall mean emergency vaccination of animals of susceptible species in identified holdings situated
         in a defined area, the vaccination zone, which is carried out exclusively in conjunction with pre-emptive killing as defined
         in paragraph 1.
      
…’
According to Article 2(1) of that decision:
      
‘Without prejudice to Directive 85/511/EEC, and in particular Articles 4, and thereof, the Netherlands may decide on resorting
         to suppressive vaccination under the conditions set out in the Annex.’
      
That annex states inter alia that the ‘extent of the geographical area in which suppressive vaccination is to be carried out’
         corresponds to an area of up to two kilometres’ radius around a holding placed under the restrictions laid down in Article
         or of Directive 85/511. Moreover, the vaccination zone must be situated in the parts of the territory of the Netherlands
         included in Annex I to Commission Decision 2001/223/EC of March concerning certain protection measures with regard
         to foot-and-mouth disease in the Netherlands (OJ L 82, p. 29), that is, the provinces of Gelderland, Overijssel, Flevoland
         and Noord-Brabant.  
      
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
The Netherlands authorities were informed of a suspicion of foot-and-mouth disease in the Teunissen holding, which is situated
         less than two kilometres from the holdings of the claimants in the main proceedings, and on and March a team of
         specialists from the Rijksdienst voor de keuring van Vee en Vlees (national cattle and meat inspection service) (‘the RVV’)
         carried out an inspection of that holding, during which several samples were collected and sent for analysis to the laboratory
         ID-Lelystad BV (‘ID‑Lelystad’). That team also carried out clinical examinations, slaughtered animals and, on March
         2001, evacuated the holding.
      
On March 2001, ID-Lelystad sent the RVV a fax in which it stated that the samples from the Teunissen holding were positive.
      
Consequently, the Director of the RVV declared the Teunissen holding to be contaminated and, by decisions of March 2001,
         informed the claimants in the main proceedings that all biungulate animals on their holdings had to be considered as suspected
         of being contaminated on the ground that a case of foot-and-mouth disease had been found nearby. Following those decisions,
         and following an unsuccessful application for interim measures brought by those claimants, measures to control the virus on
         their holdings were implemented, namely, first, the vaccination of the animals and, second, the slaughter of those animals.
      
The claimants in the main proceedings lodged complaints against those decisions with the Director of the RVV, who rejected
         them. They then brought an action against those rejection decisions before the national court.
      
They claimed, first, that the Director of the RVV could not base the decisions of March solely on the content of the
         fax sent by ID-Lelystad which stated the results of the laboratory tests. He should have requested the file from the laboratory,
         studied it and checked whether that laboratory had carried out the tests correctly. Next, in basing the decisions of March
         on the analysis done by ID-Lelystad, the Director infringed Directive 85/511, because ID-Lelystad is not included in
         Annex B to that directive and is therefore not a laboratory for the purposes of the first indent of Article 11(1) and the
         second indent of Article 13(1) of that directive. That annex refers to the Centraal Diergeneeskundig Instituut, Lelystad (‘CDI’),
         which is separate from ID‑Lelystad, whose name and legal status are different.
      
The Director of the RVV, for his part, maintained that he was bound by the laboratory results and that he could not check
         their accuracy. He therefore had no discretion regarding the finding of the foot-and-mouth disease at the holding in question.
         Consequently, he was required to take the measures to control the disease as soon as the presence of the virus had been confirmed
         by the laboratory. He then found it appropriate to interpret Annex B to Directive 85/as meaning that it also included
         ID-Lelystad. The transformation from CDI to ID-Lelystad was due to a mere change in legal status. It had been the same laboratory
         as of 1995, established at the same address, with the same equipment and carrying out the same tasks.
      
In those circumstances, the College van Beroep voor het bedrijfsleven (Administrative Court for Trade and Industry) decided
         to stay proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Does the obligation on Member States under the first indent of Article 11(1) read in conjunction with the second indent of
         Article 13(1) of Directive 85/to ensure that laboratory testing to detect the presence of [foot-and-mouth disease] is
         carried out by a laboratory listed in Annex B to Directive 85/have direct effect?
      
(2)      (a)   Must Article 11(1) of Directive 85/be interpreted as meaning that legal consequences must be attached to the fact that
         the presence of foot-and-mouth disease is found by a laboratory which is not listed in Annex B to Directive 85/511?
      
         (b)   If the answer to Question 2(a) is in the affirmative:
                  Is the purpose of Article 11(1) of Directive 85/to protect the interests of individuals, such as [the claimants] in the
         main proceedings? If not, can individuals, such as [the claimants] in the main proceedings, plead possible failure to fulfil
         the obligations which this provision places on the authorities of the Member States?
      
         (c)   If the answer to Question 2(b) means that individuals can rely on Article 11(1) of Directive 85/511:
                  What legal consequences must be attached to a finding of the presence of [foot-and-mouth disease] by a laboratory which is
         not listed in Annex B to Directive 85/511?
      
(3)      Must Annex B to Directive 85/be interpreted, having regard to Articles and thereof, as meaning that the mention
         in Annex B to Directive 85/of “Centraal Diergeneeskundig Instituut, Lelystad” can or must refer also to ID-Lelystad BV?
      
(4)      If it follows from the answers to the above questions that the presence of [foot-and-mouth disease] can be found by a laboratory
         which is not listed in Annex B to Directive 85/or that Annex B to Directive 85/must be interpreted as meaning that
         the mention of the “Centraal Diergeneeskundig Instituut, Lelystad” can or must refer also to ID-Lelystad BV:
      
Must Directive 85/be interpreted as providing that the national administrative authority authorised to adopt decisions
         is bound by the outcome of an examination by a laboratory which is listed in Annex B to Directive 85/or – if the answer
         to Question 2(a) means that the administrative authority may base its foot-and-mouth disease control measures also on results
         obtained by a laboratory which is not listed in Annex B to Directive 85/– by the results of the latter laboratory, or
         does the determination of final authority in that regard fall within the procedural autonomy of the Member State and must
         the court before which the main proceedings are pending examine whether the rules in that respect apply irrespective of whether
         the laboratory examination is carried out by virtue of a Community or national legal obligation and of whether or not the
         application of the provisions of national procedural law renders the implementation of the Community rules extremely difficult
         or practically impossible?
      
(5)      If the answer to Question means that the issue of whether national authorities are bound by the laboratory result is governed
         by Directive 85/511:
      
Are the national authorities bound unconditionally by the result of a foot-and-mouth disease examination carried out by a
         laboratory? If not, what margin of discretion does Directive 85/leave these national authorities?’
      
 The questions
 The first, second and third questions
By those questions, which should be considered together, the national court asks essentially, first, what changes to the particulars
         of a laboratory included in Annex B to Directive 85/511, not made in accordance with the procedure provided for in Article
         of that directive, lead to that laboratory’s losing its status as a laboratory included in that annex and, second, whether
         the competent national authority may base measures to control foot-and-mouth disease on the results of tests carried out by
         a laboratory which does not have that status. Next, the national court asks whether that directive precludes a Member State
         from taking, in circumstances such as those at issue in the main proceedings, measures to control foot-and-mouth disease on
         the basis of results from a laboratory which is not included in that annex, whether individuals could then rely on infringement
         of the rules in Directive 85/before the national court, and whether that infringement would have legal consequences.
      
The Court notes, as a preliminary point, that on March 2001, that is, two days before the contested national decisions,
         the Commission adopted Decision 2001/246, based on Article of Directive 90/and Article 13(3) of Directive 85/511. By
         that decision the Commission authorised the suppressive vaccination and pre-emptive killing of animals, the latter measure
         designating, according to Article of that decision, the killing of susceptible animals on holdings within a certain radius
         around holdings placed under the restrictions laid down in Article or Article of Directive 85/511. According to the fourth
         recital in the preamble to that decision, the Kingdom of the Netherlands had, in addition to the measures within the framework
         of Directive 85/511, begun, as a precautionary measure, the pre-emptive killing of susceptible animals on holdings situated
         in close proximity to ‘infected or suspect’ holdings (see Joined Cases C-96/and C-97/Tempelman and van Schaijk [2005] ECR I-1895, paragraphs and 38). 
      
Under Decision 2001/246, read together with Article of Directive 90/and Articles and 2(d) and (e) of Directive 85/511,
         the competent Netherlands authorities were empowered to proceed, once a suppressive vaccination had been carried out, to the
         killing of susceptible animals on holdings situated within a radius of two kilometres around a holding where there was either
         an animal suspected of being infected, that is, an animal showing clinical symptoms or post-mortem lesions which were such
         that the presence of foot-and-mouth disease could reasonably be suspected, or an animal suspected of being contaminated, that
         is, an animal which might, according to the epizootiological information collected, have been directly or indirectly exposed
         to the foot-and-mouth virus. 
      
Decision 2001/does not require such information concerning the holding where there is an animal suspected of being infected
         or contaminated to be based solely on the results from the laboratories included in Annex B to Directive 85/511. Thus, the
         fact that that information has been provided by a laboratory which does not have that status does not affect the compatibility
         of those measures with Community law. 
      
Moreover, in paragraph of the judgment in Tempelman and van Schaijk, the Court found that Directive 85/cannot be interpreted as meaning that the measures which it lays down could not be
         supplemented by Community or national measures adopted on the basis of Directive 90/425. Decision 2001/constitutes a Community
         measure based, inter alia, on Article of Directive 90/425.
      
It is for the national court to assess, in the light of the facts described in paragraph of this judgment, whether the
         national authorities took the measures at issue in the main proceedings in accordance with the conditions laid down in Decision
         2001/246. If so, it follows from the foregoing that the claimants in the main proceedings may not rely on infringement of
         Articles 11(1) and 13(1) of Directive 85/511, and that Community law does not preclude those measures. 
      
It is still necessary to determine whether those claimants could rely on those provisions in the event that the decision by
         the Netherlands authorities to declare the biungulate animals on their holdings as being suspected of being contaminated on
         the ground that a case of foot-and-mouth disease had been found on the Teunissen holding and to order the slaughter of all
         those animals could not be based on Decision 2001/246.
      
According to the first indent of Article 11(1) and the second indent of Article 13(1) of Directive 85/511, Member States are
         required to ensure that the manipulation of foot-and-mouth virus for diagnosis is carried out only in approved laboratories
         listed in Annex B to that directive.  
      
The only information listed in that annex for the purpose of identifying those laboratories is, in principle, their name and
         location, in the case of the Netherlands, ‘Centraal Diergeneeskundig Instituut’ and ‘Lelystad’. That directive, moreover,
         provides in Article for a single procedure for all changes to that information.
      
That procedure, and the abovementioned Articles and 13, exists because, as also stated in the third recital in the preamble
         to Directive 90/423, there is an inherent risk in the manipulation of the foot-and-mouth virus in laboratories, given the
         possibility of contaminating local susceptible animals. This finding is, moreover, supported by the first recital in the preamble
         to Commission Decision 2003/11/EC of January amending Council Directive 85/511/EEC as regards the lists of laboratories
         authorised to handle live foot-and-mouth disease virus (OJ L 7, p. 82), according to which ‘[t]he cessation of routine
         vaccination against foot-and-mouth disease virus in the Community in has increased the susceptibility of Community herds
         to this disease. It is therefore essential to ensure that laboratories which handle the virus do so under secure conditions,
         to avoid the dissemination of the virus which might endanger the Community herds’. 
      
Thus, the diagnosis of the disease must be done by responsible laboratories, it being understood that their reliability is
         to be assessed before their inclusion in that annex and, where necessary, when changes concerning them are entered.
      
This requirement of registration for laboratories must nevertheless be considered in the light of the core objective of Directive
         85/511, which is the effective control of foot-and-mouth disease (see Tempelman and van Schaijk, paragraph 35), which implies, in particular, that measures must be taken upon the first sign of the disease. The Court notes
         in this regard that the effectiveness of such control requires that the public authorities are able to have a diagnosis established
         to detect the disease in a timely manner.
      
If a failure to include in Annex B to Directive 85/changes concerning a laboratory listed in that annex meant every time
         that that laboratory would lose its status as a listed laboratory, the national authorities would be required, under the aforementioned
         Articles and 13, not to have any more examinations carried out by that laboratory until the change in question had been
         entered in the list. A requirement such as that would lead to an emphasis on formalities which would be likely to prevent
         those authorities from having a laboratory nearby with which to detect the virus in a timely manner, which would run counter
         to the objective of effective control of foot-and-mouth disease.
      
Accordingly, the requirement that those changes be entered must not go beyond what is necessary to safeguard the interests
         it seeks to guarantee, namely the prevention of the risk of dissemination of the virus during laboratory examinations.
      
It should therefore be assessed, in each individual case, whether the changes made are likely to have repercussions on the
         safety of the laboratory in question such that they increase the risk of contamination of susceptible local animals. If not,
         there is no reason for the laboratory concerned to lose its status as a laboratory listed in Annex B to Directive 85/511,
         even though its particulars have been changed.
      
Such is the case, inter alia, when changes to that laboratory’s name or legal status are of a purely formal nature and have
         no effect on its safety or reliability, particularly when its staff, premises and equipment remain essentially unchanged.
         
      
Contrary to what the claimants in the main proceedings have maintained, it is of no importance that, under the national rules,
         the laboratory is an entity legally distinct from the one included in the list in Annex B, in the light of the changes made
         to it. 
      
In the present case, it is common ground that ID-Lelystad was created from CDI following a series of mergers and successions.
         The claimants in the main proceedings have claimed that ID-Lelystad cannot be equated with CDI for the purposes of application
         of Directive 85/511, inter alia on the grounds that they are two distinct legal entities which do not share the same legal
         status, that CDI, unlike ID‑Lelystad, was required to divulge publicly internal documents relating to the cases dealt with
         and that, unlike ID-Lelystad, CDI was under the responsibility of the competent minister. 
      
Although in preliminary ruling proceedings it is for the national court to establish, in the light of the considerations referred
         to in paragraphs to of this judgment, whether, despite such changes, ID-Lelystad must be regarded as being a laboratory
         referred to in Article 11(1) and Article 13(1) of Directive 85/511, the Court of Justice, which is called on to provide answers
         of use to the national court, may provide guidance based on the documents in the file and on the written and oral observations
         which have been submitted to it, in order to enable the national court to give judgment (see, to that effect, Case C-278/Freers and Speckmann [1996] ECR I-1165, paragraph 24, and Case  C-77/Steinicke [2003] ECR I‑9027, paragraph 59).
      
In that connection, it will be for the national court to take account also of the Commission’s viewpoint, since the Commission
         is empowered, under Article 13(2) of Directive 85/511, to carry out checks from time to time on the security systems applied
         in the laboratories referred to in Annex B, and it likewise has a particular responsibility in the procedure provided for
         in Article of that directive, which is in place precisely for the assessment of the reliability of a laboratory for the
         purposes of application of that directive.
      
Moreover, the Commission stated, both in its written observations and at the hearing, that it has never had any doubts as
         to the identity of the ID-Lelystad laboratory and that it has always considered the changes between CDI and ID‑Lelystad to
         be merely formal. 
      
It is, moreover, clear that, in the circumstances at issue in the main proceedings, the mere fact that the original entity
         became a legally distinct entity following mergers or successions does not mean that the laboratory’s level of safety is now
         lower as regards the risk of dissemination of the virus.
      
Likewise, the Court notes that there is no link between the risk of dissemination of the virus and the obligation of a laboratory
         to divulge publicly the internal documents relating to cases dealt with. 
      
However, as regards the fact that the laboratory is no longer under the authority of the public authorities, is no longer
         required to follow their instructions and thus cannot effectively be required to comply with the obligations under Directive
         85/511, the Court cannot prima facie exclude the possibility of such a change having repercussions on safety as regards the
         risk of dissemination of the virus and, consequently, the possibility that a laboratory might lose its status as a laboratory
         listed in Annex B to that directive. It will be for the national court to assess, in the light of the facts of the case, whether
         or not such a change has had an impact on safety at the laboratory at issue in the main proceedings. 
      
Should  the Court find, in the light of the aforementioned considerations, that ID‑Lelystad lost its status as a laboratory
         listed in Annex B to Directive 85/511, the national court also asks whether that directive precludes a Member State from taking,
         in circumstances such as those at issue in the main proceedings, measures to control foot-and-mouth disease on the basis of
         results of a laboratory which is not included in that annex, whether individuals could then rely on infringement of the rules
         in Directive 85/before the national court, and whether that infringement would have legal consequences.
      
In the context of the main proceedings, it should be borne in mind that Article 10(1) of Directive 90/confers on Member
         States the power to adopt measures to control foot-and-mouth disease in addition to those provided for in Directive 85/511,
         in particular, as in the present case, the power to order the slaughter of animals belonging to a holding adjacent to or within
         a specific radius of a holding containing infected animals (Tempelman and van Schaijk, paragraph 52).
      
However, those States may adopt those measures only in compliance with Community law, and they are thus required to respect
         the objectives pursued by the Community legislation in force, in particular such as those referred to in Directive 85/(see, to that effect, Tempelman and van Schaijk, paragraph 31). 
      
Regarding that directive, the Court notes, first, that, according to Article 5, read together with point (c) of the second
         paragraph of Article 2, it is for the competent authorities to take the measures provided for in Article – including the
         slaughter of all animals of susceptible species – on any holding where it has been confirmed that there are one or more animals
         of susceptible species:
      
–        in which clinical symptoms or post-mortem lesions which may arise from foot-and-mouth disease have been ascertained; or 
–        in which the presence of foot-and-mouth disease has been officially ascertained following a laboratory examination. 
Given the objective of effective control of foot-and-mouth disease, those means of diagnosis must be interpreted broadly.
         
      
Point (c) of the second paragraph of Article uses the term ‘laboratory’ without providing further specification and its
         wording therefore does not indicate that measures may be taken only on the basis of results from a laboratory included in
         the list in Annex B to Directive 85/511.
      
Furthermore, the same provision requires that measures to control the disease should also be taken as soon as clinical symptoms
         or post-mortem lesions which ‘may’ arise from foot-and-mouth disease have been found in an animal. However, a finding that
         the virus is present based on such a method would appear, by definition, to have less evidential value than an examination
         done by a laboratory, even if that laboratory is not recognised by the Commission, under the procedure under Article of
         Directive 85/511, as a laboratory authorised to manipulate the virus.
      
Next, although the competent authorities have power, under Article 10(1) of Directive 90/425, to adopt measures to control
         foot-and-mouth disease in addition to those provided for in Directive 85/511, their additional nature implies that those authorities
         may take measures analogous to those provided for in Article of Directive 85/on the basis of the same laboratory results
         as those on the basis of which the latter measures were taken and, therefore, also on the basis of results from a laboratory
         which is not included in Annex B to Directive 85/511. 
      
Lastly, the Court notes that, contrary to what the claimants in the main proceedings allege, the provisions of the first indent
         of Article 11(1) and the second indent of Article 13(1) of Directive 85/do not affect this finding. 
      
It should be borne in mind that those provisions impose on the Member States the obligation to use the laboratories listed
         in Annex B for diagnosis, on the ground that the manipulation of the virus in other laboratories carries a risk of disseminating
         the virus. 
      
The obligation not to use, for the purpose of taking measures to control foot-and-mouth disease, a laboratory result which
         was furnished previously in violation of the above obligation, and therefore at the risk of spreading the virus by the laboratory
         not listed in that annex, is an obligation independent of the first obligation. Although the competent authorities may infringe
         Directive 85/by not complying with that first obligation, that infringement does not affect the considerations discussed
         in paragraphs to of this judgment, in the light of which the Member States may use results from a laboratory not listed
         in that annex in order to take those measures. 
      
In those circumstances, it is not necessary to consider whether individuals may rely before the national court, in circumstances
         such as those at issue in the main proceedings, on an infringement of Directive 85/arising from the use by the public
         authorities of results from a laboratory not included in that annex, and whether such an infringement has legal consequences.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the first, second and third questions must be that Directive 85/must be interpreted
         as meaning that changes to the particulars of a laboratory included in Annex B to that directive, which were not entered in
         accordance with the procedure provided for in Article of the directive, lead to that laboratory’s losing its status as
         a laboratory included in that annex only if those changes are likely to have repercussions on the safety of the laboratory
         as regards the risk of dissemination of the foot-and-mouth virus during the examinations performed by the laboratory and thus
         increase the risk of contamination of susceptible local animals. Moreover, Directive 85/does not preclude a Member State
         from taking the measures to control foot-and-mouth disease provided for in Article 10(1) of Directive 90/on the basis
         of results of an examination carried out by a laboratory which is not included in Annex B to Directive 85/511.
      
 The fourth and fifth questions
By those questions, which should be considered together, the national court seeks to know how far the national authority with
         competence to take measures to control foot-and-mouth disease is bound by the results of tests carried out by a laboratory
         which has the status of a laboratory listed in Annex B to Directive 85/511, and to what extent it is bound by the results
         provided by a laboratory which does not have that status, in particular a laboratory which has lost that status, where applicable,
         for the reasons given in paragraph above. 
      
First, it is appropriate to consider the case where the results have been provided by a laboratory which has that status.
         
      
Article of Directive 85/states that the competent national authorities are required to take immediately the measures
         provided for in that provision as soon as it has been confirmed that there are on a holding one or more animals in which the
         presence of foot-and-mouth disease has been officially ascertained following a laboratory examination. 
      
Furthermore, other provisions, such as Article of Decision 2001/and Article 10(1) of Directive 90/425, empower those
         authorities to take additional measures.
      
Next, it must be borne in mind that the control of foot-and-mouth disease requires that appropriate measures be taken promptly
         and effectively. 
      
To that end, Article in particular of Directive 85/subjects the laboratories listed in Annex B to strict requirements
         concerning their security systems and checks from time to time by veterinary experts from the Commission and by the competent
         authorities of the Member States. It follows that the organisation of the examinations carried out by those laboratories is
         likely to offer guarantees such that the authority responsible for the control of foot-and-mouth disease can, in principle,
         rely on their results.
      
In the light of the foregoing, it must be concluded that the competent authority is required to follow up those results and
         to adopt, in principle, the measures provided for in Directive 85/or any other appropriate measure, given the necessity
         to control foot-and-mouth disease promptly and effectively. 
      
It is only if the competent authority has evidence casting serious doubt on the reliability of the results from those laboratories
         that it may refrain from taking those measures immediately. In such a case, it may inter alia obtain another diagnosis to
         confirm or contradict those results.   
      
Second, the case where the results have been provided by a laboratory which does not have the status of a laboratory listed
         in Annex B to Directive 85/should be considered.
      
It follows from paragraph above that the competent authority may not refrain from taking appropriate measures solely on
         the ground that the presence of foot-and-mouth disease on a holding has been ascertained by a laboratory which does not have
         the status of a laboratory listed in Annex B to Directive 85/511.
      
Given the highly contagious nature of foot-and-mouth disease and the need to control it promptly and effectively, the competent
         authority is required to take account of the results provided by such a laboratory in order to adopt, where necessary, the
         appropriate measures provided for by Community legislation. However, as that laboratory no longer necessarily offers the same
         guarantees of reliability as a laboratory having the status of a laboratory listed in Annex B to Directive 85/511, the competent
         authority must, before taking appropriate measures, make sure that the results are reliable.   
      
Next, it is clear in this context that, in any event, irrespective of whether the results of the examinations have been provided
         by a laboratory which has the status of a laboratory listed in Annex B to Directive 85/511, the competent authority may adopt
         those measures only in compliance with the general principles of Community law, including in particular the principle of proportionality
         and fundamental rights (see, to that effect, Tempelman and van Schaijk, paragraph 31).
      
In that connection, it should be borne in mind that, according to settled case-law, the principle of proportionality requires
         that measures implemented through Community provisions should be appropriate for attaining the objective pursued and must
         not go beyond what is necessary to achieve it (Case C-434/Arnold André [2004] ECR I-11825, paragraph 45; Case C-210/Swedish Match  [2004] ECR I-11893, paragraph 47; and Joined Cases C-453/03, C‑11/04, C-12/and C‑194/ABNA and Others [2005] ECR I-0000, paragraph 68).   
      
Regarding the safeguarding of fundamental rights, the claimants in the main proceedings submit in particular that the national
         authorities took the measures at issue in the main proceedings in violation of the principle of respect for the rights of
         the defence.
      
It is equally settled case-law that respect for the rights of the defence is, in all proceedings initiated against a person
         which are liable to culminate in a measure adversely affecting that person, a fundamental principle of Community law which
         must be guaranteed even in the absence of any rules governing the proceedings in question. That principle requires that the
         addressees of decisions which significantly affect their interests should be placed in a position in which they may effectively
         make known their views on the evidence on which the contested decision is based (see, inter alia, Case C-32/P Commission v Lisrestal and Others [1996] ECR I‑5373, paragraph 21; Case C‑462/P Mediocurso v Commission [2000] ECR I-7183, paragraph 36; and Case C‑287/Spain v Commission [2005] ECR I-5093, paragraph 37). Given the important consequences for breeders flowing from decisions taken on the basis
         of Article of Directive 85/511, Article of Decision 2001/and Article 10(1) of Directive 90/425, that principle requires,
         in connection with the control of foot-and-mouth disease, that the addressees of such decisions be, in principle, placed in
         a position in which they may effectively make known their views on the evidence on which the contested measure is based.
      
It should, however, be borne in mind that fundamental rights, such as respect for the rights of the defence, do not constitute
         unfettered prerogatives and may be restricted, provided that the restrictions in fact correspond to objectives of general
         interest pursued by the measure in question and that they do not constitute, with regard to the objectives pursued, a disproportionate
         and intolerable interference which infringes upon the very substance of the rights guaranteed. Objectives which may justify
         such restrictions include the protection of public health (see, to that effect, Case C-62/Commission v Germany [1992] ECR I-2575, paragraph 23, and Case C‑44/Fishermen’s Organisations and Others [1995] ECR I-3115, paragraph 55). 
      
In that context, it must be concluded that, if the competent authority were not able to take measures against foot-and-mouth
         disease unless all potentially concerned parties had previously been given the opportunity to familiarise themselves with
         the facts and documents on which those measures are based and had expressed a view on those facts and documents, that authority
         could be prevented from acting promptly and effectively. Accordingly, the protection of public health justifies, in principle,
         that that authority adopts those measures, even without first obtaining the views of interested parties on the elements on
         which the measures are based. Such a restriction would, moreover, be a disproportionate and intolerable intervention infringing
         upon the very substance of the rights of the defence only if the interested parties were given no opportunity to contest those
         measures in subsequent proceedings and to make their views known effectively at that stage. 
      
Moreover, given the imperative need to act promptly against foot-and-mouth disease, the principle of respect for the rights
         of the defence does not necessarily require that the implementation of those measures be postponed until those proceedings
         have come to an end.
      
Lastly, if it should emerge in such proceedings that the authority responsible for control of foot-and-mouth disease could
         take the measures provided for in  Directives 85/and 90/or Decision 2001/solely on the basis of the results from
         the laboratory as communicated to it by fax, the principle of respect for the rights of the defence does not preclude the
         court ruling in those proceedings from basing its decision on that document alone, provided that the parties have been given
         a proper opportunity to put forth their views. 
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the fourth and fifth questions must be that the competent authority is required
         to follow up the results of examinations provided by a laboratory which has the status of a laboratory listed in Annex B to
         Directive 85/and to adopt, in principle, the measures provided for in that directive or any other measure required, given
         the need to control foot-and-mouth disease promptly and effectively. The competent authority is required to take into consideration
         even results provided by a laboratory which does not have that status in order to adopt, where necessary, the appropriate
         measures provided for by Community legislation. However, as that laboratory no longer necessarily offers the same guarantees
         of reliability as a laboratory having the status of a laboratory listed in Annex B, the competent authority must make sure,
         before taking the appropriate measures, that those results are reliable. In any event, the authority may adopt measures to
         control foot-and-mouth disease only in compliance with the general principles of Community law, including in particular the
         principle of proportionality and fundamental rights. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Council Directive 85/511/EEC of November introducing Community measures for the control of foot-and-mouth disease,
            as amended by Council Directive 90/423/EEC of June 1990, must be interpreted as meaning that changes to the particulars
            of a laboratory included in Annex B to that directive, which were not entered in accordance with the procedure provided for
            in Article of the directive, lead to that laboratory’s losing its status as a laboratory included in that annex only if
            those changes are likely to have repercussions on the safety of the laboratory as regards the risk of dissemination of the
            foot-and-mouth virus during the examinations performed by the laboratory and thus increase the risk of contamination of susceptible
            local animals. Moreover, Directive 85/does not preclude a Member State from taking the measures to control foot-and-mouth
            disease provided for in Article 10(1) of Council Directive 90/425/EEC of June concerning veterinary and zootechnical
            checks applicable in intra-Community trade in certain live animals and products with a view to the completion of the internal
            market on the basis of results of an examination carried out by a laboratory which is not included in Annex B to Directive
            85/511. 
2.      The competent authority is required to follow up the results of examinations provided by a laboratory which has the status
            of a laboratory listed in Annex B to Directive 85/and to adopt, in principle, the measures provided for in that directive
            or any other measure required, given the need to control foot-and-mouth disease promptly and effectively. The competent authority
            is required to take into consideration even results provided by a laboratory which does not have that status in order to adopt,
            where necessary, the appropriate measures provided for by Community legislation. However, as that laboratory no longer necessarily
            offers the same guarantees of reliability as a laboratory having the status of a laboratory listed in Annex B, the competent
            authority must make sure, before taking the appropriate measures, that those results are reliable. In any event, the authority
            may adopt measures to control foot-and-mouth disease only in compliance with the general principles of Community law, including
            in particular the principle of proportionality and fundamental rights. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 