
Case C-457/Claude Chartry
v
État belge
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
tribunal de première instance de Liège)
(Preliminary ruling – Article EC – Assessing whether a national rule is consistent with both EU law and the national Constitution – National legislation laying down the priority nature of preliminary proceedings for reviewing constitutionality – Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union – Need for a connection with EU law – Clear lack of jurisdiction of the Court)
Summary of the Order
1.        Preliminary rulings – Reference to the Court – Jurisdiction of the national courts – National legislation confirming the priority
            nature of national preliminary proceedings for reviewing constitutionality – Not permissible – Condition
(Art. EC)
2.        Preliminary rulings – Jurisdiction of the Court – Limits – Request for interpretation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights
            of the European Union – Subject-matter of national dispute not having any connection with EU law – Lack of jurisdiction of
            the Court
(Art. EC; Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, Art. 51(1))
1.        Article EC precludes Member State legislation which establishes an interlocutory procedure for the review of the constitutionality
         of national laws, in so far as the priority nature of that procedure prevents, both before the submission of a question on
         constitutionality to the national court responsible for reviewing the constitutionality of laws and, as the case may be, after
         the decision of that court on that question, all other national courts or tribunals from exercising their right or fulfilling
         their obligation to refer questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling.
      
(see para. 20)
2.        When proceedings are brought before it under Article EC, the Court of Justice has jurisdiction to give preliminary rulings
         concerning the interpretation of the EC Treaty and the validity and interpretation of the acts of the institutions of the
         European Union. In that context, the jurisdiction of the Court is confined to considering provisions of EU law only.
      
Article 51(1) of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union states that its provisions are addressed to the Member
         States only when they are implementing European Union law. Furthermore, that limitation has not been amended by the entry
         into force of the Treaty of Lisbon on December 2009, since when, under Article 6(1) TEU, the Charter has the same legal
         value as the Treaties. That article states that the provisions of the Charter are not to extend in any way the competences
         of the Union as defined in the Treaties.
      
It follows that the jurisdiction of the Court to answer a request for interpretation of Article 6(1) TEU, as it stood before
         the Treaty of Lisbon, has not been established when the order for reference does not contain any specific information that
         might allow the subject-matter of the dispute to be considered connected with EU law.
      
(see paras 21, 23-26)
  
  
ORDER OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
March (*)
      
(Preliminary ruling – Article EC – Examination of a national rule’s compatibility with both European Union law and the national Constitution – National legislation laying down the priority nature of preliminary proceedings for reviewing constitutionality – Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union – Need of a connection with EU law – Clear lack of jurisdiction of the Court)
In Case C‑457/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the tribunal de première instance de Liège (Belgium), made by
         decision of October 2009, received at the Court on November 2009, in the proceedings
      
Claude Chartry
v
État belge,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber), 
composed of J.‑J. Kasel, President of the Chamber, M. Ilešič and M. Berger (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: P. Mengozzi,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
after hearing the Advocate General,
makes the following
Order
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article EU, in its version before the Treaty of Lisbon,
         and of Article EC.
      
The reference was made in proceedings between Mr Chartry and the Belgian State concerning taxation.
      
 Legal context
Article of the Special Law of January on the Cour d’arbitrage (Constitutional Court) (Moniteur Belge of January 1989), as amended by, inter alia, the Special Law of July (Moniteur Belge of July 2009), is worded as follows:
      
‘§ 1.      The Constitutional Court shall, by way of preliminary ruling, hear and determine, in the form of judgments, matters relating
         to:
      
… 
3°      the infringement by a statute, a decree or a rule referred to in Article of the Constitution of the articles of Title
         II, “The Belgians and their Rights”, and Articles 170, and of the Constitution,
      
… 
§ 2.      Where such a question is raised before a court of law, the latter shall request the Cour d’arbitrage to give a ruling on that
         question.
      
None the less, the court of law shall not be obliged to do so:
… 
2°      if the Constitutional Court has already ruled on a question or appeal on an identical subject.
… 
§ 4. When it is alleged before a court of law that a statute, a decree or a rule referred to in Article of the Constitution
         infringes a fundamental right guaranteed in a wholly or partly similar manner by a provision of Title II of the Constitution
         and by a provision of European or international law, that court of law shall first refer the question of compatibility with
         the provision of Title II of the Constitution to the Cour d’arbitrage for a preliminary ruling.
      
In derogation from paragraph 1, the obligation to refer a preliminary question to the Constitutional Court shall not apply:
         
      
1°      in the cases referred to in paragraphs and 3;
… ’
Article of the Special Law of January on the Cour d’arbitrage provides:
      
‘The court of law that referred the question for a preliminary ruling, and any other court of law called upon to adjudicate
         in the same case, shall comply with the judgment given by the Cour d’arbitrage in the settlement of the case in which the
         questions mentioned in Article were referred.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
Mr Chartry, resident in Belgium, worked as an informant for a company established in Belgium which specialised in acting for
         insured persons.
      
Following an audit, the Belgian tax authority adjusted Mr Chartry’s declared earnings for the fiscal years 1994, and
         and recalculated the amount of direct taxes owed by Mr Chartry in respect of those years. The additional tax for the
         year was payable by February 1997, for the year by September and for the year by August 1997.
      
On February and October 1997, Mr Chartry lodged objections against the decisions fixing those additional amounts of tax.
      
On November and December 2001, Mr Chartry was issued with orders for payment stopping time from running.
      
Mr Chartry’s objections were, for the most part, rejected by decision of the tax authorities of October 2007.
      
On January 2008, Mr Chartry brought proceedings before the tribunal de première instance de Liège (Court of First Instance,
         Liège). He submits that, according to Belgian tax legislation, direct taxes are time-barred five years after the date fixed
         for their payment and that there has been no action stopping time from running for the purpose of Article of the Belgian
         Civil Code in the five years following the date fixed for payment of the additional tax claimed from him. Concerning the two
         orders for payment served on him in 2001, he invokes the case-law of the Belgian Cour de cassation, according to which an
         order for payment issued on account of a disputed tax debt does not have the effect of stopping time running for the purpose
         of Article of the Belgian Civil Code.
      
In response, the Belgian State asserts that, under Article of the Programme Law of July (Moniteur Belge of July 2004), even if the tax debt is disputed, an order for payment must be interpreted as constituting an action stopping
         time running for the purpose of Article of the Belgian Civil Code.
      
The national court indicates that, by judgments of December and February 2006, the Cour d’arbitrage held that Article
         of the Programme Law of July has retroactive effect prejudicing the judicial safeguards enjoyed by citizens, but
         that it is justified by exceptional circumstances and dictated by overriding reasons relating to the public interest.
      
The national court holds that Article of the Programme Law of July 2004, having regard to its retroactive character,
         constitutes an intervention by the legislature in pending judicial proceedings which, in Mr Chartry’s specific situation,
         is not justified by a fair balance between the requirements of general interest and the protection of his fundamental rights.
      
However, the national court considers that it is prevented from giving due effect to that finding by Article of the Special
         Law of January on the Cour d’arbitrage which, in principle, obliges the court before which it is invoked, when a rule
         infringes a fundamental right guaranteed both by a provision of the Belgian Constitution and by a provision of European or
         international law, first to refer the constitutionality of the rule in question to the Cour d’arbitrage for a preliminary
         ruling.  It is true that point of the second subparagraph of Article 26(4) and point of the second subparagraph of Article
         26(2), that obligation is not binding on that court in the present case, for the Cour d’arbitrage has twice already affirmed
         that Article of the Programme Law of July is consistent with the Belgian Constitution. However, those decisions
         of the Cour d’arbitrage prevent the national court from carrying out a specific review, tailored to the particular circumstances
         of the present case before it.
      
Those were the circumstances in which the tribunal de première instance de Liège decided to stay the proceedings and to refer
         the following question to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Do Article [EU] and Article [EC] preclude national legislation, such as the Law of July amending Article of the Special Law of January on the Cour d’arbitrage, from requiring the national court to make a reference to the
         Constitutional Court for a preliminary ruling, if it finds that a citizen taxpayer has been deprived of the effective judicial
         protection guaranteed by Article of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
         [signed at Rome on November 1950; “the ECHR”], as incorporated into Community law, by another national law, namely: Article
         of the Programme Law of July 2004, without that national court’s being able to ensure immediately the direct effect of
         Community law in the proceedings before it or to carry out a review of compatibility with the ECHR when the Constitutional
         Court has recognised the compatibility of the national legislation with the fundamental rights guaranteed by Title II of the
         Belgian Constitution?’
      
 Jurisdiction of the Court
The Belgian and French Governments and the European Commission, which have submitted written observations, submit that the
         Court does not have jurisdiction to answer the question referred.
      
In order to determine whether the Court has jurisdiction, it is necessary to consider the subject-matter of the question referred.
      
By its question, the national court asks, in essence, whether it is contrary to Article EC for legislation of a Member
         State to require the courts of that Member State to refer a question beforehand on whether a provision of national law is
         consistent with a fundamental right guaranteed by the Constitution when, at the same time, the conflict of that provision
         with a fundamental right guaranteed in full or in part by Union law is at issue, on the one hand, and to bind the courts of
         that Member State with regard to the findings of law made by the national court responsible for reviewing the constitutionality
         of laws, on the other.
      
In that regard, it must be borne in mind that, according to the settled case‑law of the Court, in order to ensure the primacy
         of EU law, the functioning of the system of cooperation between the Court of Justice and the national courts, established
         by Article EC, requires the national court to be free to refer to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling any question
         that it considers necessary, at whatever stage of the proceedings it considers appropriate (see Joined Cases C‑188/and
         C‑189/Melki and Abdeli [2010] ECR I‑5667, paragraph 52).
      
More specifically, the Court has ruled that Article EC precludes Member State legislation which establishes an interlocutory
         procedure for the review of the constitutionality of national laws, in so far as the priority nature of that procedure prevents
         – both before the submission of a question on constitutionality to the national court responsible for reviewing the constitutionality
         of laws and, as the case may be, after the decision of that court on that question – all the other national courts or tribunals
         from exercising their right or fulfilling their obligation to refer questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling
         (Melki and Abdeli, paragraph 57).
      
However, it must also be borne in mind that, when proceedings are brought before it under Article EC, the Court has jurisdiction
         to give preliminary rulings concerning the interpretation of the EC Treaty and the validity and interpretation of the acts
         of the institutions of the European Union. In that context, the jurisdiction of the Court is confined to considering provisions
         of EU law only (see, inter alia, orders of January in Case C‑361/Polier, paragraph 9, and of November in Case C‑339/Asparuhov Estov and Others [2010] ECR I‑11465, paragraph 11).
      
As regards the requirements flowing from the protection of fundamental rights, it is settled case-law that they are binding
         on Member States whenever they are required to apply EU law (see Asparuhov Estov and Others, paragraph 13).
      
In the same way, Article 51(1) of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (‘the Charter’) states that its
         provisions are addressed ‘to the Member States only when they are implementing European Union law’.
      
Furthermore, that limitation has not been amended by the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon on December 2009, since
         when, under Article 6(1) EU, the Charter has had the same legal value as the Treaties. That article states that the provisions
         of the Charter are not to extend in any way the competences of the Union as defined in the Treaties.
      
Although the right to an effective legal remedy, guaranteed by Article 6(1) of the ECHR, referred to by the national court,
         constitutes a general principle of Union law (see, inter alia, Case C‑385/P Der Grüne Punkt – Duales System Deutschland v Commission [2009] ECR I‑6155, paragraphs and 178), and was reaffirmed by Article of the Charter, the fact remains that the order
         for reference does not contain any specific information enabling the subject-matter of the dispute in the main proceedings
         to be considered to be connected with EU law. The dispute in the main proceedings, between a Belgian national and the Belgian
         State concerning taxation of activities carried out within the territory of that Member State, is not connected in any way
         with any of the situations contemplated by the provisions of the EC Treaty on the free movement of persons, of services, or
         of capital. Moreover, that dispute does not concern the application of national measures by which that Member State implements
         EU law.
      
It follows that it has not been established that the Court has jurisdiction to answer this reference for a preliminary ruling.
      
In those circumstances, it must be held, on the basis of Article 92(1) of the Rules of Procedure, that the Court clearly has
         no jurisdiction to answer the question referred by the tribunal de première instance de Liège.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fifth Chamber) hereby orders:
The Court of Justice of the European Union clearly has no jurisdiction to answer the question referred by the tribunal de
            première instance de Liège (Belgium).
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 