
Case C-45/Campina GmbH & Co., formerly TUFFI Campina emzett GmbH
v
Hauptzollamt Frankfurt (Oder)
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Finanzgericht des Landes Brandenburg)
(Milk and milk products – Additional levy – Slight delay in observing the time-limit for communication of the summary of statements – Financial penalty – Regulation (EEC) No 536/as amended by Regulation (EC) No 1001/– Article 3(2), second subparagraph – Regulation (EC) No 1392/– Article 5(3) – Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 2988/– Article 2(2), second sentence – Principle of retroactive application of the more lenient penalty)
Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber), March Summary of the Judgment
1.     Community law – Principles – Principle of retroactive application of the more lenient penalty
2.     Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Milk and milk products – Additional levy on milk 
(Commission Regulation No 536/93, as amended by Regulation No 1001/98, Art. 3(2), second para., and No 1392/2001, Art. 5(3))
1.     The principle of retroactive application of the more lenient penalty must be respected by national courts when they have to
         penalise practices which do not comply with rules laid down by Community legislation. 
      
(see para. 40, operative part)
2.     In the case of a slight delay in observing the time-limit imposed on purchasers for communication of the summary of statements,
         such as one working day, the system of financial penalties provided for by Article 5(3) of Regulation No 1392/laying
         down detailed rules for applying the additional levy on milk is less severe than that provided for by the first indent of
         the second subparagraph of Article 3(2) of Regulation No 536/laying down detailed rules on the application of that levy,
         as amended by Regulation No 1001/98.
      
(see para. 40, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
March 2007(*)
      
(Milk and milk products – Additional levy – Slight delay in observing the time-limit for communication of the summary of statements – Financial penalty – Regulation (EEC) No 536/as amended by Regulation (EC) No 1001/– Article 3(2), second subparagraph – Regulation (EC) No 1392/– Article 5(3) – Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 2988/– Article 2(2), second sentence – Principle of retroactive application of the more lenient penalty)
In Case C-45/06,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC by the Finanzgericht des Landes Brandenburg (Germany), made by decision
         of November 2005, received at the Court on January 2006, in the proceedings
      
Campina GmbH & Co., formerly TUFFI Campina emzett GmbH
v
Hauptzollamt Frankfurt (Oder),
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
composed of R. Schintgen, President of the Chamber, M. Ilešič (Rapporteur) and E. Levits, Judges,
Advocate General: P. Mengozzi,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       the Greek Government, by G. Kanellopoulos and S. Papaioannou, acting as Agents,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by J. Schieferer and C. Cattabriga, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the proportionality of the second subparagraph of Article 3(2) of Commission
         Regulation (EEC) No 536/of March laying down detailed rules on the application of the additional levy on milk and
         milk products (OJ L 57, p. 12), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1001/of May (OJ L 142, p.
         22) (‘Regulation No 536/93’).
      
The reference was made in the context of proceedings between Campina GmbH & Co., formerly TUFFI Campina emzett GmbH (‘Campina’),
         as universal successor to the milk processing and purchasing undertaking Meierei-Zentrale GmbH (‘MZ’), and the Hauptzollamt
         Frankfurt (Oder), regarding a slight delay in observing the time‑limit for communication of a summary of the statements (‘the
         communication’).
      
 Community legal context
The first subparagraph of Article 3(2) of Regulation No 536/provides:
‘Before May each year, the purchasers shall forward to the competent authority of the Member State a summary of the statements
         drawn up for each producer or, where appropriate, by decision of the Member State, the total quantity, the quantity corrected
         in accordance with Article 2(2) and average fat content of the milk and/or milk equivalent delivered to it by producers and
         the sum of the individual reference quantities and the average representative fat content of such producers’ production.’
      
The second subparagraph of Article 3(2) of Regulation No 536/in its original version stated:
‘Where that time‑limit is not observed, the purchaser shall be liable to a penalty equal to the amount of the levy due for
         a 0.1% overrun on the quantities of milk and milk equivalent delivered to them by producers. Such penalty may not exceed ECU 000.’
      
That provision was declared to be disproportionate by the judgment in Case C‑356/Molkereigenossenschaft Wiedergeltingen [2000] ECR I‑5461).
      
In the meantime, the Commission adopted Regulation No 1001/98, Article of which provides:
‘Article 3(2), second subparagraph, of Regulation (EEC) No 536/93, is hereby replaced by the following:
Where that time‑limit is not observed, the purchaser shall be liable to a penalty calculated as follows:
–       if the communication referred to in the first subparagraph is made before June, the penalty shall be equal to the amount
         of the levy due for a 0.1% overrun on the quantities of milk and milk equivalent delivered to them by producers. Such penalty
         may not be less than ECU nor more than ECU 000,
      
…’
Article of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1392/of July laying down detailed rules for applying Council Regulation
         (EEC) No 3950/establishing an additional levy on milk and milk products (OJ L 187, p. 19) states:
      
‘…
3.      … purchasers who fail to comply with the time‑limit referred to in paragraph shall be required to pay an amount equal to
         the levy due for a 0.01% overrun of the quantities of milk and milk equivalent delivered to them by producers for each calendar
         day of delay. … That amount may not be less than EUR nor more than EUR 000.
      
…’
The second sentence of Article 2(2) of Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 2988/of December on the protection of
         the European Communities’ financial interests (OJ L 312, p. 1), provides:
      
‘In the event of a subsequent amendment of the provisions which impose administrative penalties and are contained in Community
         rules, the less severe provisions shall apply retroactively.’
      
 The main proceedings and the reference for a preliminary ruling
By form signed on May and received the same day at the Hauptzollamt Cottbus (‘the HZA’), MZ submitted the communication
         on the quantities of milk which had been delivered to it by producers during the period to 1999.
      
The back of the form carried instructions specifying that that communication had to arrive at the HZA by May at the latest.
         The HZA received the communication three days late and decided, on the basis of the second subparagraph of Article 3(2) of
         Regulation No 536/93, that the failure to observe the time-limit thus set required the imposition of a penalty of an amount
         equal to the levy due for a 0.1% overrun of the quantities of milk and milk equivalent delivered to them by producers. On
         the basis of the information provided by MZ on the quantity of milk delivered, and in view of the upper limit of ECU 000,
         a penalty amounting to DEM 116.was therefore imposed.
      
MZ lodged an objection to that decision and an application for a stay of execution. MZ maintains that the employee to whom
         it entrusted the preparation and dispatch of the communications was overloaded with work on May because he also had
         to meet a number of other important deadlines. As May was a Friday, the communication was submitted to the HZA on
         the next working day, Monday, May 1999.
      
Therefore, according to MZ, even if the HZA did not receive the communication on the date provided, the delay was trivial,
         as the HZA was unable to act earlier than May and, consequently, the delay had no effect. MZ concluded from this that
         the penalty imposed on it was disproportionate in relation to the delay which had occurred.
      
The HZA refused to grant a stay of execution of its decision and suspended the objection procedure until such time as the
         Court of Justice of the European Communities gave judgment in Molkereigenossenschaft Wiedergeltingen.
      
By decision of July 2001, the HZA then dismissed MZ’s objection as unfounded. Basing itself on the second subparagraph of
         Article 3(2) of Regulation No 536/93, the HZA pointed out, first, that within the meaning of that provision, for communications
         made after May and before June 1999, the penalty was equal to 0.1% of the quantities of milk and milk equivalent
         delivered by producers provided however that that penalty was not less than ECU or more than ECU and, secondly,
         that, according to the wording of Regulation No 536/93, any fault on the part of MZ was not a relevant factor.
      
Campina brought an action for annulment of that decision.
As to the HZA’s argument on the basis of the second subparagraph of Article 3(2) of Regulation No 536/93, Campina maintains
         that that regulation is invalid and therefore without effect in that it does not provide a mechanism for taking into account
         the extent of the delay and the fault of the undertaking concerned where a penalty provided for in that regulation is imposed.
         That is precisely what the Court criticised in the original version of that provision in its judgment in Molkereigenossenschaft Wiedergeltingen.
      
The Hauptzollamt Frankfurt (Oder) submitted that the action should be dismissed, maintaining that, as the second subparagraph
         of Article 3(2) of Regulation No 536/grades the penalties according to the length of the delay, it already takes the length
         of overrun sufficiently into account. It stated that the wording of the regulation does not concern itself with fault or objective
         damage.
      
The national court considers that the system of financial penalties provided for by the second subparagraph of Article 3(2)
         of Regulation No 536/is disproportionate because, in the case of a slight delay, it treats the purchaser of milk no better
         than the second subparagraph of Article 3(2) of Regulation No 536/which was declared invalid by the Court of Justice in
         Molkereigenossenschaft Wiedergeltingen.
      
It states that the period from May to June is, at the least, too long and leads to disproportionate effects, since it
         leads to the imposition of a financial penalty at the full rate even for delays which do not exceed one working day, as in
         the present case, and which have no apparent effect on the payment of the additional levy which the purchaser must make before
         September under Article 3(4) of Regulation No 536/93. It adds that, moreover, the dairy at issue does not have any additional
         levy to pay.
      
Finally, the national court finds that the financial penalty fails to take into account the question whether the late submission
         of the communication has had any effect on the administrative procedure, and especially on the payment on September. To
         that effect, it states that the Court has already pointed out that a slight delay in meeting the deadline of May would
         not jeopardise the payment of the additional levy before September (see Molkereigenossenschaft Wiedergeltingen, paragraph 41).
      
In those circumstances, the Finanzgericht des Landes Brandenburg decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following question
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Does the system of penalties laid down in the second subparagraph of Article 3(2) of [Regulation No 536/93] contravene the
         principle of proportionality in cases in which the delay in observing the deadline is only slight and has, moreover, had no
         noticeable effect?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
 Observations submitted to the Court
The Greek Government maintains that compliance with the deadline of May is necessary in the main proceedings for the proper
         functioning of the system of additional levies and of the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products, since
         the calculation of that levy is jeopardised by delays in the communication of the data referred to in the first subparagraph
         of Article 3(2) of Regulation No 536/93.
      
The government states that the financial penalties provided for in the second subparagraph of Article 3(2) of Regulation No 536/vary according to the length of the delay and the seriousness of the infringement, which makes it possible, first, for purchasers
         to be encouraged to observe the deadline of May and, second, for dairies which are not subject to the additional levy to
         be prevented from failing to comply with the time-limit. Finally, the period of approximately days provided for in the
         second subparagraph of Article 3(2) of Regulation No 536/does not appear to the Greek Government to be a manifestly inappropriate
         measure for achieving the object pursued.
      
According to the Commission, in accordance with the principle of the retroactive application of financial penalties which
         penalise in a less severe manner the infringement at issue in the main proceedings, Regulation No 1392/must be applied.
      
It points out that that regulation has, first, set the percentage at 0.01% for each calendar day of lateness as opposed to
         0.1% provided for by Regulation No 536/and, second, reduced the minimum penalty to EUR 100. According to the Commission,
         the applicability of Regulation No 1392/is not affected by the fact that the financial penalty based on Regulation No 536/has already been imposed on the applicant in the main proceedings, since the decision in the main proceedings imposing that
         penalty has been contested. The penalty thus imposed does not therefore constitute a settled legal situation.
      
As to the principle of proportionality in respect of the provisions of the second subparagraph of Article 3(2) of Regulation
         No 536/93, the Commission draws attention to the broad discretion which it enjoys in agricultural policy.
      
By virtue of that discretion, it was not required to provide for a daily grading of the amount of financial penalties and,
         consequently, was able to adopt the system at issue in the main proceedings on the basis of which purchasers who failed to
         comply with the deadline of May were thus encouraged to make the communication before the beginning of the following period,
         so as to avoid a higher penalty. The Commission considers that it did not manifestly exceed the limits of its discretion in
         choosing to adopt a period of approximately days for each stage of delay in meeting the deadline for that communication.
      
Moreover, the imposition of a financial penalty pursuant to the second subparagraph of Article 3(2) of Regulation No 536/does not go beyond what is necessary and appropriate to achieve the desired objective, namely urging purchasers to send their
         communications in good time. 
      
Finally, the Commission maintains that any delay in observing the time‑limit by purchasers leads to a reduction of the period
         which the competent national authorities have to calculate the amount of the additional levy and therefore jeopardises the
         good functioning of that system. Consequently, a duty to establish whether the overrun of the time‑limit has had an effect
         on the administrative procedure would jeopardise the dissuasive effect and the effectiveness of the financial penalties.
      
 The Court’s answer
In the procedure laid down by Article EC providing for cooperation between national courts and the Court of Justice, it
         is for the latter to provide the national court with an answer which will be of use to it and enable it to determine the case
         before it. To that end, the Court may have to reformulate the questions referred to it (Case C-286/Haug [2006] ECR I-4121, paragraph and the case‑law cited).
      
Moreover, it must be recalled that the Court has a duty to interpret all provisions of Community law which national courts
         need in order to decide the actions pending before them, even if those provisions are not expressly indicated in the questions
         referred to the Court of Justice by those courts (Case C-42/Immobiliare SIF[1997] ECR I-7089, paragraph and the case‑law cited).
      
It must be noted that the principle of the retroactive application of the more lenient penalty forms part of the constitutional
         traditions common to the Member States and, accordingly, must be considered to be one of the general principles of Community
         law, which the Court ensures are respected and which national courts are required to abide by (see, to that effect, Joined
         Cases C-387/02, C-391/and C-403/Berlusconi and Others [2005] ECR I-3565, paragraphs to 69).
      
That principle is more specifically laid down in the second sentence of Article 2(2) of Regulation No 2988/95, according to
         which the competent authorities are obliged to apply retroactively penalties provided for by sectoral rules to practices on
         the ground that those penalties are less severe (see, to that effect, Case C‑295/Gerken [2004] ECR I‑6369, paragraph 61).
      
It is apparent from the order for reference that the main proceedings concern a slight delay in observing the deadline of
         May, since the communication reached the competent national authorities on the next working day.
      
In order to provide the referring court with a useful answer, it must therefore be established whether, in a particular situation
         such as that at issue in the main proceedings, characterised by a slight delay in observing the deadline of May, Regulation
         No 1392/is to be considered as providing for a system of financial penalties which is less severe than that imposed by
         Regulation No 536/93.
      
As set out in Article 5(3) of Regulation No 1392/2001, the financial penalty for a failure to observe the deadline of May
         such as that at issue in the main proceedings is, first, set at an amount equal to the levy due for a 0.01% overrun for each
         calendar day of delay of the reference quantity for direct sales which the purchaser has at his disposal and, second, may
         not be less than EUR nor more than EUR 000.
      
By contrast, pursuant to the first indent of the second subparagraph of Regulation No 536/93, the financial penalty for a
         failure to respect the deadline of May such as that at issue in the main proceedings, first, corresponds to 0.1% of the
         quantities of milk and milk equivalent delivered to the purchaser by the producers and, second, may not be less than ECU nor more than ECU 000.
      
It therefore follows, as the Commission has rightly pointed out in its observations, that in the case of a slight delay in
         observing the deadline of May, such as in the case at issue, the system of financial penalties under Article 5(3) of Regulation
         No 1392/is less severe than that provided for by the first indent of the second subparagraph of Article 3(2) of Regulation
         No 536/93.
      
In the light of that interpretation, there is no need to adjudicate on the proportionality of the system of financial penalties
         provided for by the second subparagraph of Article 3(2) of Regulation No 536/93.
      
Having regard to all of the foregoing, the answer to the question referred must be that
–       the principle of retroactive application of the more lenient penalty must be respected by national courts when they have to
         penalise practices which do not comply with rules laid down by Community legislation;
      
–       in the case of a slight delay in observing the deadline such as that at issue in the main proceedings, the system of financial
         penalties provided for by Article 5(3) of Regulation No 1392/is less severe than that provided for by the first indent
         of the second subparagraph of Article 3(2) of Regulation No 536/93.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fifth Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      The principle of retroactive application of the more lenient penalty must be respected by national courts when they have to
            penalise practices which do not comply with rules laid down by Community legislation.
2.      In the case of a slight delay in observing the deadline such as that at issue in the main proceedings, the system of financial
            penalties provided for by Article 5(3) of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1392/of July laying down detailed rules
            for applying Council Regulation (EEC) No 3950/establishing an additional levy on milk and milk products is less severe
            than that provided for by the first indent of the second subparagraph of Article 3(2) of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 536/of March laying down detailed rules on the application of the additional levy on milk and milk products, as amended
            by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1001/of May 1998.
[Signatures]
* Language of the Case: German.
      
Top  
 