
Case C-91/Commission of the European Communities
v
Council of the European Union
(Action for annulment – Article EU – Common foreign and security policy – Decision 2004/833/CFSP – Implementation of Joint Action 2002/589/CFSP – Combating the proliferation of small arms and light weapons – Community competence – Development cooperation policy)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        European Union – Common foreign and security policy – Powers of the Community judicature – Acts adopted under Title V of the
            Treaty on European Union 
(Arts EC and EC; Arts 46(f) EU and EU)
2.        European Union – Common foreign and security policy – Acts adopted under Title V of the Treaty on European Union
(Art. EU)
3.        Development cooperation – Competence of the Community – Extent – Measures to combat the proliferation of small arms and light
            weapons 
(Art. EC)
4.        European Union – Common foreign and security policy – Combating the proliferation of small arms and light weapons 
(Art. EU; Council Decision 2004/833)
1.        It follows from Article 46(f) EU that the provisions of the EC Treaty concerning the powers of the Court and the exercise
         of those powers are applicable to Article EU. Under the latter article, none of the provisions of the EC Treaty is to be
         affected by a provision of the EU Treaty.
      
It is therefore the task of the Court to ensure that acts which, according to the Council, fall within the scope of Title
         V of the EU Treaty and which, by their nature, are capable of having legal effects, do not encroach upon the powers conferred
         by the EC Treaty on the Community.
      
It follows that the Court has jurisdiction to consider an action for annulment of an act adopted under Title V of the EU Treaty
         brought by a Community institution under Article EC and, in that context, to consider the pleas invoked in accordance
         with Article EC in so far as they allege an infringement of Article EU.
      
(see paras 31-34)
2.        A measure having legal effects adopted under Title V of the EU Treaty affects the provisions of the EC Treaty within the meaning
         of Article EU whenever it could have been adopted on the basis of the EC Treaty, it being unnecessary to examine whether
         the measure prevents or limits the exercise by the Community of its competences. If it is established that the provisions
         of a measure adopted under Titles V or VI of the EU Treaty, on account of both their aim and their content, have as their
         main purpose the implementation of a policy conferred by the EC Treaty on the Community, and if they could properly have been
         adopted on the basis of the EC Treaty, those provisions will infringe Article EU.
      
Since the infringement of Article EU arises from the fact that a measure having legal effects adopted by the Union on the
         basis of the EU Treaty could have been adopted by the Community, it is also not relevant whether, in an area which does not
         fall within the exclusive competence of the Community and in which, therefore, the Member States are not precluded from exercising,
         individually or collectively, their competences, such a measure could have been adopted by the Member States in exercise of
         their competences.
      
Moreover, the question whether the provisions of such a measure adopted by the Union fall within the competence of the Community
         relates to the attribution and, thus, the very existence of that competence, and not its exclusive or shared nature.
      
(see paras 60-62)
3.        While the objectives of current Community development cooperation policy should not be limited to measures directly related
         to the campaign against poverty, it is none the less necessary, if a measure is to fall within that policy, that it contributes
         to the pursuit of that policy’s economic and social development objectives. In that regard, it is apparent from a number of
         documents emanating from the Union institutions and from the European Council that certain measures aiming to prevent fragility
         in developing countries, including those adopted in order to combat the proliferation of small arms and light weapons, can
         contribute to the elimination or reduction of obstacles to the economic and social development of those countries.
      
Nevertheless, a concrete measure aiming to combat the proliferation of small arms and light weapons may be adopted by the
         Community under its development cooperation policy only if that measure, by virtue both of its aim and its content, falls
         within the scope of the competences conferred by the EC Treaty on the Community in that field. That is not the case if such
         a measure, even if it contributes to the economic and social development of the developing country, has as its main purpose
         the implementation of the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the Union.
      
(see paras 67-68, 71-72)
4.        Decision 2004/implementing Joint Action 2002/589/CFSP with a view to a European Union contribution to the Economic Community
         of West African States in the framework of the Moratorium on Small Arms and Light Weapons contains, taking account of its
         aim and its content, two components, neither of which can be considered to be incidental to the other, one falling within
         Community development cooperation policy and the other within the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP).
      
With regard to a measure which simultaneously pursues a number of objectives or which has several components, without one
         being incidental to the other, where various legal bases of the EC Treaty are applicable, that measure will have to be founded,
         exceptionally, on the various corresponding legal bases. However, under Article EU, such a solution is impossible with
         regard to a measure which pursues a number of objectives or which has several components falling, respectively, within development
         cooperation policy, as conferred by the EC Treaty on the Community, and within the CFSP, and where neither one of those components
         is incidental to the other. Since Article EU precludes the Union from adopting, on the basis of the EU Treaty, a measure
         which could properly be adopted on the basis of the EC Treaty, the Union cannot have recourse to a legal basis falling within
         the CFSP in order to adopt provisions which also fall within a competence conferred by the EC Treaty on the Community.
      
It follows that the Council infringed Article EU by adopting Decision 2004/on the basis of Title V of the EU Treaty,
         since that decision* also falls within development cooperation policy.
      
(see paras 75-77, 108-109)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Action for annulment – Article EU – Common foreign and security policy – Decision 2004/833/CFSP – Implementation of Joint Action 2002/589/CFSP – Combating the proliferation of small arms and light weapons – Community competence – Development cooperation policy)
In Case C‑91/05,
ACTION for annulment under Article EC, brought on February 2005,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by M. Petite, P.J. Kuijper and J. Enegren, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
supported by:
European Parliament, represented by R. Passos, K. Lindahl and D. Gauci, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
intervener,
v
Council of the European Union, represented by J.-C. Piris, R. Gosalbo Bono, S. Marquardt and E. Finnegan, acting as Agents,
      
defendant,
supported by:
Kingdom of Denmark, represented by A. Jacobsen, C. Thorning and L. Lander Madsen, acting as Agents,
      
Kingdom of Spain, represented by N. Díaz Abad, acting as Agent,
      
French Republic, represented by G. de Bergues, E. Belliard and C. Jurgensen, acting as Agents,
      
Kingdom of the Netherlands, represented by M. de Grave, C. Wissels and H.G. Sevenster, acting as Agents,
      
Kingdom of Sweden, represented by A. Falk, acting as Agent,
      
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, represented by R. Caudwell and E. Jenkinson, acting as Agents, assisted by A. Dashwood, barrister,
      
interveners,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas, K. Lenaerts (Rapporteur), A. Tizzano and G. Arestis,
         Presidents of Chambers, A. Borg Barthet, M. Ilešič, J. Malenovský and J.-C. Bonichot, Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Mengozzi,
Registrar: J. Swedenborg, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on December 2006,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2007,
gives the following
Judgment
By its action, the Commission of the European Communities asks the Court to annul Council Decision 2004/833/CFSP of December
         implementing Joint Action 2002/589/CFSP with a view to a European Union contribution to ECOWAS in the framework of the
         Moratorium on Small Arms and Light Weapons (OJ L 359, p. 65; ‘the contested decision’) and to declare illegal and hence
         inapplicable the Council Joint Action 2002/589/CFSP of July on the European Union’s contribution to combating the
         destabilising accumulation and spread of small arms and light weapons and repealing Joint Action 1999/34/CFSP (OJ L 191,
         p. 1; ‘the contested joint action’), in particular Title II thereof.
      
 Legal context and background to the dispute
 The Cotonou Agreement
On June the Partnership Agreement between the members of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States (‘the
         ACP States’) of the one part, and the European Community and its Member States, of the other part, was signed in Cotonou,
         Benin (OJ L 317, p. 3; ‘the Cotonou Agreement’); it was approved on behalf of the Community by Council Decision 2003/159/EC
         of December (OJ L 65, p. 27). It entered into force on April 2003.
      
Article of the Cotonou Agreement, entitled ‘Objectives of the partnership’, states:
      
‘The Community and its Member States, of the one part, and the ACP States, of the other part, hereinafter referred to as the
         “Parties” hereby conclude this Agreement in order to promote and expedite the economic, cultural and social development of
         the ACP States, with a view to contributing to peace and security and to promoting a stable and democratic political environment.
      
The partnership shall be centred on the objective of reducing and eventually eradicating poverty consistent with the objectives
         of sustainable development and the gradual integration of the ACP countries into the world economy.
      
These objectives and the Parties’ international commitments shall inform all development strategies and shall be tackled through
         an integrated approach taking account at the same time of the political, economic, social, cultural and environmental aspects
         of development. The partnership shall provide a coherent support framework for the development strategies adopted by each
         ACP State.
      
…’
Article of the Cotonou Agreement, entitled ‘Peace-building policies, conflict prevention and resolution’, states:
      
‘1.      The Parties shall pursue an active, comprehensive and integrated policy of peace-building and conflict prevention and resolution
         within the framework of the Partnership. This policy shall be based on the principle of ownership. It shall in particular
         focus on building regional, sub-regional and national capacities, and on preventing violent conflicts at an early stage by
         addressing their root-causes in a targeted manner, and with an adequate combination of all available instruments.
      
2.      The activities in the field of peace-building, conflict prevention and resolution shall in particular include support for
         balancing political, economic, social and cultural opportunities among all segments of society, for strengthening the democratic
         legitimacy and effectiveness of governance, for establishing effective mechanisms for the peaceful conciliation of group interests,
         for bridging dividing lines among different segments of society as well as support for an active and organised civil society.
      
3.      Relevant activities shall also include, inter alia, support for mediation, negotiation and reconciliation efforts, for effective
         regional management of shared, scarce natural resources, for demobilisation and reintegration of former combatants into the
         society, for addressing the problem of child soldiers, as well as for suitable action to set responsible limits to military
         expenditure and the arms trade, including through support for the promotion and application of agreed standards and codes
         of conduct. In this context, particular emphasis shall be given to the fight against anti-personnel landmines as well as to
         addressing an excessive and uncontrolled spread, illegal trafficking and accumulation of small arms and light weapons.
      
…’
Under Articles to of Annex IV of the Cotonou Agreement, entitled ‘Implementation and Management Procedures’, a regional
         support strategy and a regional indicative programme were drawn up in a document signed on February by the Commission,
         of the one part, and by the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the West African Economic and Monetary
         Union (WAEMU), of the other.
      
This document highlights, in section 2.3.1, entitled ‘Security and conflict prevention’, ‘the importance of controlling the
         traffic in small arms’, noting that ‘there is a moratorium on export and import supported by the United Nations’. Section
         6.4.1, entitled ‘Support for a regional policy of conflict prevention and good governance’, refers to support which may be
         given to back up the United Nations in carrying out priority measures under the action plan to implement a moratorium on the
         import, export and production of small arms.
      
Following a request from ECOWAS, in the Commission started preparing a financing proposal for conflict prevention and
         peace-building operations. According to the Commission, the largest single block of this financing was to be allocated to
         the ECOWAS Small Arms Control Programme.
      
 The contested joint action
On July 2002, the Council of the European Union adopted, on the basis of Article EU, the contested joint action, which
         repealed and replaced Council Joint Action 1999/34/CFSP of December 1998, adopted on the basis of Article J.of the Treaty
         on European Union, on the European Union’s contribution to combating the destabilising accumulation and spread of small arms
         and light weapons (OJ L 9, p. 1).
      
According to Article 1(1) of the contested joint action, ‘[t]he objectives of this Joint Action are:
      
–        to combat, and contribute to ending, the destabilising accumulation and spread of small arms,
–        to contribute to the reduction of existing accumulations of these weapons and their ammunition to levels consistent with countries’
         legitimate security needs, and 
      
–        to help solve the problems caused by such accumulations.’
Title I of the contested joint action, entitled ‘Principles on preventive and reactive aspects’, sets out the programme on
         the basis of which the European Union will aim to build consensus in the relevant regional and international forums. To this
         end, it sets out the principles and measures which must be realised in order to prevent the further destabilising accumulation
         of small arms (Article 3) and to reduce existing accumulations of small arms and their ammunition (Article 4).
      
Among the principles and measures which must be realised in order to prevent the further destabilising accumulation of small
         arms, Article of the contested joint action refers to commitments by all the countries concerned regarding the production,
         export, import and holding of those arms, as well as the establishment and maintenance of national inventories of weapons
         and the establishment of restrictive national weapons legislation.
      
Among the principles and measures which must be realised in order to reduce existing accumulations of small arms and their
         ammunition, Article of the contested joint action mentions the provision of assistance as appropriate to countries requesting
         support for controlling or eliminating surplus small arms on their territory, and the promotion of confidence-building measures
         and incentives to encourage the voluntary surrender of surplus or illegally-held small arms and their ammunition.
      
Title II of the contested joint action, headed ‘Contribution by the Union to specific actions’, provides, in particular, for
         financial and technical assistance to programmes and projects which make a direct contribution to the principles and measures
         referred to in Title I. 
      
Article 6(2) of the joint action states:
      
‘In providing such assistance, the Union shall take into account in particular the recipients’ commitments to comply with
         the principles mentioned in Article 3; their respect for human rights; their compliance with international humanitarian law
         and the protection of the rule of law; and their compliance with their international commitments, in particular with regard
         to existing peace treaties and international arms control agreements.’
      
Under Article 7(1) of the contested joint action, the Council is to decide on the allocation of the financial and technical
         assistance referred to in Article 6(1) of the joint action, on the priorities for the use of those funds and on the conditions
         for implementing specific actions of the Union. Article 7(2) provides that ‘[t]he Council shall decide on the principle, arrangements
         and financing of such projects on the basis of concrete and properly-costed project proposals and on a case-by-case basis,
         without prejudice to Member States’ bilateral contributions and operation of the Community’. 
      
Article of the contested joint action provides:
      
‘The Council notes that the Commission intends to direct its action towards achieving the objectives and the priorities of
         this Joint Action, where appropriate by pertinent Community measures.’
      
Article 9(1) of the joint action provides:
      
‘The Council and the Commission shall be responsible for ensuring the consistency of the Union’s activities in the field of
         small arms, in particular with regard to its development policies. For this purpose, Member States and the Commission shall
         submit any relevant information to the relevant Council bodies. The Council and the Commission shall ensure implementation
         of their respective action, each in accordance with its powers.’
      
 The contested decision
On December 2004, the Council adopted the contested decision, which implements the contested joint action with a view to
         a contribution by the Union to ECOWAS in the framework of the Moratorium on Small Arms and Light Weapons. As its legal basis,
         the contested decision refers to the contested joint action, in particular Article thereof, in conjunction with Article
         23(2) EU.
      
The preamble of the contested decision contains the following recitals:
      
‘(1)      The excessive and uncontrolled accumulation and spread of small arms and light weapons poses a threat to peace and security
         and reduces the prospects for sustainable development; this is particularly the case in West Africa.
      
(2)      In pursuing the objectives set out in Article of [the contested] Joint Action, the European Union envisages operating within
         the relevant international forums to promote confidence-building measures. This Decision is accordingly intended to implement
         the said Joint Action.
      
(3)      The European Union considers that a financial contribution and technical assistance would help to consolidate the [ECOWAS]
         initiative concerning small arms and light weapons.
      
(4)      The European Union therefore intends to offer financial support and technical assistance to ECOWAS in accordance with Title
         II of [the contested] Joint Action.’
      
Under Article of the contested decision, the Union is to contribute towards implementing projects in the framework of the
         ECOWAS Moratorium on the Import, Export and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light Weapons. To that end, it is to offer a financial
         contribution and technical assistance in order to set up the Light Weapons Unit within the ECOWAS Technical Secretariat and
         to convert the Moratorium into a Convention on small arms and light weapons between the ECOWAS Member States.
      
Article of the contested decision provides:
      
‘The Commission shall be entrusted with the financial implementation of this Decision. To that end, it shall conclude a financing
         agreement with ECOWAS on the conditions for use of the European Union contribution, which shall take the form of a grant.
         Amongst other things, this grant shall cover, over a period of months, salaries, travel expenses, supplies and equipment
         necessary for setting up the Light Weapons Unit within the ECOWAS Technical Secretariat and converting the Moratorium into
         a Convention on small arms and light weapons between the ECOWAS Member States. …’
      
Article 4(2) of the decision provides:
      
‘The Presidency and the Commission shall submit to the relevant Council bodies regular reports on the consistency of the European
         Union’s activities in the field of small arms and light weapons, in particular with regard to its development policies, in
         accordance with Article 9(1) of [the contested] Joint Action. More particularly, the Commission shall report on the aspects
         referred to in the first sentence of Article 3. This information shall be based, amongst other things, on regular reports
         to be supplied by ECOWAS under its contractual relationship with the Commission.’
      
When the draft of the contested decision was discussed by the Committee of Permanent Representatives on November 2004,
         the Commission made the following declaration to the minutes of the Council meeting (document No 15236/PESC of November 2004):
      
‘In the view of the Commission this Joint Action should not have been adopted and the project ought to have been financed
         from the 9th [European Development Fund – ‘EDF’] under the Cotonou Agreement. This is clearly borne out by Article 11(3) of
         the Cotonou Agreement which specifically mentions the fight against the accumulation of small arms and light weapons as a
         relevant activity. It is also reflected in the annotation to the relevant [Common Foreign and Security Policy – ‘CFSP’] budget
         line (02) in the budget, which excludes CFSP financing of such projects if they “are already covered by the provisions
         of the Cotonou Agreement …”.
      
The Joint Action for financing under the CFSP would have been eligible under the 9th EDF and fully coherent with the regional
         indicative programme with ECOWAS. This is demonstrated by the fact that the Commission is already preparing a financing proposal
         for an indicative amount of EUR 1.million to support the implementation of the ECOWAS moratorium on small arms and light
         weapons (SALW).
      
Finally, the Joint Action falls within the shared competences on which Community development policy and the Cotonou Agreement
         are based. Such areas of shared competences are just as much protected by Article [EU] as the areas of exclusive Community
         competence; otherwise Article would be deprived of a large part of its useful effect. The Commission reserves its rights
         in this matter.’
      
Taking the view that the contested decision was not adopted on the correct legal basis, and that by virtue of that fact Article
         EU was infringed, the Commission brought the present action.
      
 Forms of order sought by the parties
The Commission claims that the Court should:
      
–        annul the contested decision;
–        declare illegal and hence inapplicable the contested joint action, in particular Title II thereof.
The Council contends that the Court should:
      
–        dismiss the application for annulment of the contested decision as unfounded;
–        dismiss the Commission’s application for a declaration of the inapplicability of the contested joint action as inadmissible
         and, in the alternative, as unfounded;
      
–        order the Commission to pay the costs. 
By order of the President of the Court of September 2005, the European Parliament was granted leave to intervene in support
         of the form of order sought by the Commission.
      
By the same order, the Kingdom of Spain, the French Republic, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Kingdom of Sweden and the
         United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland were granted leave to intervene in support of the form of order sought
         by the Council. By order of the President of the Court of September 2005, the Kingdom of Denmark was granted leave to appeal
         in support of the form of order sought by the Council.
      
 Jurisdiction of the Court
By the present action for annulment, brought under Article EC, the Commission is seeking a declaration that the Council,
         by adopting the contested decision, has encroached upon Community competences and, therefore, infringed Article EU. In
         so far as the contested decision is based on the contested joint action, the Commission relies on Article EC in order
         to invoke the inapplicability of that joint action, in particular Title II thereof, on the ground that it also infringes Article
         EU.
      
Without thereby calling in question the jurisdiction of the Court to rule on the action, the Council, supported by the Spanish
         and United Kingdom governments, submits, in particular with regard to the plea based on the illegality of the contested joint
         action, that the Court has no jurisdiction to rule on the legality of a measure falling within the CFSP.
      
In that regard, it follows from Article 46(f) EU that the provisions of the EC Treaty concerning the powers of the Court and
         the exercise of those powers are applicable to Article EU.
      
Under Article EU, none of the provisions of the EC Treaty is to be affected by a provision of the Treaty on European Union
         (Case C-176/Commission v Council [2005] ECR I-7879, paragraph 38, and Case C-440/Commission v Council [2007] ECR I-0000, paragraph 52).
      
It is therefore the task of the Court to ensure that acts which, according to the Council, fall within the scope of Title
         V of the Treaty on European Union and which, by their nature, are capable of having legal effects, do not encroach upon the
         powers conferred by the EC Treaty on the Community (see, to that effect, Case C-170/Commission v Council [1998] ECR I-2763, paragraph 16; Case C-176/Commission v Council, paragraph 39; and Case C-440/Commission v Council, paragraph 53).
      
It follows that the Court has jurisdiction to consider the action for annulment brought by the Commission under Article EC and, in that context, to consider the pleas invoked in accordance with Article EC in so far as they allege an infringement
         of Article EU.
      
 The action
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission, supported by the Parliament, claims that the contested decision should be annulled because it impinges upon
         competences conferred upon the Community in the area of development cooperation, thus infringing Article EU.
      
The Commission and the Parliament take the view that Article EU establishes a ‘fixed’ boundary between the competences
         of the Community and those of the Union. If, in an area of shared competence, such as development cooperation policy, the
         Member States retain the competence to act by themselves, whether individually or collectively, to the extent that the Community
         has not yet exercised its competence, the same cannot be said for the Union which, under Article EU, does not enjoy the
         same complementary competence, but must respect the competences of the Community, whether exclusive or not, even if they have
         not been exercised. Therefore, there is an encroachment upon Community competences whenever the Council adopts, in the framework
         of the CFSP, an act which could properly have been adopted on the basis of the EC Treaty.
      
According to the Commission and the Parliament, the combating of the proliferation of small arms and light weapons, since
         it has become an integral part of development cooperation policy, falls within the scope of the competences conferred on the
         Community in that field. Cooperation in the long-term development of a country can be effective only where there is a minimum
         degree of stability and democratic legitimacy. As part of that stability perspective, the policy of mine clearance and decommissioning
         of small arms and light weapons constitutes an indispensable means of achieving the objectives of development cooperation
         policy.
      
The Commission claims that the integration of the campaign against the proliferation of small arms and light weapons into
         Community development cooperation policy was established by the Cotonou Agreement, in particular Article 11(3) thereof.
      
The connection between the destabilising accumulation of small arms and light weapons and development cooperation policy is
         moreover recognised by the Council itself and by the international community.
      
According to the Commission, supported by the Parliament, the contested decision, by virtue of its objective and its content,
         falls within the scope of Community competences and could therefore properly have been adopted on the basis of the EC Treaty.
         First, the objective of the contested decision is not only the promotion of peace and security, but also the improvement of
         the prospects for sustainable development in West Africa. Second, the strengthening of the Light Weapons Unit within the ECOWAS
         Technical Secretariat and the appointment of experts in order to draw up a draft convention on light weapons, as provided
         for in the annex to the contested decision, constitutes a typical form of assistance in the context of development cooperation
         planning, which does not require specific activities falling within the CFSP.
      
In so far as the contested decision is based on the contested joint action, the Commission, supported by the Parliament, is
         seeking to have the joint action, and in particular Title II thereof, declared illegal on the ground that it encroaches on
         Community competences. While certain aspects of the fight against the proliferation of small arms and light weapons can fall
         within the CFSP, in particular police or military action to collect weapons or begin destruction programmes, that does not
         apply to the measures of financial and technical assistance provided for under Title II of the joint action, which fall within
         Community competences in the field of development cooperation and of economic, financial and technical cooperation with third
         countries.
      
The Council, supported by all the intervening governments of the Member States, considers that there is no basis to claim
         infringement of Article EU since the campaign against the proliferation of small arms and light weapons does not fall within
         Community competences in the field of development cooperation policy or within any other Community competences. 
      
With regard, first, to Article EU, the Council submits that that provision aims to protect the balance of powers established
         by the Treaties and cannot be interpreted as aiming to protect the competences conferred upon the Community to the detriment
         of those enjoyed by the Union. In contrast to the Commission, the Council is of the view that Article EU does not establish
         a fixed boundary between Community and Union competences. In order to determine whether action by the Union affects Community
         competences, it is necessary to take into account the nature of the competences conferred on the Community in the sector concerned,
         in particular the complementary character of Community competence in the field of development cooperation.
      
According to the United Kingdom government, in order to regard a measure based on the EU Treaty as contrary to Article EU, it is necessary, first, that the Community be competent to adopt a measure having the same purpose and the same content.
         Second, the measure based on the EU Treaty must encroach on a competence conferred upon the Community by preventing or limiting
         the exercise of that competence, thus creating a pre-emptive effect on Community competence. Such an effect is however impossible
         in an area such as development cooperation, where the Community has concurrent competences. 
      
The Council, supported by all the intervening governments of the Member States, then contends that the campaign against the
         destabilising accumulation and spread of small arms and light weapons does not fall within the competences conferred on the
         Community.
      
Neither the combating of the proliferation of small arms and light weapons, nor the more general objectives of preserving
         peace and strengthening security, appear among the objectives of the Community contained in Articles EC and EC. Furthermore,
         according to Article 177(1) EC, the main aim of Community development cooperation policy is the reduction of poverty. The
         objectives of preserving peace and strengthening international security fall exclusively within the EU Treaty, in particular
         the CFSP. The provisions of the EC Treaty cannot therefore be interpreted broadly without undermining the coexistence of the
         Union and the Community as integrated but distinct legal orders and also the constitutional architecture formed by the three
         ‘pillars’ as a whole.
      
The Council, supported by the French, Netherlands and United Kingdom Governments, considers that the fact that the proliferation
         of small arms and light weapons may incidentally affect the prospects for sustainable development does not mean that the whole
         of that area falls within Community competences. 
      
The Council and the United Kingdom Government contend, in addition, that, if the Commission’s argument were accepted, the
         CFSP would be of no practical effect at all. That government adds that, were an incidental effect on the objectives of a Community
         competence sufficient to bring the matter under that competence, there would no longer be any limits to the scope of Community
         competences, thus undermining the principle of conferred competences. The Netherlands Government, for its part, does not consider
         it desirable to restrict the role of the CFSP in preserving peace and security in developing countries, since that policy
         enables the Council to act rapidly and decisively in those countries.
      
The Council, supported by the Spanish, French, Swedish and United Kingdom Governments, submits that, given the ‘mixed’ character
         of the Cotonou Agreement, a Community competence to combat the destabilising accumulation and spread of small arms and light
         weapons cannot be derived from that agreement either. 
      
Both the Council and all the intervening governments of the Member States consider furthermore that the contested decision
         was adopted in accordance with the provisions and the spirit of the EU Treaty. Since the principal objective of the contested
         decision is to combat the accumulation and spread of small arms and light weapons, it does not fall within Community competence
         but in fact within Union competences in the framework of the CFSP.
      
First, the campaign against the proliferation of small arms and light weapons is part of the CFSP’s fundamental objective,
         which is the preservation of peace and the strengthening of international security, as stated in Article EU. The Swedish
         government adds that, with regard to the fight against the spread of small arms and light weapons in West Africa, the United
         Nations Security Council has adopted a number of resolutions inviting the international community of donors to implement the
         ECOWAS moratorium on those weapons and to support its technical secretariat.
      
Second, the Council and the intervening governments of the Member States maintain that, in so far as a measure falls within
         the CFSP, Article EU does not preclude the Union from using the same instruments as those employed by the Community in
         the sphere of development cooperation. In order to further the objectives assigned to it in the framework of the CFSP, the
         instruments at the disposal of the Union are not limited to diplomatic or military démarches, but also comprise operational
         activities, such as the financial or technical assistance required to achieve the desired objectives.
      
The Council and the French Government point out moreover that the contested joint action was implemented by a series of decisions
         falling within the CFSP, the legality of which was not challenged by the Commission, that is: Council Decision 2002/842/CFSP
         of October concerning the implementation of Joint Action 2002/with a view to a European Union contribution to
         combating the destabilising accumulation and spread of small arms and light weapons in South East Europe (OJ L 289, p.
         1); Council Decision 2003/543/CFSP of July concerning the implementation of Joint Action 2002/with a view to a
         European Union contribution to combating the destabilising accumulation and spread of small arms and light weapons in Latin
         America and the Caribbean (OJ L 185, p. 59); Council Decision 2004/790/CFSP of November extending and amending
         Decision 2003/276/CFSP implementing Joint Action 2002/with a view to a European Union contribution to the destruction
         of ammunition for small arms and light weapons in Albania (OJ L 348, p. 45); Council Decision 2004/791/CFSP of November
         extending and amending Decision 2002/842/CFSP implementing Joint Action 2002/with a view to a European Union contribution
         to combating the destabilising accumulation and spread of small arms and light weapons in South East Europe (OJ L 348,
         p. 46); Council Decision 2004/792/CFSP of November extending and amending Decision 1999/730/CFSP implementing Joint
         Action 1999/with a view to a European Union contribution to combating the destabilising accumulation and spread of small
         arms and light weapons in Cambodia (OJ L 348, p. 47), and Council Decision 2005/852/CFSP of November for the
         destruction of small arms and light weapons (SALW) and their ammunition in Ukraine (OJ L 315, p. 27).
      
Finally, the Council, supported in that regard by the Spanish and United Kingdom governments, argues that the Commission’s
         plea that the contested joint action is illegal is inadmissible, since a privileged applicant, such as the Commission, is
         barred from pleading the illegality of an act the annulment of which it could have sought directly by an action under Article
         EC.
      
While referring to the arguments concerning the contested decision, the Council and the Netherlands, Swedish and United Kingdom
         Governments submit that, in any event, the contested joint action was adopted in full compliance with Article EU.
      
 Findings of the Court
 Application of Article EU
As stated in paragraphs to of this judgment, under Article EU, it is the task of the Court to ensure that the acts
         which, according to the Council, fall within the scope of Title V of the EU Treaty and which are capable of having legal effects
         do not encroach upon the powers conferred by provisions of the EC Treaty on the Community.
      
According to the Commission, the contested decision fails to respect the division of competences between the Community and
         the Union established by Article EU as it could have been adopted on the basis of competences conferred on the Community
         in the area of development cooperation. The same applies to the provisions of Title II of the contested joint action, as implemented
         by the contested decision, which, it claims, fall either within Community competences concerning development cooperation or
         those concerning economic, financial and technical cooperation with third countries.
      
It is therefore necessary to determine whether the provisions of the contested decision affect competences enjoyed by the
         Community under the EC Treaty, on the ground that, as the Commission argues, they could have been adopted on the basis of
         that treaty (see, to that effect, Case C-176/Commission v Council, paragraph 40, and Case C-440/Commission v Council, paragraph 54).
      
In providing that nothing in the EU Treaty is to affect the Treaties establishing the European Communities or the subsequent
         Treaties and Acts modifying or supplementing them, Article EU aims, in accordance with the fifth indent of Article EU
         and the first paragraph of Article EU, to maintain and build on the acquis communautaire.
      
Contrary to what is submitted by the United Kingdom Government, a measure having legal effects adopted under Title V of the
         EU Treaty affects the provisions of the EC Treaty within the meaning of Article EU whenever it could have been adopted
         on the basis of the EC Treaty, it being unnecessary to examine whether the measure prevents or limits the exercise by the
         Community of its competences. It is apparent from the case-law of the Court that, if it is established that the provisions
         of a measure adopted under Titles V or VI of the EU Treaty, on account of both their aim and their content, have as their
         main purpose the implementation of a policy conferred by the EC Treaty on the Community, and if they could properly have been
         adopted on the basis of the EC Treaty, the Court must find that those provisions infringe Article EU (see, to that effect,
         Case C-176/Commission v Council, paragraphs and 53, and Case C-440/Commission v Council, paragraphs to 74).
      
Since the infringement of Article EU arises from the fact that a measure having legal effects adopted by the Union on the
         basis of the EU Treaty could have been adopted by the Community, it is also not relevant whether in an area such as development
         cooperation – which does not fall within the exclusive competence of the Community and in which, therefore, the Member States
         are not precluded from exercising, individually or collectively, their competences (see, to that effect, Joined Cases C-181/and C-248/Parliament v Council and Commission [1993] ECR I-3685, paragraph 16, and C-316/Parliament v Council [1994] ECR I-625, paragraph 26) – such a measure could have been adopted by the Member States in exercise of their competences.
      
Moreover, the question whether the provisions of such a measure adopted by the Union fall within the competence of the Community
         relates to the attribution and, thus, the very existence of that competence, and not its exclusive or shared nature (see,
         to that effect, Case C-459/Commission v Ireland [2006] ECR I-4635, paragraph 93).
      
It is therefore necessary to determine whether the contested decision infringes Article EU inasmuch as it could have been
         adopted on the basis of the provisions of the EC Treaty.
      
 Demarcation of the areas of Community development cooperation policy and the CFSP respectively 
With regard to Community development cooperation policy, the Court has held that the objectives pursued by Article 130u of
         the EC Treaty (now Article EC) are broad in the sense that it must be possible for the measures required for their pursuit
         to concern various specific matters (Case C-268/Portugal v Council [1996] ECR I-6177, paragraph 37).
      
Articles EC to EC, which deal with cooperation with developing countries, refer not only to the sustainable economic
         and social development of those countries, their smooth and gradual integration into the world economy and the campaign against
         poverty, but also to the development and consolidation of democracy and the rule of law, as well as to respect for human rights
         and fundamental freedoms, in compliance also with commitments in the context of the United Nations and other international
         organisations (C-403/Parliament v Commission [2007] ECR I-0000, paragraph 56).
      
In addition, it follows from the Joint Statement by the Council and the representatives of the governments of the Member States
         meeting within the Council, the European Parliament and the Commission on European Union Development Policy, entitled ‘The
         European Consensus [on Development]’ (OJ C 46, p. 1) that there can be no sustainable development and eradication of
         poverty without peace and security and that the pursuit of the objectives of the Community’s new development policy necessarily
         proceed via the promotion of democracy and respect for human rights (C-403/Parliament v Commission, paragraph 57).
      
While the objectives of current Community development cooperation policy should therefore not be limited to measures directly
         related to the campaign against poverty, it is none the less necessary, if a measure is to fall within that policy, that it
         contributes to the pursuit of that policy’s economic and social development objectives (see, to that effect, Case C-268/Portugal v Council, paragraphs 44, 60, and 73).
      
In that regard, it is apparent from a number of documents emanating from the Union institutions and from the European Council
         that certain measures aiming to prevent fragility in developing countries, including those adopted in order to combat the
         proliferation of small arms and light weapons, can contribute to the elimination or reduction of obstacles to the economic
         and social development of those countries. 
      
For example, on May 1999, the ‘development’ Council of the European Union adopted a resolution on small arms in which it
         presented the proliferation of those weapons as a problem of global proportions which, in particular in crisis zones and countries
         where the security situation is unstable, has been an obstacle to peaceful economic and social development. More recently,
         in the European Union strategy to combat illicit accumulation and trafficking of small arms and light weapons adopted by the
         European Council on and December (Council document No 5319/PESC of January 2006), the European Council
         referred, among the consequences of the illicit spread of small arms and light weapons, in particular to those relating to
         the development of the countries concerned, that is, the weakening of State structures, displacement of persons, collapse
         of health and education services, declining economic activity, reduced government resources, the spread of pandemics, damage
         to the social fabric and, in the long term, the reduction or withholding of development aid, while adding that those consequences
         constitute, for sub-Saharan Africa, the region principally affected, a key factor in limiting development.
      
Equally, the Joint Statement by the Council and the representatives of the governments of the Member States meeting within
         the Council, the European Parliament and the Commission on European Union development policy, mentioned in paragraph of
         the present judgment, refers, in paragraph 37, to insecurity and violent conflict as amongst the biggest obstacles to the
         achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, agreed by the United Nations, while mentioning, in that context, the fight
         against the uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light weapons.
      
Nevertheless, a concrete measure aiming to combat the proliferation of small arms and light weapons may be adopted by the
         Community under its development cooperation policy only if that measure, by virtue both of its aim and its content, falls
         within the scope of the competences conferred by the EC Treaty on the Community in that field.
      
That is not the case if such a measure, even if it contributes to the economic and social development of the developing country,
         has as its main purpose the implementation of the CFSP. 
      
If examination of a measure reveals that it pursues a twofold aim or that it has a twofold component and if one of those is
         identifiable as the main one, whereas the other is merely incidental, the measure must be based on a single legal basis, namely
         that required by the main aim or component (see, to that effect, Case C-211/Commission v Council [2003] ECR I-8913, paragraph 39; Case C‑338/Commission v Council [2004] ECR I-4829, paragraph 55, and Case C‑94/Commission v Council [2006] ECR I‑1, paragraph 35; and see, with regard to the application of Article EU, Case C-176/Commission v Council, paragraphs to 53, and Case C-440/Commission v Council, paragraphs to 73).
      
It follows that measures combating the proliferation of small arms and light weapons do not fall within the competences conferred
         on the Community in the field of development cooperation policy if, on account of their main aim or component, they are part
         of the pursuit of the CFSP.
      
With regard to a measure which simultaneously pursues a number of objectives or which has several components, without one
         being incidental to the other, the Court has held, where various legal bases of the EC Treaty are therefore applicable, that
         such a measure will have to be founded, exceptionally, on the various corresponding legal bases (see, to that effect, Case
         C-211/Commission v Council, paragraph 40, and Case C-94/Commission v Council, paragraph 36).
      
However, under Article EU, such a solution is impossible with regard to a measure which pursues a number of objectives
         or which has several components falling, respectively, within development cooperation policy, as conferred by the EC Treaty
         on the Community, and within the CFSP, and where neither one of those components is incidental to the other.
      
Since Article EU precludes the Union from adopting, on the basis of the EU Treaty, a measure which could properly be adopted
         on the basis of the EC Treaty, the Union cannot have recourse to a legal basis falling within the CFSP in order to adopt provisions
         which also fall within a competence conferred by the EC Treaty on the Community.
      
In the light of the foregoing it must be established whether, as the Commission claims, the contested decision, which implements
         the contested joint action with a view to a European Union contribution to ECOWAS in the framework of the Moratorium on Small
         Arms and Light Weapons, falls, by virtue both of its aim and its content, within the policy on development cooperation conferred
         by the EC Treaty on the Community.
      
 Aim of the contested decision
With regard to the aim of the contested decision, it follows both from its title, from the legal basis relied upon and from
         recitals to in its preamble that, by making a financial and technical contribution to an ECOWAS initiative concerning
         the fight against the proliferation of small arms and light weapons, the decision aims to implement the contested joint action
         which the Council adopted on the basis of Title V of the EU Treaty.
      
To the extent that the contested decision implements a measure falling within the CFSP, it is necessary at the outset to examine
         whether, because of that fact, the decision must be understood as aiming to achieve the objectives of the CFSP rather than
         those of Community development cooperation policy.
      
In that regard, and without it being necessary, at this stage, to examine the Commission’s plea as to the alleged illegality
         of the contested joint action, it should be pointed out that the joint action is presented, in its preamble, as a measure
         intended to replace Joint Action 1999/34, in order to include, where appropriate, ammunition for small arms and light weapons
         in the Union joint action.
      
Article 1(1) of the contested joint action sets out as objectives the combating of the destabilising accumulation and spread
         of small arms, the contribution to the reduction of existing accumulations of these weapons and their ammunition to levels
         consistent with countries’ legitimate security needs and assistance in solving the problems caused by such accumulations.
      
Concrete expression is given to these objectives, first, in Title I of the contested joint action, which lists certain principles
         and measures around which the Union is aiming to build a consensus in order to combat the destabilising accumulation and spread
         of small arms and light weapons and, second, in Title II of the joint action, which deals with the financial and technical
         assistance provided by the Union to projects which contribute to those principles and measures.
      
However, it cannot be inferred from the contested joint action that the implementation of the campaign against the proliferation
         of small arms and light weapons which it sets out will necessarily take the form of measures which pursue CFSP objectives,
         such as the preservation of peace and the strengthening of international security, rather than objectives of Community development
         policy.
      
In that regard, it should be observed, first, that Joint Action 1999/34, of which the contested joint action is the successor
         and whose objectives, principles listed and type of contribution envisaged are fully reproduced by it, stated clearly, in
         the first recital to its preamble, that the excessive and uncontrolled accumulation and spread of small arms and light weapons
         poses a threat to peace and security and reduces the prospects for sustainable development in many regions of the world, thereby
         from the outset placing the fight against that phenomenon within a dual perspective, that is preservation of peace and international
         security, on the one hand, and safeguarding development perspectives, on the other.
      
Second, it follows from the provisions of Title II of the contested joint action – which, while reproducing the provisions
         of Joint Action 1999/34, specify the nature of the contribution the Union will make and how its tasks will be divided between
         the Council and the Commission – that the objectives and the programme of action laid down by it can be implemented not only
         by the Union, acting within the CFSP context, but equally by the Community, on the basis of its own competences. 
      
Indeed, Article of the contested joint action points out that it is for the Council to decide on the allocation of the financial
         and technical assistance referred to in Article of the joint action, but explains, in Article 7(2), that the Council is
         to decide ‘without prejudice to … operation of the Community’, on a case-by-case basis, on the principle, arrangements and
         financing of the projects implementing the joint action. The fact that the contested joint action can be implemented both
         by the Community and the Union is confirmed in Article thereof, in which the Council notes that the Commission intends to
         direct its action towards achieving the objectives and the priorities of the joint action, where appropriate by pertinent
         Community measures, and in Article of the joint action, which places in the hands of the Council and the Commission the
         responsibility for ensuring the consistency of the Union’s activities in the field of small arms, ‘in particular with regard
         to its development policies’, and for ensuring implementation of their respective action, each in accordance with its powers.
         The need for consistency of the Union’s activities in the field of small arms and light weapons is also stated, with an identical
         reference to ‘development policies [of the Union]’ in Article 4(2) of the contested decision. 
      
The conclusion that the objectives of the contested joint action can be implemented both by the Union, under Title V of the
         EU Treaty, and by the Community, under its development cooperation policy, corresponds, in the end, to the approach advocated
         by the Union’s institutions and by the European Council in numerous documents.
      
First, the Council itself, in the resolution on small arms referred to in paragraph of this judgment, while alluding to
         the action undertaken by the Union in the CFSP framework and recalling the need to ensure coherence of Union activities in
         the field of small arms, inter alia in relation to the CFSP, nevertheless recommends, in the same document, that, in the field
         of development cooperation, the Community and the Member States devote particular attention to the following measures: ‘inclusion
         of the small arms issue in the political dialogue with ACP and other development cooperation partner countries of the Union;
         development cooperation support for countries seeking assistance in the control or elimination of surplus small arms …; considering
         support, where necessary, to strengthen appropriate government institutions and legislation to better control small arms’,
         while adding, concerning the last point, that ‘[t]he first interventions could be focused on Southern … and on West Africa
         (ECOWAS), where significant progress has been made and frameworks for combating small arms proliferation have been developed
         and agreed’. 
      
Second, in the European Union strategy to combat illicit accumulation and trafficking of small arms and light weapons, referred
         to in paragraph of this judgment, the European Council mentions, among the means at the disposal of the Union, the Community
         and the Member States to react to the threat of the illicit spread of those weapons, in particular, apart from civilian and
         military instruments for managing crises and other diplomatic tools, partnership and cooperation agreements with third countries
         and development and assistance programmes which fall within EC-ACP cooperation and include a chapter on small arms and light
         weapons and their ammunition. Having indicated, in paragraph 15, that, according to the European Council, the challenge for
         a Union strategy on small arms and light weapons is to respond to that threat and to ensure that its security policy and its
         development policy are consistent, the document mentions, as the final element of the action plan introduced in order to respond
         to the accumulation of such weapons, the need to ‘[e]nsure consistency and complementarity between Council decisions in the
         CFSP framework and actions implemented by the Commission in the field of development aid in order to promote a consistent
         approach for all [Union] activities in the … area [of small arms and light weapons]’.
      
Third, paragraph of the joint statement of the Council and the representatives of the governments of the Member States
         meeting within the Council, the European Parliament and the Commission on European Union Development Policy, referred to in
         paragraph of this judgment, announces concrete steps to limit the uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light weapons
         which will be taken, in line with the European strategy against the accumulation and the illicit traffic of such weapons and
         their ammunition, by ‘[t]he EU, within the respective competences of the Community and the Member States’.
      
Therefore, since the measure falling within the CFSP which the contested decision is intended to implement does not exclude
         the possibility that its objectives can be achieved by measures adopted by the Community on the basis of its competences in
         the field of development cooperation, it is necessary to examine whether the contested decision, as such, must be regarded
         as a measure which pursues objectives falling within Community development cooperation policy.
      
In that regard, recital in the preamble to the contested decision states that the excessive and uncontrolled accumulation
         and spread of small arms and light weapons not only poses a threat to peace and security, but also reduces the prospects for
         sustainable development, particularly in West Africa.
      
According to recital in its preamble, the contested decision is intended to implement the contested joint action by which
         the Union envisages, in particular by promoting confidence-building measures, the pursuit of the objectives set out in Article
         of that joint action, that is, the combating of the destabilising accumulation and spread of small arms and light weapons
         and the reduction of existing accumulations of these weapons. 
      
Contrary to what is submitted by the Commission and the Parliament, it cannot be denied that the contested decision, to the
         extent that it aims to prevent further accumulation of small arms and light weapons in West Africa capable of destabilising
         that region, forms part of a general perspective of preserving peace and strengthening international security.
      
None the less, it cannot be inferred from the contested decision that in comparison with its objectives of preserving peace
         and strengthening international security its concern to eliminate or reduce obstacles to the development of the countries
         concerned is purely incidental.
      
As confirmed by recitals and in the preamble of the decision, the financial and technical contribution which the Union
         intends to make is designed to help consolidate the initiative taken in the field of small arms and light weapons by ECOWAS.
      
The contested decision therefore has the specific goal of strengthening the capacities of a group of African developing countries
         to combat a phenomenon which, according to recital in the preamble to the decision, constitutes an obstacle to the sustainable
         development of those countries.
      
It follows that the contested decision pursues a number of objectives, falling within the CFSP and development cooperation
         policy respectively, without one of those objectives being incidental to the other.
      
 Content of the contested decision
The conclusion drawn in the preceding paragraphs from the examination of the objective of the contested decision is not invalidated
         by the analysis of its content.
      
Article 1(2) of the contested decision provides for a financial contribution and technical assistance to set up a Light Weapons
         Unit within the ECOWAS Technical Secretariat and to convert into a convention the existing moratorium between the member states
         of that organisation concerning small arms and light weapons. To that end, Article 4(1) of the contested decision provides
         for a reference amount of EUR 000. 
      
Under Article of the contested decision, the financial implementation of that decision is entrusted to the Commission and,
         following conclusion by it of a financing agreement with ECOWAS, is to take the form of a grant which, amongst other things,
         is to cover, over a period of one year, the salaries, travel expenses, supplies and equipment necessary for setting up the
         Light Weapons Unit within the ECOWAS Technical Secretariat and for converting the abovementioned moratorium into a convention.
      
With regard to the technical assistance which must be afforded by the Union, the project which is detailed in the annex to
         the contested decision indicates that it involves the putting in place of experts responsible for carrying out the studies
         necessary to draw up a draft convention.
      
As pointed out by the Advocate General in point of his Opinion, it is only in the light of the aims that they pursue that
         a financial contribution or technical assistance can be regarded as falling within the scope of the CFSP or of Community development
         cooperation policy.
      
While there may be some measures, such as the grant of political support for a moratorium or even the collection and destruction
         of weapons, which fall rather within action to preserve peace and strengthen international security or to promote international
         cooperation, being CFSP objectives stated in Article 11(1) EU, the decision to make funds available and to give technical
         assistance to a group of developing countries in order to draft a convention is capable of falling both under development
         cooperation policy and the CFSP.
      
The fact that the contested joint action was implemented by other decisions adopted under Title V of the EU Treaty, the legality
         of which the Commission has not challenged, cannot determine the outcome of the present case. For, according to settled case-law,
         the legal basis for an act must be determined having regard to its own aim and content and not to the legal basis used for
         the adoption of other Union measures which might, in certain cases, display similar characteristics (see, to that effect,
         Case C-94/Commission v Council, paragraph 50).
      
Moreover, as pointed out in paragraph of this judgment, the contested joint action which the contested decision aims to
         implement does not itself exclude the possibility that the objective of the campaign against the proliferation of small arms
         and light weapons can be achieved by Community measures, when it refers, in Articles and 9, to the Commission’s intention
         to direct its action towards achieving that objective, where appropriate by pertinent Community measures, and to the obligation
         of the Council and the Commission to ensure the consistency of the Union’s activities in the field of small arms, in particular
         with regard to its development policies, and to ensure implementation of their respective action, each in accordance with
         its powers. 
      
It follows from the foregoing that, taking account of its aim and its content, the contested decision contains two components,
         neither of which can be considered to be incidental to the other, one falling within Community development cooperation policy
         and the other within the CFSP.
      
Having regard to the reasoning contained in paragraphs and of this judgment, it must be concluded that the Council has
         infringed Article EU by adopting the contested decision on the basis of Title V of the EU Treaty, since that decision also
         falls within development cooperation policy.
      
The contested decision must therefore be annulled.
      
As the decision must be annulled because of its own defects, it is not necessary to examine the plea as to the alleged illegality
         of the contested joint action.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs, if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. As the Commission has not asked that the Council be ordered to pay the costs,
         it follows that those two institutions must bear their own costs. Under Article 69(4) of the Rules of Procedure, the interveners
         in these proceedings are to bear their own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby:
1.      Annuls Council Decision 2004/833/CFSP of December implementing Joint Action 2002/589/CFSP with a view to a European
            Union contribution to ECOWAS in the framework of the Moratorium on Small Arms and Light Weapons;
2.      Orders the Commission of the European Communities and the Council of the European Union to bear their own costs; 
3.      Orders the Kingdom of Denmark, the Kingdom of Spain, the French Republic, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Kingdom of Sweden,
            the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the European Parliament to bear their own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 