
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 2006/43/EC – Statutory audits of annual accounts and consolidated accounts – Failure to transpose completely within the prescribed period – Failure to communicate the measures to transpose the directive)
In Case C‑294/09,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on July 2009,
European Commission, represented by G. Braun and A.-A. Gilly, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Ireland, represented by D. O’Hagan, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
composed of E. Levits, President of the Chamber, M. Ilešič and M. Berger (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities requests the Court to declare that, by failing to adopt all
         the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Parliament
         and of the Council of May on statutory audits of annual accounts and consolidated accounts, amending Council Directives 78/660/EEC
         and 83/349/EEC and repealing Council Directive 84/253/EEC (OJ L 157, p. 87) or, in any event, by failing to communicate
         them to it, Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of that directive.
      
 Legal context
As recital in the preamble to Directive 2006/indicates, the Directive aims at high-level harmonisation of statutory audit
         requirements. In essence, it lays down rules on approval, continuing education and mutual recognition of statutory auditors,
         provides for their entry in registers accessible to the public, fixes rules on professional ethics and independence, defines
         auditing standards, provides for the need for a system of quality assurance, systems of investigations and penalties and public
         supervision and provides a basis for cooperation both in the relations between the Member States and in the relations of those
         States with non-member countries.
      
Article of Directive 2006/is worded as follows:
      
‘1.       Before June Member States shall adopt and publish the provisions necessary to comply with this Directive. They shall
         forthwith inform the Commission thereof.
      
2.       When Member States adopt those provisions, they shall contain a reference to this Directive or be accompanied by such a reference
         on the occasion of their official publication. The methods of making such reference shall be laid down by Member States.
      
3.       Member States shall communicate to the Commission the texts of the main provisions of national law which they adopt in the
         field covered by this Directive.’
      
 Pre-litigation procedure
Since the Commission had not been informed by Ireland of the provisions taken by that Member State to comply with Directive 2006/and did not have any other information available to it supporting the conclusion that Ireland had fulfilled its obligation
         to comply with the directive, the Commission, by letter of July and in accordance with the procedure laid down in
         Article EC, gave Ireland formal notice to submit its observations within two months of receipt of that letter.
      
By letter of November 2008, Ireland informed the Commission that the competent authorities were in the process of drafting
         the necessary measures to comply with that directive. Moreover, it was indicated in that letter that some of the fundamental
         elements of that directive were already transposed by provisions in force.
      
By letter of November 2008, the Commission delivered a reasoned opinion, in which it concluded that Ireland had failed
         to fulfil its obligations under Directive 2006/and called on that Member State to take the measures necessary to comply
         with that reasoned opinion within two months of its receipt.
      
Ireland replied to that reasoned opinion by a letter of January 2009, in which it stated that it was at an advanced stage
         in the process of transposing that directive.
      
Since it had not obtained any further information from Ireland showing that the measures necessary for the transposition of
         Directive 2006/had been adopted, the Commission brought this action.
      
 The action
Ireland submits that the process for the adoption of measures intended fully to transpose Directive 2006/is at an advanced
         stage.
      
That Member State adds that the legislation in force already transposes certain elements of Directive 2006/43. It states that,
         first, the Companies (Auditing and Accounting) Act put in place an independent quality assurance system which complies
         with the requirements of that directive. Secondly, it provides a table listing the elements of that directive which have already
         been transposed, either substantially or partially, in particular by means of the Act or the Companies Act 1990. Thirdly,
         Ireland states that the European Communities (transitional period measures in respect of third country auditors) Regulations
         2009, adopted on June 2009, transpose Commission Decision 2008/627/EC of July concerning a transitional period
         for audit activities of certain third country auditors and audit entities (OJ L 202, p. 70).
      
Accordingly, Ireland requests the Court to suspend the infringement proceedings pending the completion of the legislative
         process commenced and withdrawal of the action by the Commission.
      
The Commission, while stating that the arguments put forward by Ireland do not justify the proceedings being suspended, declined
         to lodge a reply.
      
In this connection, it is settled case-law that the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations must
         be determined by reference to the situation obtaining in the Member State at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned
         opinion and that the Court cannot take account of any subsequent changes (see, inter alia, Case C-23/Commission v Luxembourg [2005] ECR I-9535, paragraph 9, and judgment of December in Case C-120/Commission v Belgium, paragraph 19). 
      
It follows that the European Communities (transitional period measures in respect of third country auditors) Regulations 2009,
         adopted after the time-limit laid down in the reasoned opinion, cannot, in any event, be taken into consideration in this
         action.
      
As regards the legislation in force in Ireland at the end of the period laid down, it must be stated, first, that the arguments
         put forward by Ireland before the Court are not such as to establish that that legislation could constitute a correct and
         complete transposition of Directive 2006/and, secondly, that that Member State expressly acknowledges that that transposition
         was not completed within the prescribed period.
      
It is therefore common ground that, at the date of the expiry of the time‑limit laid down in the reasoned opinion, Ireland
         had not adopted all the measures necessary fully to transpose that directive.
      
Furthermore, it follows from case-law that, where a directive expressly provides that the measures transposing it are to contain
         a reference to it or are to be accompanied by such a reference on the occasion of their official publication, it is in any
         event necessary to adopt a specific measure transposing the directive (see Case C-360/Commission v Spain [1997] ECR I-7337, paragraph 13; Case C‑361/Commission v Spain [1997] ECR I‑7351, paragraph 15; and judgment of October in Case C‑502/Commission v Spain, paragraph 21). 
      
In the present case, Article 53(2) of Directive 2006/provides that the measures transposing the Directive must contain
         a reference to it or be accompanied by such a reference on the occasion of their official publication. Ireland does not claim
         that the statutory provisions which it relies on fulfil that condition, but merely states that it will submit a formal table
         of concurrence to the Commission on completion of the transposition process.
      
The action for failure to fulfil obligations brought by the Commission must therefore be considered to be well founded.
      
The finding of a failure to fulfil obligations of itself precludes granting Ireland’s application to suspend the proceedings
         pending a hypothetical withdrawal of the action by the Commission (Case C-366/Commission v Luxembourg [2002] ECR I-1749, paragraph 12, and judgment of February in Case C-383/Commission v Luxembourg, paragraph 7).
      
Consequently, it must be declared that, by failing to adopt within the prescribed period all the laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions necessary to comply with Directive 2006/and, in any event, by failing to communicate to the Commission the provisions
         of national law considered to contribute to ensuring such compliance, Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article
         of that directive. 
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and Ireland has been unsuccessful,
         the latter must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fifth Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by failing to adopt within the prescribed period all the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary
            to comply with Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of May on statutory audits of annual
            accounts and consolidated accounts, amending Council Directives 78/660/EEC and 83/349/EEC and repealing Council Directive
            84/253/EEC and, in any event, by failing to communicate to the Commission of the European Communities the provisions of national
            law considered to contribute to ensuring such compliance, Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of
            that directive. 
2.      Orders Ireland to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 