
Case C-135/Commission of the European Communities
v
Italian Republic
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Waste management – Directives 75/442/EEC, 91/689/EEC and 1999/31/EC)
Judgment of the Court (Third Chamber), April Summary of the Judgment
1.     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Proof of failure to fulfil obligations – Burden of proof on Commission 
(Art. EC)
2.     Member States – Obligations – Supervisory tasks assigned to the Commission – Duty of the Member States 
(Arts EC, EC and EC; Council Directive 75/442, as amended by Directives 91/156, 91/and 1999/31)
3.     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Examination of merits by the Court – Situation to be taken into consideration
            – Situation on expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion
(Art. EC)
4.     Environment – Disposal of waste – Directive 75/– Article (Council Directive 75/442, as amended by Directive 91/156, Art. 4)
1.     In proceedings under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations it is incumbent upon the Commission to prove the alleged
         failure. It is the Commission’s responsibility to place before the Court the information needed to enable the Court to establish
         that the obligation has not been fulfilled, and in so doing the Commission may not rely on any presumption. However, where
         the Commission has adduced sufficient evidence of certain matters in the territory of the defendant Member State and to show
         that a Member State’s authorities have developed a repeated and persistent practice which is contrary to the provisions of
         a directive, it is incumbent on that Member State to challenge in substance and in detail the information produced and the
         consequences flowing therefrom.
      
(see paras 26, 30, 32)
2.     The Member States are required, under Article EC, to facilitate the achievement of the Commission’s tasks, which consist
         in particular, pursuant to Article EC, in ensuring that the provisions of the Treaty and the measures taken by the institutions
         pursuant thereto are applied. Where it is a question of checking that the national provisions intended to ensure effective
         implementation of directives, including those adopted in the environmental field, are applied correctly in practice, the Commission,
         which does not have investigative powers of its own, is largely reliant on the information provided by any complainants, private
         or public bodies active in the Member State concerned and that Member State itself. In such circumstances, it is primarily
         for the national authorities to conduct the necessary on-the-spot investigations, in a spirit of genuine cooperation and mindful
         of each Member State’s duty to facilitate the general task of the Commission. 
      
(see paras 27-28, 31)
3.     The question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations must be determined by reference to the situation
         obtaining in the Member State at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion and the Court cannot take account
         of any subsequent changes even if they constitute a correct application of the Community law rule which is the subject of
         the action for failure to fulfil obligations.
      
(see para. 36)
4.     Although Article of Directive 75/as amended by Directive 91/156, does not specify the actual content of the measures
         which must be taken by the Member States to ensure that waste is recovered or disposed of without endangering human health
         and without using processes or methods which could harm the environment, it is none the less true that the provision is binding
         on the Member States as to the objective to be achieved, whilst leaving to the Member States a margin of discretion in assessing
         the need for such measures.
      
It cannot, therefore, in principle, be directly inferred from the fact that a situation is not in conformity with the objectives
         laid down in Article of the directive that the Member State concerned has necessarily failed to fulfil its obligations under
         that provision. Nevertheless, if that situation persists and leads in particular to a significant deterioration in the environment
         over a protracted period without any action being taken by the competent authorities, it may be an indication that the Member
         States have exceeded the discretion conferred on them by that provision. 
      
(see para. 37)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Waste management – Directives 75/442/EEC, 91/689/EEC and 1999/31/EC)
In Case C‑135/05,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on March 2005,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by D. Recchia and M. Konstantinidis, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Italian Republic, represented by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and G. Fiengo, avvocato dello Stato, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of A. Rosas, President of the Chamber, J. Klučka (Rapporteur), U. Lõhmus, A. Ó Caoimh and P. Lindh, Judges,
Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on January 2007,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities requests the Court to declare that, by failing to adopt all
         the necessary measures to ensure that:
      
–       waste is recovered or disposed of without endangering human health and without using processes or methods which could harm
         the environment, and to prohibit the abandonment, dumping or uncontrolled disposal of waste;
      
–       any holder of waste has it handled by a private or public undertaking which carries out the operations of recovery or disposal,
         or recovers or disposes of it himself in accordance with the provisions of Council Directive 75/442/EEC of July on
         waste (OJ L 194, p. 39), as amended by Council Directive 91/156/EEC of March (OJ L 78, p. 32; ‘Directive
         75/442’);
      
–       any establishment or undertaking which carries out waste-disposal operations is required to obtain a permit from the competent
         authority;
      
–       on every site where tipping (discharge) of hazardous waste takes place the waste is recorded and identified, and
–       as regards landfills which had already been granted a permit or were already in operation on July 2001, the operator of
         a landfill, before July 2002, prepared and presented to the competent authorities, for their approval, a conditioning plan
         for the site including particulars relating to the conditions of the permit and any corrective measures which the operator
         considered would be needed and that, following the presentation of the conditioning plan, the competent authorities took a
         definite decision on whether operations might continue, by closing down as soon as possible sites which had not been granted
         a permit to continue to operate, or by authorising the necessary work and laying down a transitional period for the completion
         of the plan, 
      
the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 4, and of Directive 75/442, under Article 2(1)
         of Council Directive 91/689/EEC of December on hazardous waste (OJ L 377, p. 20), and under Article 14(a) to
         (c) of Council Directive 1999/31/EC of April on the landfill of waste (OJ L 182, p. 1).
      
 Legal context
 Directive 75/Article of Directive 75/provides:
‘Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that waste is recovered or disposed of without endangering human
         health and without using processes or methods which could harm the environment ...
      
…
Member States shall take the necessary measures to prohibit the abandonment, dumping or uncontrolled disposal of waste.’
Article of Directive 75/requires the Member States to take the necessary measures to ensure that any holder of waste
         either has it handled by a private or public undertaking which carries out the operations listed in Annexes IIA or IIB to
         that directive, or recovers or disposes of it himself in accordance with the provisions of that directive.
      
Article 9(1) of Directive 75/provides that, for the purposes of implementing, among others, Article of that directive,
         any establishment or undertaking which carries out waste-disposal operations must obtain a permit from the competent authority
         responsible for the implementation of that directive. Article 9(2) states that such permits may be granted for a specified
         period, be renewable or subject to conditions and obligations or, in particular, if the intended method of disposal is unacceptable
         from the point of view of environmental protection, be refused.
      
 Directive 91/Article of Directive 91/provides:
‘1.      Member States shall take the necessary measures to require that on every site where tipping (discharge) of hazardous waste
         takes place the waste is recorded and identified.
      
…’
 Directive 1999/Article 14(a) to (c) of Directive 1999/states:
‘Member States shall take measures in order that landfills which have been granted a permit, or which are already in operation
         at the time of transposition of this Directive, may not continue to operate unless … 
      
(a)      with[in] a period of one year after the date laid down in Article 18(1) [that is not later than July 2002], the operator
         of a landfill shall prepare and present to the competent authorities, for their approval, a conditioning plan for the site
         including the particulars listed in Article and any corrective measures which the operator considers will be needed in order
         to comply with the requirements of this Directive with the exception of the requirements in Annex I, point 1;
      
(b)      following the presentation of the conditioning plan, the competent authorities shall take a definite decision on whether operations
         may continue on the basis of the said conditioning plan and this Directive. Member States shall take the necessary measures
         to close down as soon as possible, in accordance with Articles 7(g) and 13, sites which have not been granted, in accordance
         with Article 8, a permit to continue to operate;
      
(c)      on the basis of the approved site-conditioning plan, the competent authority shall authorise the necessary work and shall
         lay down a transitional period for the completion of the plan. Any existing landfill shall comply with the requirements of
         this Directive with the exception of the requirements in Annex I, point within eight years after the date laid down in Article
         18(1) [that is not later than July 2009].’
      
Under Article 18(1) of that directive, the Member States were to bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions necessary to comply with it not later than two years after its entry into force (that is not later than July
         2001), and forthwith to inform the Commission thereof.
      
 Pre-litigation procedure
Following various complaints, parliamentary questions and articles in the press, as well as the publication, on October
         2002, of a report of the Corpo forestale dello Stato (National Forestry Authority; ‘the CFS’) revealing the existence of a
         large number of illegal and uncontrolled waste tips in Italy, the Commission decided to review that Member State’s compliance
         with its obligations under Directives 75/442, 91/and 1999/31.
      
The abovementioned report concluded the third stage of a process launched in by the CFS to record the illegal tips in
         the forest and mountainous areas of the ordinary regions in Italy (that is all the Italian regions except Friuli-Venezia Giulia,
         Sardinia, Sicily, Trentino-Alto Adige and Valle d’Aosta). A first survey, carried out in 1986, had covered of the Italian local authorities and enabled the CFS to establish the existence of illegal tips. A second survey, in 1996,
         had concerned local authorities and revealed to the CFS the existence of illegal tips. After the survey,
         the CFS still listed illegal tips, of which did not feature in the earlier studies. According to the CFS, of those tips contained hazardous waste. By contrast, the number of tips and landfills which have been granted a permit is
         only 420.
      
The results of that last survey are summarised by the Commission as follows:
Region
Number of illegal tips
Surface area of illegal tips (m2)
               
Tips in use/not in use
Tips cleaned up/not cleaned up
Abruzzo
111/70/Basilicata
40/43/Calabria
81/19/Campania
40/37/Emilia Romagna
189/59/Lazio
120/110/Liguria
145/58/Lombardy
124/159/Marche
70/41/Molise
14/13/Piedmont
114/119/Puglia
440/37/Tuscany
107/154/Umbria
33/61/Veneto
26/50/Total
654/1030/Although the data provided by the CFS concerns only the Italian ordinary regions, the Commission states that it wishes
         to pursue, in the present proceedings, the Italian Republic in respect of all the illegal tips on its territory. Indeed, the
         Commission is in possession of information from which it appears that the situation is comparable in the special regions.
      
The Commission refers, in that regard, to the region of Sicily’s waste management plan, notified to the Commission on March
         and to which is annexed the plan for cleaning up the polluted areas of the region in question. That plan reveals the
         existence of numerous illegal tips, of abandoned waste sites, of unauthorised fly-tips and of unspecified sites, some of which
         contain hazardous waste.
      
The same applies as regards the regions of Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Trentino-Alto Adige and Sardinia, for which the Commission
         completes the description of the overall situation in Italy with official documents emanating from the authorities of those
         regions and with reports of parliamentary commissions of inquiry, as well as press articles.
      
As an example, the Commission refers to a tip in a place called ‘Cascina Corradina’ in the Comune di San Fiorano, which was
         initially the subject of a separate procedure, but which was subsequently joined to the present procedure for the purposes
         of the action before the Court.
      
On the basis of all that information and in accordance with Article EC, the Commission, by letter of July 2003, gave
         the Italian Government formal notice to submit to it its observations on the matter.
      
Since the Commission received no information from the Italian authorities enabling it to establish that the failures to fulfil
         obligations complained of had been brought to an end, it delivered, by letter of December 2003, a reasoned opinion requesting
         the Italian Republic to adopt the measures necessary to comply therewith within two months from the date of its notification.
      
The Commission received no reply to that reasoned opinion. Consequently, it decided to bring the present action.
 The action
 Admissibility
The Italian Government submits that the Commission’s action should be declared inadmissible because of the general and undefined
         nature of the alleged failure to fulfil obligations, which makes it impossible for the government to present a detailed defence
         either in fact or law. In particular, the Commission has not identified the holders of waste or the operators of the tips,
         or the owners of the sites on which waste has been abandoned.
      
The Commission submits, on the other hand, that it is entitled to deal, in a single set of proceedings, with the question
         of waste disposal throughout Italian territory. Such an approach, which it describes as ‘horizontal’, makes it possible, first,
         to identify and correct more effectively the structural problems underlying the Italian Republic’s alleged failure to fulfil
         obligations and, second, to reduce the processes for reviewing compliance with Community law in the environmental field. In
         that regard, the Commission refers to the Opinion of Advocate General Geelhoed in Case C‑494/Commission v Ireland [2005] ECR I-3331.
      
First of all, it is appropriate to state that, without prejudice to the Commission’s obligation to discharge the burden of
         proof upon it in proceedings under Article EC, the EC Treaty does not contain any rule which precludes the overall treatment
         of a significant number of situations on the basis of which the Commission considers that a Member State has, repeatedly and
         over a long period, failed to fulfil its obligations under Community law.
      
Next, it is settled case-law that an administrative practice can be made the object of an action for failure to fulfil obligations
         when it is, to some degree, of a consistent and general nature (see, in particular, Commission v Ireland, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Finally, it must be recalled that the Court has already declared admissible actions brought by the Commission in similar situations,
         in which the latter relied precisely on a structural and general breach, by a Member State, of Articles 4, and of Directive
         75/(judgment of October in Case C-502/Commission v Greece, not published in the ECR) and on a breach of those same articles as well as Article of Directive 1999/(judgment of
         March in Case C‑423/Commission v France, not published in the ECR).
      
Accordingly, the Commission’s action is admissible.
 Substance
 The burden of proof
The Italian Government submits that the sources of information on which the applicant bases its action lack credibility since,
         first, the reports of the CFS were not drawn up in collaboration with the Ministry of the Environment and the Protection of
         Natural Resources, which is the only competent national authority in respect of the Community legal order, and, second, the
         reports of parliamentary commissions of inquiry and press articles do not constitute admissions but only general sources of
         evidence, the truth of which must be demonstrated by the party relying upon them. 
      
The Commission submits, to the contrary, that the reports drawn up by the CFS constitute a reliable and highly credible source
         of information in the environmental field. In fact, the CFS is a State civil police force, whose mission is, particularly,
         the defence of Italian forests, the protection of the environment, the countryside and the ecosystem and the pursuit of police
         activities in order to ensure compliance with the national and international legislation in the matter.
      
In that regard, it is to be remembered that in proceedings under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations it is incumbent
         upon the Commission to prove the alleged failure. It is the Commission’s responsibility to place before the Court the information
         needed to enable the Court to establish that the obligation has not been fulfilled, and in so doing the Commission may not
         rely on any presumption (Case 96/Commission v Netherlands [1982] ECR 1791, paragraph 6).
      
However, the Member States are required, under Article EC, to facilitate the achievement of the Commission’s tasks, which
         consist in particular, pursuant to Article EC, in ensuring that the provisions of the Treaty and the measures taken by
         the institutions pursuant thereto are applied (Commission v Ireland, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In this context, account should be taken of the fact that, where it is a question of checking that the national provisions
         intended to ensure effective implementation of directives, including those adopted in the environmental field, are applied
         correctly in practice, the Commission, which does not have investigative powers of its own in the matter, is largely reliant
         on the information provided by any complainants, private or public bodies active in the Member State concerned and that Member
         State itself (see, to that effect, Commission v Ireland, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In that regard, the reports drawn up by the CFS and by parliamentary commissions of inquiry or official documents emanating,
         in particular, from regional authorities can therefore be regarded as valid sources of information for the purposes of the
         commencement by the Commission of the procedure under Article EC.
      
It follows in particular that, where the Commission has adduced sufficient evidence of certain matters in the territory of
         the defendant Member State, it is incumbent on the latter to challenge in substance and in detail the information produced
         and the consequences flowing therefrom (Commission v Ireland, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In such circumstances, it is indeed primarily for the national authorities to conduct the necessary on-the-spot investigations,
         in a spirit of genuine cooperation and mindful of each Member State’s duty, recalled in paragraph of the present judgment,
         to facilitate the general task of the Commission (Commission v Ireland, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Thus, where the Commission relies on detailed complaints revealing repeated failures to comply with the provisions of the
         directive, it is incumbent on the Member State concerned to contest specifically the facts alleged in those complaints. Likewise,
         where the Commission has adduced sufficient evidence to show that a Member State’s authorities have developed a repeated and
         persistent practice which is contrary to the provisions of a directive, it is incumbent on that Member State to challenge
         in substance and in detail the information produced and the consequences flowing therefrom (Commission v Ireland, paragraphs and and the case-law cited). That obligation rests on the Member States under the duty of genuine cooperation,
         enshrined in Article EC, throughout the procedure provided for by Article EC. It is apparent from the case-file that
         the Italian authorities did not fully cooperate with the Commission for the purposes of the investigation of the present case
         at the stage of the pre-litigation procedure.
      
 Infringement of Articles 4, and of Directive 75/442, Article 2(1) of Directive 91/and Article 14(a) to (c) of Directive
         1999/–       Arguments of the parties
In order to challenge the Commission’s complaints, the Italian Government, relying on information which it was able to gather
         from the regional and provincial administrations as well as from the Nucleo operativo ecologico dell’arma dei Carabinieri
         (Ecological Operations Unit of the Carabinieri), submits, first, that the information provided by the Commission is inconsistent
         and does not reflect the actual situation in Italy. It disputes, in particular, the number of ‘illegal tips’ counted by the
         Commission on the ground that, in the first place, it counted certain tips several times, in the second place, described as
         ‘illegal tips’ mere deposits of, or abandoned, waste, some of which are in the course of being cleaned up or from which the
         waste has already been cleared and, in the third place, misstated their degree of hazardousness, since the majority of those
         tips are under control or sequestration.
      
The government points out, also, the recent progress which the Italian Republic has made in the fulfilment of its obligations
         under Directives 75/442, 91/and 1999/31.
      
The Commission argues, in the first place, that the Italian Government has not produced any contrary information emanating
         from a source of a level comparable to its own sources. In the second place, although the Commission acknowledges that the
         waste has been cleared from certain tips, it submits that the situations on the point of being regularised are far fewer than
         those in respect of which the national authorities have taken no action to remedy their illegal nature.
      
–       Findings of the Court
First of all, it is settled case-law that the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations must be
         determined by reference to the situation obtaining in the Member State at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned
         opinion and that the Court cannot take account of any subsequent changes even if they constitute a correct application of
         the Community law rule which is the subject of the action for failure to fulfil obligations (see, to that effect, Case C‑111/Commission v Austria [2001] ECR I‑7555, paragraphs and 14; Case C‑103/Commission v Greece [2002] ECR I‑1147, paragraph 23; the judgment of April in Case C‑157/Commission v Spain, not published in the ECR, paragraph 19; and the judgment of July in Case C‑214/Commission v Italy, not published in the ECR, paragraph 14). 
      
Next, so far as concerns, more specifically, the determination as to the infringement by a Member State of Article of Directive
         75/442, it is important to note that that article provides that Member States are to take the necessary measures to ensure
         that waste is recovered or disposed of without endangering human health and without using processes or methods which could
         harm the environment, without however specifying the actual content of the measures which must be taken in order to ensure
         that such objective is attained. It is none the less true that the provision is binding on the Member States as to the objective
         to be achieved, whilst leaving to the Member States a margin of discretion in assessing the need for such measures (Case C‑365/Commission v Italy(‘San Rocco’) [1999] ECR I‑7773, paragraph 67). It cannot, therefore, in principle, be directly inferred from the fact that a situation
         is not in conformity with the objectives laid down in Article of Directive 75/that the Member State concerned has necessarily
         failed to fulfil its obligations under that provision. Nevertheless, it is established that if that situation persists and
         leads in particular to a significant deterioration in the environment over a protracted period without any action being taken
         by the competent authorities, it may be an indication that the Member States have exceeded the discretion conferred on them
         by that provision (San Rocco, paragraphs and 68).
      
In that regard, it must be stated that the validity of the complaints against the Italian Republic is clearly apparent from
         the case-file. While the information provided by its government has established that compliance in Italy with the objectives
         of the provisions of Community law which are the subject of the failure to fulfil obligations has improved over the course
         of time, that information reveals, however, that the general non-compliance of the tips in the light of those provisions was
         persisting at the expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion.
      
As regards the complaint alleging infringement of Article of Directive 75/442, it is common ground that, at the expiry of
         the period laid down in the reasoned opinion, there was, throughout Italy, a considerable number of tips, the operators of
         which had not ensured the recovery or disposal of waste in such a way as not to endanger human health and not to use processes
         or methods which could harm the environment, as well as of sites of uncontrolled waste disposal. By way of example, as is
         clear from Annex to the Italian Government’s rejoinder, it admitted the existence, in the Abruzzo region, of sites affected
         by abandoned waste, established during a check at the local level, following the survey carried out by the CFS.
      
The existence of such a situation over a prolonged period necessarily brings about a significant deterioration in the environment.
As regards the complaint alleging infringement of Article of Directive 75/442, it is established that, at the expiry of
         the prescribed period, the Italian authorities had not ensured that holders of waste either recover or dispose of it themselves
         or have it handled by an undertaking which carries out the operations of recovery or disposal, in accordance with the provisions
         of Directive 75/442. In that regard, it is clear from Annex to the Italian Government’s rejoinder that the Italian authorities
         counted at least nine sites with such characteristics in the Umbria region and in the Puglia region (province of Bari).
         
      
So far as concerns the complaint alleging infringement of Article of Directive 75/442, it is not disputed that, when the
         period laid down by the reasoned opinion expired, numerous tips were operating without a permit having been obtained from
         the competent authorities. That is particularly evidenced, as is clear from Annex to the Italian Government’s rejoinder,
         by the cases of abandoned waste already mentioned in paragraphs and of the present judgment, but also by the presence
         of at least illegal tips in the Puglia region (province of Lecce).
      
As regards the complaint alleging that the Italian authorities did not ensure the recording or identification of hazardous
         waste on every site where the tipping or discharge thereof takes place, that is the allegation of infringement of Article
         of Directive 91/689, it is sufficient to observe that the government of that Member State presented no arguments or specific
         evidence to contradict the Commission’s allegations. In particular, it does not dispute the existence, when the period laid
         down by the reasoned opinion expired, in Italy, of at least illegal tips containing hazardous waste, which are therefore
         not subject to any control measures. It follows that the Italian authorities cannot be aware of the deposits of hazardous
         waste discharged at those tips and, therefore, the obligation to record and identify it is not complied with.
      
Finally, the same applies to the complaint alleging infringement of Article of Directive 1999/31. In this instance, the
         Italian Government itself stated that landfills in Italian territory should have been the subject of conditioning plans.
         Examination of all the documents annexed to the government’s rejoinder reveals that, when the prescribed period expired, such
         plans had been presented for only landfills and that only plans had been approved by the competent authorities. In
         addition, as the Commission correctly points out, the government has not made clear what action was taken as regards the landfills
         for which the conditioning plans were not approved.
      
It follows that the Italian Republic has, generally and persistently, failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 4, and of Directive 75/442, Article 2(1) of Directive 91/and Article 14(a) to (c) of Directive 1999/31. Consequently, the
         Commission’s action is well founded.
      
Having regard to all the foregoing considerations, it must be held that, by failing to adopt all the necessary measures to
         ensure that:
      
–       waste is recovered or disposed of without endangering human health and without using processes or methods which could harm
         the environment, and to prohibit the abandonment, dumping or uncontrolled disposal of waste;
      
–       any holder of waste has it handled by a private or public undertaking which carries out the operations of recovery or disposal,
         or recovers or disposes of it himself in accordance with the provisions of Directive 75/442;
      
–       any establishment or undertaking which carries out waste-disposal operations is required to obtain a permit from the competent
         authority;
      
–       on every site where tipping (discharge) of hazardous waste takes place the waste is recorded and identified, and
–       as regards landfills which had already been granted a permit or were already in operation on July 2001, the operator of
         a landfill, before July 2002, prepared and presented to the competent authorities, for their approval, a conditioning plan
         for the site including particulars relating to the conditions of the permit and any corrective measures which the operator
         considered would be needed, and that, following the presentation of the conditioning plan, the competent authorities took
         a definite decision on whether operations might continue, by closing down as soon as possible sites which had not been granted
         a permit to continue to operate, or by authorising the necessary work and laying down a transitional period for the completion
         of the plan,
      
the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 4, and of Directive 75/442, under Article 2(1)
         of Directive 91/689, and under Article 14(a) to (c) of Directive 1999/31.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission applied for costs against the Italian Republic and the
         latter has been unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by failing to adopt all the necessary measures to ensure that:
–       waste is recovered or disposed of without endangering human health and without using processes or methods which could harm
            the environment, and to prohibit the abandonment, dumping or uncontrolled disposal of waste;
–       any holder of waste has it handled by a private or public undertaking which carries out the operations of recovery or disposal,
            or recovers or disposes of it himself in accordance with the provisions of Council Directive 75/442/EEC of July on
            waste, as amended by Council Directive 91/156/EEC of March 1991;
–       any establishment or undertaking which carries out waste-disposal operations is required to obtain a permit from the competent
            authority;
–       on every site where tipping (discharge) of hazardous waste takes place the waste is recorded and identified, and
–       as regards landfills which had already been granted a permit or were already in operation on July 2001, the operator of
            a landfill, before July 2002, prepared and presented to the competent authorities, for their approval, a conditioning plan
            for the site including particulars relating to the conditions of the permit and any corrective measures which the operator
            considered would be needed and that, following the presentation of the conditioning plan, the competent authorities took a
            definite decision on whether operations might continue, by closing down as soon as possible sites which had not been granted
            a permit to continue to operate, or by authorising the necessary work and laying down a transitional period for the completion
            of the plan,
the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 4, and of Directive 75/442, as amended by Directive
            91/156, under Article 2(1) of Council Directive 91/689/EEC of December on hazardous waste, and under Article 14(a)
            to (c) of Council Directive 1999/31/EC of April on the landfill of waste;
2.      Orders the Italian Republic to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 