
Case C-15/P
Regione Siciliana
v
Commission of the European Communities
(Appeal – European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) – Closure of Community financial assistance – Action for annulment – Admissibility – Local or regional entity – Measures of direct and individual concern to that entity – Direct concern)
Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber), March Summary of the Judgment
1.     Actions for annulment – Natural or legal persons – Measures of direct and individual concern to them 
(Art. 230, fourth para., EC)
2.     European Communities – Judicial review of the legality of the acts of the institutions – Need for natural or legal persons
            to have recourse to a reference for a preliminary ruling on validity
(Arts EC, 230, fourth para., EC and EC)
1.     On the basis of the fourth paragraph of Article EC, a local or regional entity may, to the extent that it has legal personality
         under national law, institute proceedings against a decision addressed to it or against a decision which, although in the
         form of a regulation or a decision addressed to another person, is of direct and individual concern to it.  The condition
         that the decision forming the subject-matter of the proceedings must be of direct concern to a natural or legal person requires
         the contested Community measure to affect directly the legal situation of the individual and leave no discretion to its addressees,
         who are entrusted with the task of implementing it, such implementation being purely automatic and resulting from Community
         rules without the application of other intermediate rules.
      
The designation of a regional or local entity as the authority responsible for the implementation of a project of the European
         Regional Development Fund does not imply that that entity is itself entitled to the financial assistance in question.  The
         fact that, in the annex to the decision to grant that assistance, that regional entity is referred to as the authority responsible
         for the application for financial assistance is also irrelevant.  The position of ‘authority responsible for the application’,
         to which the annex to the decision to grant refers, does not have the effect of putting that authority in a direct relationship
         with the Community assistance, which the same decision states moreover was applied for by the government of a Member State
         and granted to the latter. 
      
(see paras 29, 31-32, 36)
2.     Individuals are entitled to effective judicial protection of the rights they derive from the Community legal order.  The judicial
         protection of natural or legal persons who are unable, by reason of the conditions for admissibility laid down in the fourth
         paragraph of Article EC, directly to challenge Community measures must be guaranteed effectively by a right of action
         before national courts. Those are required, in accordance with the principle of cooperation in good faith laid down by Article EC,
         so far as possible, to interpret and apply national procedural rules governing the exercise of rights of action in a way that
         enables those persons to challenge before the courts the legality of any decision or other national measure relative to the
         application to them of a Community act by pleading the invalidity of such an act and by asking them to make a reference to
         the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling on validity.
      
(see para. 39)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
March (*)
      
(Appeal – European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) – Closure of Community financial assistance – Action for annulment – Admissibility – Local or regional entity – Measures of direct and individual concern to that entity – Direct concern)
In Case C‑15/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, lodged on January 2006,
Regione Siciliana, represented by G. Aiello, avvocato dello Stato, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
appellant,
the other party to the proceedings being:
Commission of the European Communities, represented by E. de March and L. Flynn, acting as Agents, assisted by G. Faedo, avvocatessa, with an address for service
         in Luxembourg,
      
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
composed of R. Schintgen, President of the Chamber, A. Borg Barthet and M. Ilešič (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on January 2007,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
In this appeal, the Regione Siciliana asks the Court of Justice to set aside the judgment of the Court of First Instance of
         the European Communities of October in Case T‑60/Regione Siciliana v Commission [2005] ECR II‑(‘the judgment under appeal’), dismissing as inadmissible its action for annulment of Commission Decision
         C (2002) of December relating to the cancellation of the aid granted to the Italian Republic by Commission Decision
         C (87) of December concerning the provision of assistance by the European Regional Development Fund as infrastructure
         investment, for a sum no less than EUR million, in Italy (region: Sicily), and to the recovery of the advance on that assistance
         made by the Commission (‘the contested decision’).
      
 Legal context
In order to strengthen economic and social cohesion, within the meaning of Article EC, the Council adopted Regulation
         (EEC) No 2052/of June on the tasks of the Structural Funds and their effectiveness and on coordination of their
         activities between themselves and with the operations of the European Investment Bank and the other existing financial instruments
         (OJ L 185, p. 9), as amended by Council Regulation (EEC) No 2081/of July (OJ L 93, p. 5) (‘Regulation
         No 2052/88’), and Regulation (EEC) No 4253/of December laying down provisions for implementing Regulation No 2052/as regards coordination of the activities of the different Structural Funds between themselves and with the operations of
         the European Investment Bank and the other existing financial instruments (OJ L 374, p. 1), as amended by Council Regulation
         (EEC) No 2082/of July (OJ L 193, p. 20; ‘Regulation No 4253/88’).
      
The first subparagraph of Article 4(1) of Regulation No 2052/provides:
‘Community operations shall be such as to complement or contribute to corresponding national operations. They shall be established
         through close consultations between the Commission, the Member State concerned and the competent authorities and bodies ...
         designated by the Member State at national, regional, local or other level, with all parties acting as partners in pursuit
         of a common goal. These consultations shall hereinafter be referred to as the “partnership”. The partnership shall cover the
         preparation and financing, as well as the ex ante appraisal, monitoring and ex post evaluation of operations.’
      
Under the title ‘Additionality’, Article 9(1) of Regulation No 4253/provides that ‘[i]n order to achieve a genuine economic
         impact, Structural Funds … appropriations may not replace public expenditure on structural or comparable expenditure undertaken
         by the Member State in the whole of the territory eligible under an objective’.
      
Under Article of the same regulation:
‘1.      If an operation or measure appears to justify neither part nor the whole of the assistance allocated, the Commission shall
         conduct a suitable examination of the case in the framework of the partnership, in particular requesting that the Member State
         or authorities designated by it to implement the operation submit their comments within a specified period of time.
      
2.      Following this examination, the Commission may reduce or suspend assistance in respect of the operation or a measure concerned
         if the examination reveals an irregularity or a significant change affecting the nature or conditions for the implementation
         of the operation or measure for which the Commission’s approval has not been sought.
      
3.      Any sum received unduly and to be recovered shall be repaid to the Commission. …’
 Facts giving rise to the dispute
By request received at the Commission on September 1986, the Italian Republic sought the grant of ERDF assistance towards
         infrastructure investment in Sicily, for the third part of construction work on a dam across the Gibbesi. The request provided
         for the construction of works connected to the main body of the dam and indicated its dual purpose: the water was to be used
         to ensure a reliable water supply for the industrial centre yet to be built in Licata and for the irrigation of some hectares of agricultural land.
      
By Decision C (87) (‘the decision to grant’), the Commission granted the Italian Republic ERDF assistance of the
         maximum sum of ITL (approximately EUR 48.million). In all the Italian Republic received an advance of ITL (approximately EUR million) on that assistance.
      
By letter of May 2000, the Italian authorities indicated to the Commission that the work on the main body of the dam had
         been complete since November 1992, but that the dam was not, however, operational. In the same letter, the Italian authorities
         sent the Commission a note from the Regione Siciliana of January 2000, in which the latter formally undertook to have the
         necessary work done in order to make the dam operational and capable of being put into use.
      
By letter of March the Italian authorities submitted to the Commission their claim for payment of the balance and
         forwarded a note of March from the Regione Siciliana. That note made it clear that the Ente minerario siciliano (the
         Sicilian Mines Authority, the project supervisor for the dam) had been wound up, that it had proved impossible to build the
         industrial centre of Licata and that, therefore, the original destined use of the dam waters had to be changed. A study had
         therefore been ordered with a view to defining the potential uses of the reservoir water.
      
On the basis of those facts, the Commission decided to initiate the examination provided for by Article of Regulation No 4253/and by the decision to grant. By letter of September it sent to the Italian Republic the items of evidence capable
         of constituting irregularities and of justifying a possible decision to cancel the assistance. It requested the Italian authorities,
         the presidency of the Regione Siciliana and the end‑beneficiary to submit their observations within a period of two months.
      
By letter of November 2001, the Italian Republic forwarded the Regione Siciliana’s observations to the Commission. It was
         clear from those that no date, even a provisional one, had been fixed for bringing the project into operation.
      
By letter of February 2002, the Regione Siciliana submitted other information about the project’s progress together with
         a timetable showing the predicted completion of the works before February 2003.
      
The Commission took the view that that information amounted to confirmation of various irregularities within the meaning of
         Article of Regulation No 4253/and on December it adopted the contested decision. By the contested decision the
         Commission cancelled the assistance, withholding the sum reserved in order to pay the balance and demanding repayment of the
         sums paid by way of advances.
      
 Procedure before the Court of First Instance and the judgment under appeal
On February 2003, the Regione Siciliana brought an action for annulment of the contested decision. By the judgment under
         appeal, the Court of First Instance dismissed the action as unfounded.
      
Before ruling on the substance, the Court of First Instance dismissed the objection of inadmissibility raised by the Commission
         on the ground that the Regione Siciliana lacked standing to bring proceedings. The Commission did not deny that the appellant
         was individually concerned by the contested decision within the meaning of the fourth paragraph of Article EC but maintained
         that it was not directly concerned by it.
      
The essential grounds of the judgment under appeal regarding the admissibility of the action are the following:
‘By revoking the assistance in its entirety, the [contested] decision has principally … rescinded the Commission’s obligation
         to pay the balance of the assistance (EUR 9.million) and demanded repayment of the advances paid to the Italian Republic
         and passed on to the applicant (approximately EUR million).
      
The Court considers that such a decision must necessarily have directly affected the applicant’s legal situation in several
         ways. In addition, the [contested] decision leaves the Italian authorities no discretion, its implementation being purely
         automatic and resulting from Community rules alone without the application of other intermediate rules.
      
…
With regard first of all to the alteration of the applicant’s legal situation, the [contested] decision has had the initial
         direct and immediate effect of changing the applicant’s financial situation by depriving the applicant of the balance of the
         assistance (approximately EUR 9.million) remaining to be paid by the Commission. The unpaid balance of the assistance will
         not be paid to the Italian Republic by the Commission, for the assistance has been cancelled. The Italian authorities will
         not, therefore, be able to pay it on to the applicant. …
      
The [contested] decision also directly alters the applicant’s legal situation with regard to the duty to repay the sums paid
         by way of advances (approximately EUR million). In point of fact, the effect of the [contested] decision is directly to
         change the applicant’s legal status from that of unarguably being a creditor in respect of those sums to that of debtor, at
         least potentially. … 
      
…
As regards, next, the criterion that the [contested] decision should be automatically applicable, it may be noted that it
         is automatically and of itself that the [contested] decision produces the twofold effect on the applicant mentioned in paragraphs and above.
      
That twofold effect of the [contested] decision follows from Community law alone, namely, the provisions of the third indent
         of Article EC in conjunction with the fourth paragraph of Article EC. In this connection the national authorities
         enjoy no discretion in their duty to implement the decision.
      
The conclusions reached in paragraphs and above are not shaken by the Commission’s argument that the national authorities
         may in theory decide to release the applicant from the financial consequences that the [contested] decision entails for it
         directly, by funding out of State resources the balance of the Community assistance withheld, on the one hand, and the repayment
         of the Community advances received by the applicant, on the other, or just one of those two.
      
A national decision providing funding of that magnitude would not in fact mean that the Commission’s decision ceased to apply
         automatically. Legally speaking, the national decision would remain extraneous to the application in Community law of the
         [contested] decision. Its effect would be to put the applicant back in the situation it occupied before the [contested] decision
         was adopted, by bringing about in its turn a second alteration of the applicant’s legal situation which was changed in the
         first place, and automatically, by the [contested] decision. This second alteration of the applicant’s legal situation would
         be the consequence of the national decision alone and not of the implementation of the [contested] decision.’
      
 Main appeal and cross-appeal
By its appeal, the appellant claims that the Court should set aside the judgment under appeal and declare that the contested
         decision is invalid. To that end, it relies on a number of grounds of challenge alleging errors of law and incoherent reasoning
         which, it claims, vitiate the Court of First Instance’s assessment of the substance of the dispute.
      
The Commission not only contends that the appeal should be dismissed but that the judgment under appeal should be set aside.
         In regard to the latter claim, it has lodged a cross-appeal in which it maintains that the Court of First Instance infringed
         the fourth paragraph of Article EC and erred in its reasoning when it dismissed the objection of inadmissibility that
         the Commission had brought before it.
      
Since the cross-appeal relates to the admissibility of the action brought by the Regione Siciliana before the Court of First
         Instance, an issue which precedes the questions of substance raised by the main appeal, it is necessary to examine it first.
      
 Cross-appeal
 Arguments of the parties
In its cross-appeal, the Commission contends that the Court of First Instance’s reasoning as to the admissibility of the action
         starts from a false premiss, namely, that the decision to grant puts the Regione Siciliana directly in the position of a creditor
         in respect of the assistance granted. According to the Commission, the Regione Siciliana’s ability to receive ERDF assistance
         for the dam on the Gibbesi was dependent on the autonomous decisions of the Italian Republic.
      
In addition, even if it were to be admitted that the Regione Siciliana was effectively a creditor of the Community assistance,
         such a situation arose from provisions or decisions of national law.
      
According to the Commission, if the Court were to confirm the interpretation adopted by the Court of First Instance in the
         judgment under appeal, this would have unacceptable consequences from the point of view of the judicial protection of recipients
         of the Structural Funds. Any person or entity recognised by law which is an end‑beneficiary of Structural Funds would be directly
         concerned by the Commission decisions regarding the funds granted.
      
The judgment under appeal is, moreover, contradictory. Thus, the Court of First Instance found that the alterations to the
         appellant’s legal situation arose directly and automatically from the contested decision whilst also recognising that the
         Italian authorities played an indispensable role. In addition, by using at paragraph of the judgment under appeal the expression
         ‘debtor, at least potentially’, the Court of First Instance accepted that the Italian Republic had a discretion concerning
         whether or not to pass on to the appellant the effects of the contested decision.
      
According to the appellant, that decision directly affected its legal position, since it went from being the recipient of
         assistance to a debtor required to pay back advances received by way of assistance.
      
In fact, the Italian authorities enjoyed no discretion in implementing the contested decision. In that regard, the Court of
         First Instance correctly stated that a possible financial reorganisation at the initiative of the Italian Republic would be
         the result of a national decision extraneous to the obligation to implement the contested decision.
      
The appellant states next that the projected dam across the Gibbesi falls within its powers and that in the annex to the decision
         to grant it is referred to as the body responsible for the application for financial assistance.
      
It also points out that the contested decision has prevented it from exercising its powers as it understands them. That decision
         obliged it in particular to cease to apply the legislation on the project and to activate the procedure for the recovery of
         the aid from recipients.
      
At the hearing, the appellant again pointed out that a declaration that its action was inadmissible would constitute a denial
         of justice, since, as an infra‑State entity, it cannot bring an action against the Italian Republic before the national courts.
      
 Findings of the Court
On the basis of the fourth paragraph of Article EC, a local or regional entity may, to the extent that it has – like the
         Regione Siciliana – legal personality under national law, institute proceedings against a decision addressed to it or against
         a decision which, although in the form of a regulation or a decision addressed to another person, is of direct and individual
         concern to it (see Case C‑452/Nederlandse Antillen v Council [2001] ECR I‑8973, paragraph 51; Case C‑142/P Commission v Nederlandse Antillen [2003] ECR I‑3483, paragraph 59; and Case C‑417/P Regione Siciliana v Commission [2006] ECR I‑3881, paragraph 24).
      
In the present case, the Court of First Instance limited its examination to whether the appellant was directly concerned by
         the contested decision, the Commission not having disputed that that decision was of individual concern to the appellant.
      
In accordance with settled case-law, the condition that the decision forming the subject-matter of the proceedings must be
         of direct concern to a natural or legal person, as laid down in the fourth paragraph of Article EC, requires the contested
         Community measure to affect directly the legal situation of the individual and leave no discretion to its addressees, who
         are entrusted with the task of implementing it, such implementation being purely automatic and resulting from Community rules
         without the application of other intermediate rules (see, in particular, Case C‑404/P Glencore Grain v Commission [1998] ECR I‑2435, paragraph 41; Case C‑486/P National Front v Parliament [2004] ECR I‑6289, paragraph 34; and Regione Siciliana v Commission, paragraph 28).
      
As the Court of Justice has already held at paragraphs and of its judgment in Regione Siciliana v Commission, the designation of a regional or local entity such as the Regione Siciliana as the authority responsible for the implementation
         of an ERDF project does not imply that that entity is itself entitled to assistance. According to the Court, nothing in the
         documents in the case giving rise to that judgment supports the conclusion that the appellant was directly concerned within
         the meaning of the fourth paragraph of Article EC in its capacity as the authority responsible for the implementation
         of the project.
      
The Court went on to say that that analysis is not weakened by the first subparagraph of Article 4(1) of Regulation No 2052/and Article 9(1) of Regulation No 4253/88. In fact, those articles, which set out the principle that Community financial assistance
         is complementary to national assistance, are not relevant to cases in which the Commission has closed financial assistance
         (Regione Siciliana v Commission, paragraph 31).
      
Those considerations also fall to be applied in the present case.
They are in no way called into doubt by the Regione Siciliana’s argument that in the Italian legal system it enjoys more extensive
         competences in those matters to which the dam project across the Gibbesi relates than in the sphere of the motorway network,
         to which the project concerned by the judgment in Regione Siciliana v Commission relates. In fact, that distinction drawn from domestic law cannot have any effect on whether the appellant is directly concerned.
      
The fact that, in the annex to the decision to grant, the Regione Siciliana is referred to as the authority responsible for
         the application for financial assistance is also without relevance even though, in the case which Regione Siciliana v Commission decided, it was referred to as the authority responsible for the implementation of the project. In fact, the position of
         ‘authority responsible for the application’, to which the annex to the decision to grant refers, does not have the effect
         of putting the appellant in a direct relationship with the Community assistance, which the same decision states moreover was
         applied for by the Italian Government and granted to the Italian Republic.
      
In the absence of any other factor which may, regarding the condition of direct concern, distinguish significantly the present
         case from that considered in Regione Siciliana v Commission, it must be held that the Court’s assessment in that regard in that judgment can be transposed in its entirety to the present
         case.
      
Consequently, the Court of First Instance erred in law in considering that the Regione Siciliana was directly concerned by
         the contested decision. Therefore, the judgment under appeal must be set aside.
      
Contrary to the appellant’s assertion, that conclusion does not constitute a denial of justice. In that regard, it is sufficient
         to bear in mind that individuals are entitled to effective judicial protection of the rights they derive from the Community
         legal order (see Case C‑263/P Commission v Jégo-Quéré [2004] ECR I‑3425, paragraph and the case‑law cited). The judicial protection of natural or legal persons who are unable,
         by reason of the conditions for admissibility laid down in the fourth paragraph of Article EC, to challenge directly Community
         measures of the kind in the present case, must be guaranteed effectively by a right of action before national courts. Those
         are required, in accordance with the principle of cooperation in good faith laid down by Article EC, so far as possible,
         to interpret and apply national procedural rules governing the exercise of rights of action in a way that enables those persons
         to challenge before the courts the legality of any decision or other national measure relative to the application to them
         of a Community act such as that at issue, by pleading the invalidity of such an act and by asking them to make a reference
         to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling on validity (Commission v Jégo-Quéré, paragraphs to and the case‑law cited).
      
 Admissibility of the Regione Siciliana’s action
Under the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, the Court, where it quashes a decision of
         the Court of First Instance, may either itself give final judgment in the matter, where the state of the proceedings so permits,
         or refer the case back to the Court of First Instance for final judgment.
      
In the present case, the Court considers that it has all the elements necessary for it to rule on the admissibility of the
         Regione Siciliana’s action before the Court of First Instance. In fact, the arguments relied on by the Regione Siciliana in
         that respect correspond to those which it developed in the context of its observations on the Commission’s cross‑appeal and
         rely substantially on the contention, which has already been raised, that the appellant is directly concerned by the contested
         decision, since as a result of that decision it went from being the recipient of assistance to being a debtor required to
         pay back advances received under that assistance.
      
For the reasons set out at paragraphs to above, the Regione Siciliana cannot be considered to be directly concerned
         by the contested decision.
      
In those circumstances, the Regione Siciliana’s action before the Court of First Instance must be dismissed as inadmissible.
 Main appeal
In the light of the inadmissibility of the Regione Siciliana’s action before the Court of First Instance, the Regione Siciliana’s
         appeal against the judgment under appeal to the extent that it ruled on the substance of that action has become devoid of
         purpose, and therefore no longer needs to be considered.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, which is applicable to appeals by virtue of Article
         thereof, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they are applied for in the successful party’s pleadings.
         Under Article 69(6) of those rules, also applicable to appeals by virtue of Article 118, where a case does not proceed to
         judgment, the costs are at the discretion of the Court.
      
Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Regione Siciliana has been unsuccessful in the cross-appeal, the Regione Siciliana
         must be ordered to pay the costs relating to the cross-appeal.
      
The finding that the main appeal is devoid of purpose, as a result of the upholding of the Commission’s cross-appeal, means
         that the Regione Siciliana must also be ordered to pay the costs of the main appeal.
      
Since the Commission has applied for costs of the procedure before the Court of First Instance and the action before that
         Court has been dismissed as inadmissible, the Regione Siciliana must be ordered to pay the costs relating to the procedure
         at first instance.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fifth Chamber) hereby:
1.      Sets aside the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities of October in Case T‑60/Regione Siciliana v Commission;
2.      Rejects as inadmissible the Regione Siciliana’s action for annulment of Commission Decision C (2002) of December relating to the cancellation of the aid granted to the Italian Republic by Commission Decision C (87) of December concerning the provision of assistance by the European Regional Development Fund as infrastructure investment, for a sum no
            less than EUR million, in Italy (region: Sicily), and for the recovery of the advance on that assistance made by the Commission;
3.      Declares that it is not necessary to rule on the appeal brought by the Regione Siciliana against the judgment referred to
            in paragraph of the present operative part;
4.      Orders the Regione Siciliana to pay the costs of the proceedings before the present Court and also those connected with the
            procedure at first instance.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 