
         				Ordonnance de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-555/Magali Warbecq
v
Ryanair Ltd
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Tribunal du travail de Charleroi)
(Regulation (EC) No 44/– Jurisdiction in civil and commercial matters – Court or tribunal having the power under Article EC to request the Court to give a preliminary ruling – Court lacking jurisdiction to give a preliminary ruling)
Summary of the Order
References for a preliminary ruling – Jurisdiction of the Court – Measure adopted on the basis of Part Three, Title IV, of
            the Treaty – Regulation No 44/on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments – National courts and
            tribunals having the power to request the Court to give a preliminary ruling – Courts or tribunals against whose decisions
            there is no judicial remedy under national law 
(Arts 61(c) EC and EC; Council Regulation No 44/2001)
  
ORDER OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)June 2004(1)
(Regulation (EC) No 44/–  Jurisdiction in civil and commercial matters  –  Court or tribunal having the power under Article EC to request the Court to give a preliminary ruling  –  Court lacking jurisdiction to give a preliminary ruling)
 In Case C-555/03,
          REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Tribunal du travail de Chareleroi (Belgium) for a preliminary ruling in
         the proceedings pending before that court between
         
Magali Warbecq
and
Ryanair Ltd,
         
 on the interpretation of Council Regulation (EC) No 44/of December on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement
         of judgments in civil and commercial matters (OJ L 12, p. 1),
         
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
 composed of: J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber,  K. Schiemann and E. Juhász, 
         
 Advocate General: A. Tizzano, Registrar: R. Grass,
         
after hearing the Advocate General, 
makes the following
Order
            
 By judgment of December 2003, received at the Court on December 2003, the Tribunal du travail de Charleroi (Chareleroi
         Labour Court) referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC two questions on the interpretation of Council
         Regulation (EC) No 44/of December on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and
         commercial matters (OJ L 12, p. 1).
         
            
 Those questions were raised in proceedings between Ms Warbecq, a Belgian national, and the Irish company Ryanair Ltd (hereinafter
         ‘Ryanair’), established in Dublin (Ireland).
         
Legal framework
            
 Article EC states:
         ‘In order to establish progressively an area of freedom, security and justice, the Council shall adopt:
         …
         
(c) 
measures in the field of judicial cooperation in civil matters as provided for in Article 65;
…’
         
            
 Article of Regulation No 44/provides:
         ‘An employer domiciled in a Member State may be sued:
          1.        in the courts of the Member State where he is domiciled; or
          2.        in another Member State:
         
(a) 
in the courts for the place where the employee habitually carries out his work or in the courts for the last place where he
                     did so, …
                  
…’
         
Main proceedings and questions referred to the Court
            
 By contract of employment signed in Dublin on April 2001, Ms Warbecq was engaged by Ryanair as a ‘customer services agent-inflight’.
         
            
 Ryanair terminated the contract on April and paid Ms Warbecq a severance allowance equivalent to seven days’ remuneration.
         
            
 On a date not specified in the judgment making the reference, Ms Warbecq brought proceedings against Ryanair before the Tribunal
         du travail de Charleroi. The application seeks an order for payment by the defendant in the main proceedings of certain sums
         by way of end-of-contract holiday allowance, additional severance pay and damages.
         
            
 The claimant in the main proceedings maintains that under Article of Regulation No 44/she had the choice of bringing
         proceedings against her employer in the courts of the place where the latter was domiciled and in the courts for the place
         where she habitually carried out her work, in this case Charleroi Airport. 
         
            
 Ryanair contends that the Belgian courts have no jurisdiction to hear the action brought by Ms Warbecq.
         
            
 Taking the view that the resolution of the dispute before it required an interpretation of Article of Regulation No 44/2001,
         the Tribunal du travail decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
         
‘1.
For the purposes of Article 19(2) of Council Regulation No 44/…, what are the relevant criteria for determining the Contracting
               State on the territory of which an employee habitually carries out his work, when that employee is employed as a member of
               the air crew of an undertaking engaged in international air passenger transport?
            
2.
Which place should be regarded as the place where or from which such an employee in fact performs most of his duties for his
               employer when the duties under the contract of employment are to be performed partly on the ground (airport) of a Contracting
               State and partly on an aircraft which has the nationality of another Contracting State which also recruited the employee?’
            
Jurisdiction of the Court
            
 Under Article 92(1) of the Rules of Procedure, where it is clear that the Court has no jurisdiction to take cognisance of
         an action or where the action is manifestly inadmissible, the Court may, by reasoned order, after hearing the Advocate General
         and without taking further steps in the proceedings, give a decision on the action.
         
            
 Article 68(1) EC provides that ‘Article shall apply to this Title [IV concerning “Visas, asylum, immigration and other
         policies related to free movement of persons”] under the following circumstances and conditions: where a question on the interpretation
         … of acts of the institutions of the Community based on this Title is raised in a case pending before a court or tribunal
         of a Member State against whose decisions there is no judicial remedy under national law, that court or tribunal shall, if
         it considers that a decision on the question is necessary to enable it to give judgment, request the Court to give a ruling
         thereon’.
         
            
 Regulation No 44/was adopted on the basis of Article 61(c) EC, which appears in Part Three, Title IV of the EC Treaty.
         In those circumstances, only a national court or tribunal against whose decisions there is no judicial remedy under national
         law may request the Court to give a preliminary ruling on the interpretation of that regulation.
         
            
 It is not disputed in the present case that decisions taken by the Tribunal du travail de Charleroi in proceedings such as
         the main proceedings are amenable to appeal under national law.
         
            
 Therefore, as the reference to the Court has not been made by a court or tribunal as referred to in Article EC, the Court
         has no jurisdiction to give a preliminary ruling on the interpretation of Regulation No 44/2001.
         
            
 Consequently, Article 92(1) of the Rules of Procedure must be applied and it must be held that the Court clearly has no jurisdiction
         to rule on the questions referred by the Tribunal du travail de Charleroi.
         
Costs 
            
 Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court.
         
On those grounds,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
 hereby orders:
         The Court of Justice of the European Communities clearly has no jurisdiction to answer the questions referred by the Tribunal
               du travail de Charleroi (Belgium) by judgment of December 2003. Luxembourg, June 2004.
         
R. Grass
J. N. Cunha Rodrigues
Registrar
President of the Fourth Chamber
 –
            
Language of the case: French.
Top  
 