
Case C-276/Nancy Delay
v
Università degli studi di Firenze and Others 
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Corte d’appello di Firenze)
(Freedom of movement for workers – Discrimination on grounds of nationality – Category of ‘exchange assistants’ – Former foreign-language assistants – Recognition of acquired rights)
Summary of the Judgment
Freedom of movement for persons – Workers – Equal treatment – Conditions of employment
(Art. 39(2) EC)
As provided in Article 39(2) EC, freedom of movement for workers entails the abolition of any discrimination based on nationality
         between workers of the Member States as regards employment, remuneration and other conditions of work and employment. Observance
         of the principle of equal treatment, of which Article EC is a specific expression, requires that comparable situations
         should not be treated differently and that different situations should not be treated in the same way, unless such treatment
         is objectively justified.
      
In that regard, if national workers are entitled, under domestic legislation, to reinstatement from the point of view of increases
         in salary, seniority and the payment by the employer of social security contributions, from the date of their original recruitment,
         former foreign-language assistants who have become linguistic associates must also be entitled to similar reinstatement with
         effect from the date of their original recruitment.
      
When application of that domestic legislation to national workers presupposes continuation of the employment relationship
         between employer and workers, it is for the national court, which alone has jurisdiction to assess the facts and to interpret
         the national legislation, to determine whether there exists any continuity linking the duties performed as an exchange assistant
         and those performed as a linguistic associate. In carrying out that assessment, the national court must determine, first,
         whether the duties involved in the work carried out by exchange assistants are the same as those involved in the work carried
         out by linguistic associates, having particular regard to the definition of the pedagogical profile of the foreign-language
         teaching courses and to the evaluation of the students’ knowledge and, second, whether the two kinds of duties in question
         meet the same teaching needs. If the national court should find that there is such continuity, despite the temporary interruption
         of the employment relationship with the employer, it would be necessary to consider whether a national worker placed in a
         comparable situation would have been entitled to the recognition of rights acquired since the date of his first recruitment.
         In this respect, only an analysis concentrating on the substance, rather than the form, of statutory schemes will make it
         possible to establish whether their actual application to different categories of workers in comparable legal situations leads
         to situations which are compatible or, in contrast, incompatible with the fundamental principle of non-discrimination on grounds
         of nationality.
      
It is therefore contrary to Article 39(2) EC that, when a fixed-term contract of employment as an exchange assistant is replaced
         by a contract of employment for an indefinite period as a linguistic associate, a person in the position described above should
         be refused recognition of the rights acquired since the date of her first recruitment, with consequences with regard to remuneration,
         the account to be taken of seniority and the payment, by the employer, of contributions to a social security scheme, inasmuch
         as a national worker placed in a comparable situation would have been entitled to such recognition, which it is for the national
         court to ascertain.
      
(see paras 18-19, 23-24, 26-30, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Seventh Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Freedom of movement for workers – Discrimination on grounds of nationality – Category of ‘exchange assistants’ – Former foreign-language assistants – Recognition of acquired rights)
In Case C‑276/07,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, from the Corte d’appello di Firenze (Italy), made by decision of
         May 2007, received at the Court on June 2007, in the proceedings
      
Nancy Delay
v
Università degli studi di Firenze,
Istituto nazionale della previdenza sociale (INPS),
Repubblica italiana,
THE COURT (Seventh Chamber),
composed of U. Lõhmus, President of the Chamber, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur) and A. Arabadjiev, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: K. Sztranc-Sławiczek, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on March 2008,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Ms Delay, by L. Picotti, avvocato,
–        the Università degli studi di Firenze, by R. de Angelis and S. de Felice, avvocatesse,
–        the Istituto nazionale della previdenza sociale (INPS), by L. Maritato, A. Coretti and F. Correra, avvocati,
–        the Italian Republic, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and S. Fiorentino, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by E. Traversa and L. Pignataro, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article EC.
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between Ms Delay and the Università degli studi di Firenze (University
         of Florence), the Istituto nazionale della previdenza sociale (INPS) (National Institute of social insurance) and the Italian
         Republic concerning the recognition of her rights acquired while performing the duties of an exchange assistant.
      
 Legal context
 The relevant provisions of national law
In the Italian legal order there exists a special category of foreign-language teachers, commonly known as ‘exchange assistants’,
         governed by cultural agreements between the Kingdom of Belgium and the Italian Republic, and by Law No of February (GURI No of March 1967, ‘Law No 62/1967’).
      
Article of Law No 62/provides:
      
‘1.      In accordance with duly ratified cultural agreements, annual appointments, renewable in subsequent years, may be conferred
         on foreign nationals in derogation from the last subparagraph of Article of Law No of March 1958, corresponding
         to posts for tenured assistants.
      
2.      The appointment shall be made by decision of the Rector, after deliberation by the Faculty and School, on a proposal by the
         professor holding the relevant chair who shall select from a list drawn up by the authorities of the country of origin.
      
3.      The documents usually required shall be replaced by statements by the competent diplomatic authorities certifying that the
         person selected satisfies all the conditions, including possession of diplomas, required for the post of university assistant
         in the competent country of origin.
      
4.      Foreign nationals may be appointed, in accordance with the same rules as in the subparagraphs above, and again in accordance
         with duly ratified cultural agreements, to special posts of foreign-language and foreign-literature and ‑language assistant
         in addition to tenured assistant posts.  Appointment to such posts shall be subject to authorisation by the Minister for public
         education.
      
...’
Article of Presidential Decree No of July (ordinary supplement to GURI No of July 1980, ‘DPR No 382/80’)
         stated:
      
‘Within the funding limits laid down ..., Rectors may engage on contracts governed by private law, upon reasoned proposals
         from the faculty concerned in order to meet the actual needs for practice of students attending language courses, if necessary
         not covered by specific international agreements, assistants of foreign mother tongue of proved and recognised competence,
         verified by the faculty, the number of such assistants not exceeding the ratio of assistant to students actually attending
         the course. ...
      
The contracts referred to in the first paragraph may not be extended beyond the academic year for which they are concluded
         and may be renewed annually for a maximum period of five years. …’
      
In response to the judgments in Case 33/Allué and Coonan [1989] ECR and in Joined Cases C-259/91, C-331/and C‑332/Allué and Others [1993] ECR I-4309, the Italian Republic adopted Decree-Law No of April 1995, converted into Law No of June
         (GURI No of June 1995, p. 9) (‘Law No 236/95’), the purpose of which was to reform foreign-language teaching in
         Italian universities.
      
Law No 236/laid down four fundamental rules:
      
(a)      the post of foreign-language assistant, as established by Article of DPR No 382/80, was abolished and replaced by that
         of ‘associate and mother-tongue linguistic expert’ (‘linguistic associate’);
      
(b)      linguistic associates are to be engaged by universities on the basis of an employment contract governed by private law (and
         no longer on a self-employed basis), usually concluded for an indeterminate period and, in exceptional circumstances, in order
         to meet temporary requirements, for a fixed term;
      
(c)      linguistic associates are to be engaged following a public selection procedure, the detailed rules of which are laid down
         by universities according to their respective statutes;
      
(d)      those who were previously foreign-language assistants, and persons who have reached the end of their contract, unless the
         non-renewal of the contract is due to the person’s lack of aptitude or to the removal of the post, are entitled to a preferential
         right of employment and, in addition, they retain, under Article 4(3) of Law No 236/95, the rights acquired in the course
         of previous employment relationships.
      
Article 1(1) of Decree-Law No of January laying down urgent provisions relating to the economic treatment of linguistic
         associates in certain universities and concerning equivalent qualifications (GURI No of January 2004, p. 4) provides:
      
‘In compliance with the judgment delivered by the Court of Justice … on June in Case C-212/[Commission v Italy [2001] ECR I‑4923], the financial treatment of linguistic associates, former foreign-language assistants … at the universities
         of La Basilicata, Milan, Palermo, Pisa, “La Sapienza” in Rome, and the Eastern University Institute in Naples … shall correspond
         to that afforded to part‑time tenured researchers, on a pro rata basis according to the number of hours worked and on the
         basis that full-time employment is equal to hours, with effect from the original date of recruitment, save where more
         advantageous treatment may be afforded; …’
      
Article of Law No of April on the regulation of fixed-term contracts (GURI No of May 1962, ‘Law No 230/62’),
         applicable to all Italian workers whose employment relationship is governed by contracts under private law, provides that,
         ‘if the employment relationship continues after the date of expiry originally fixed or if the period is subsequently extended,
         the contract of employment shall be deemed to be a contract for an indeterminate period from the date on which the worker
         was first employed’.
      
It is apparent from the decision for reference that the category of exchange assistants has never been abolished.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
Ms Delay, a Belgian citizen, was employed as an exchange assistant by the Università degli Studi di Firenze from November
         to October under fixed-term contracts successively renewed.  She had first taken part in a competition organised
         by the General Commissariat for International Relations in Brussels for French-language and -literature assistants.  Then,
         Ms Delay having being successful, her curriculum vitae was sent to the university in question, together with the names of
         other successful candidates, so that the university should choose an exchange assistant.
      
On October her contract was not renewed, her name no longer appearing in the list supplied to the Università degli
         studi di Firenze by the Belgian authorities.
      
On December 1994, after two months without working, Ms Delay concluded with that same university a contract for an indefinite
         period governed by Law No 236/applicable, from January 1994, to linguistic associates.
      
Although her duties were similar, the remuneration payable under the new system was less than that previously received by
         Ms Delay.  Upon its proving impossible to reach any agreement with the Università degli studi di Firenze, the applicant brought
         an action before the Tribunale di Firenze (District Court, Florence) on July claiming, in particular, that her contract
         should be recognised as having been for an indefinite period since November 1986, that is to say, from the beginning of
         her employment relationship with the Università degli studi di Firenze.  In essence, she claimed to be entitled to be covered
         by the rules laid down in Decree-Law No of January on the recognition of the rights acquired by former foreign-language
         assistants.
      
The Tribunale di Firenze dismissed her action, taking the view, in particular, that exchange assistants formed a category
         quite separate from that of foreign-language assistants, remaining subject to special legislation.
      
Ms Delay brought an appeal against that judgment before the Corte d’appello di Firenze (Court of Appeal, Florence) which,
         considering that it was not clear that the principles set out by the Court in its judgment in Case C‑119/Commission v Italy [2006] ECR I‑had been observed in the case of exchange assistants, has decided to stay proceedings and to refer the
         following question to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘On a proper construction of Article [EC] and secondary acts (in particular, the interpretations given in Case C‑212/[Commission v Italy] and Case C-119/[Commission v Italy]), are the rules valid which are applied to so-called “exchange assistants”, who were previously bound by fixed-term contracts
         (under Law No 62/1967), and who, when such contracts are replaced by contracts of indefinite duration, are not guaranteed
         the protection of all their rights from the date of their original recruitment, in respect not only of salary increases but
         also of seniority and the payment by the employer of social security contributions?’
      
 Concerning the question referred for a preliminary ruling
By this question the national court seeks, in substance, to ascertain whether it is contrary to Article EC that, when a
         fixed-term contract of employment as an exchange assistant is replaced by a contract of employment for an indefinite period
         as a linguistic associate, a person in the position of the applicant in the main proceedings should be refused recognition
         of the rights acquired since the date of her first recruitment, with consequences with regard to remuneration, the account
         to be taken of seniority and the payment, by the employer, of contributions to a social security scheme.
      
It is to be borne in mind that, as provided for by Article 39(2) EC, freedom of movement for workers entails the abolition
         of any discrimination based on nationality between workers of the Member States as regards employment, remuneration and other
         conditions of work and employment.
      
The principle of equal treatment, of which Article EC is a specific expression, requires that comparable situations should
         not be treated differently and that different situations should not be treated in the same way, unless such treatment is objectively
         justified (see, in particular, Case C‑303/Advocaten voor de Wereld [2007] ECR I‑3633, paragraph 56).
      
For it to be found that Ms Delay has been subject to discriminatory treatment it is therefore necessary to establish whether
         an Italian worker placed in a situation comparable to that of the applicant in the main proceedings would have been entitled
         to recognition of his rights acquired since the date of his first recruitment.
      
It is important to observe that, when a national worker whose employment relationship is governed by private law is entitled,
         by virtue of Law No 230/62, to have his fixed-term employment contract converted into one for an indefinite period, all his
         acquired rights are guaranteed from the date of his original recruitment.  That guarantee has consequences not only with regard
         to increases in salary, but also with regard to seniority and to payment, by the employer, of social security contributions.
      
The Court has previously held that Law No 230/must serve as a measure of comparison to determine whether the new system
         applying to former foreign-language assistants is similar to the general system applying to the national workforce or whether,
         on the contrary, it affords them a lower level of protection (Case C‑212/Commission v Italy, paragraph 25).
      
If national workers are entitled, under Law No 230/62, to reinstatement from the point of view of increases in salary, seniority
         and the payment by the employer of social security contributions, from the date of their original recruitment, former foreign-language
         assistants who have become linguistic associates must also be entitled to similar reinstatement with effect from the date
         of their original recruitment (Case C‑212/Commission v Italy, paragraph 30).
      
It has, however, to be borne in mind that application of Law No 230/to national workers presupposes continuance of the
         employment relationship between employer and workers.
      
The documents submitted to the Court show that Ms Delay’s contract of employment as an exchange assistant expired on October
         and that her contract of employment as a linguistic associate was not concluded until December, two months later.
         
      
It is for the national court, which alone has jurisdiction to assess the facts and to interpret the national legislation,
         to determine whether there exists any continuity linking the duties performed by Ms Delay as an exchange assistant in the
         service of the Università degli studi di Firenze and those entrusted to her as a linguistic associate by that university.
      
In carrying out that assessment, the national court must determine, first, whether the duties involved in the work carried
         out by exchange assistants are the same as those involved in the work carried out by linguistic associates, having particular
         regard to the definition of the pedagogical profile of the foreign-language teaching courses and to the evaluation of the
         students’ knowledge and, second, whether the two kinds of duties in question meet the same teaching needs of Italian universities.
      
If the national court should find that there is continuity linking the duties of an exchange assistant and those of a linguistic
         associate performed by Ms Delay, despite the temporary interruption of the employment relationship with her employer, it would
         be necessary to consider whether a national worker placed in a comparable situation would have been entitled, pursuant to
         Law No 230/62, to the recognition of rights acquired since the date of his first recruitment.
      
So far as more particularly concerns the effects of an interruption of the employment relationship, it is to be emphasised
         that, in paragraph of its judgment in Case C‑212/Commission v Italy, the Court held that only an analysis concentrating on the substance, rather than the form, of statutory schemes will make
         it possible to establish whether their actual application to different categories of workers in comparable legal situations
         leads to situations which are compatible or, in contrast, incompatible with the fundamental principle of non-discrimination
         on grounds of nationality. 
      
Having regard to all the foregoing considerations, the reply to be given to the question referred must be that it is contrary
         to Article 39(2) EC that, when a fixed-term contract of employment as an exchange assistant is replaced by a contract of employment
         for an indefinite period as a linguistic associate, a person in the position of the applicant in the main proceedings should
         be refused recognition of the rights acquired since the date of her first recruitment, with consequences with regard to remuneration,
         the account to be taken of seniority and the payment, by the employer, of contributions to a social security scheme, inasmuch
         as a national worker placed in a comparable situation would have been entitled to such recognition.  It is for the national
         court to ascertain whether that is so in the case in the main proceedings. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Seventh Chamber) hereby rules:
It is contrary to Article 39(2) EC that, when a fixed-term contract of employment as an exchange assistant is replaced by
            a contract of employment for an indefinite period as a linguistic associate, a person in the position of the applicant in
            the main proceedings should be refused recognition of the rights acquired since the date of her first recruitment, with consequences
            with regard to remuneration, the account to be taken of seniority and the payment, by the employer, of contributions to a
            social security scheme, inasmuch as a national worker placed in a comparable situation would have been entitled to such recognition.
            It is for the national court to ascertain whether that is so in the case in the main proceedings.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 