
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Seventh Chamber)
March (*)
      
(Appeal – Community trade mark – Registration of signs consisting of a surface with black dots – Declaration of invalidity – Regulation (EC) No 40/– Article 7(1)(e)(ii) – Distortion of the evidence)
In Joined Cases C‑337/P to C‑340/P,
FOUR APPEALS under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on and July 2012,
Pi-Design AG, established in Triengen (Switzerland),
      
Bodum France SAS, established in Neuilly-sur-Seine (France),
      
Bodum Logistics A/S, established in Billund (Denmark),
      
represented by H. Pernez, avocat,
appellants,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
Yoshida Metal Industry Co. Ltd, established in Tsubame-shi (Japan), represented by S. Verea, K. Muraro and M. Balestriero, avvocati,
      
applicant at first instance,
Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM), represented by A. Folliard-Monguiral, acting as Agent,
      
defendant at first instance (C‑337/P and C‑339/P),
and
Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM), represented by A. Folliard-Monguiral, acting as Agent,
      
appellant,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
Yoshida Metal Industry Co. Ltd, represented by S. Verea, K. Muraro and M. Balestriero, avvocati,
      
applicant at first instance,
Pi-Design AG,
Bodum France SAS,
Bodum Logistics A/S,
represented by H. Pernez, avocat,
interveners at first instance (C‑338/P and C‑340/P),
THE COURT (Seventh Chamber),
composed of J.L. da Cruz Vilaça (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, J.­C. Bonichot and A. Arabadjiev, Judges,
Advocate General: P. Mengozzi,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the written procedure, 
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By their appeals, Pi-Design AG, Bodum France SAS and Bodum Logistics A/S (together ‘Pi-Design and Bodum’) on the one hand,
         and the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM) on the other, ask the Court to set
         aside the judgments of the General Court of the European Union of May in Case T‑331/Yoshida Metal Industry v OHIM – Pi-Design and Others (Representation of a triangular surface with black dots) and Case T‑416/Yoshida Metal Industry v OHIM – Pi-Design and Others (Representation of a surface with black dots) (together ‘the judgments under appeal’) annulling the decisions of the First Board of Appeal of OHIM of May (Cases
         R 1235/2008‑and R 1237/2008‑1, ‘the contested decisions’) relating to invalidity proceedings brought by Pi-Design and Bodum
         against two Community trade marks registered by Yoshida Metal Industry Co. Ltd (‘Yoshida’).
      
 Legal context
Council Regulation (EC) No 40/of December on the Community trade mark (OJ L 11, p. 1) was repealed and replaced
         by Council Regulation (EC) No 207/of February on the Community trade mark (OJ L 78, p. 1), which came into
         force on April 2009. However, given the date of the facts, the present disputes continue to be governed by Regulation No 40/94,
         at least as regards provisions which are not strictly procedural (see, inter alia, order of June in Case C‑346/P
         DMK v OHIM, paragraph 2).
      
Article of Regulation No 40/94, ‘Signs of which a Community trade mark may consist’, stated:
      
‘A Community trade mark may consist of any signs capable of being represented graphically, particularly words, including personal
         names, designs, letters, numerals, the shape of goods or of their packaging, provided that such signs are capable of distinguishing
         the goods or services of one undertaking from those of other undertakings.’
      
Article of that regulation, ‘Absolute grounds for refusal’, provided:
      
‘1.      The following shall not be registered:
(a)      signs which do not conform to the requirements of Article 4;
…
(e)      signs which consist exclusively of:
…
(ii)      the shape of goods which is necessary to obtain a technical result …
…’
Article 51(1)(a) of that regulation, ‘Absolute grounds for invalidity’, laid down:
      
‘1.      A Community trade mark shall be declared invalid on application to [OHIM] or on the basis of a counterclaim in infringement
         proceedings,
      
(a)      where the Community trade mark has been registered in breach of the provisions … of Article …
…’
 Background to the dispute
On and November 1999, Yoshida filed applications for registration of Community trade marks with OHIM in respect of goods
         corresponding to the description ‘cutlery, scissors, knives, forks, spoons, whetstones, whetstone holders, knife steels, fish
         bone tweezers’ and ‘household or kitchen utensils and containers (not of precious metal or coated therewith), turners, spatulas
         for kitchen use, knife blocks for holding knives, tart scoops, pie scoops’, in Classes and respectively of the Nice Agreement
         concerning the International Classification of Goods and Services for the Purpose of the Registration of Marks of June
         1957, as revised and amended.
      
The trade marks for which registration was sought are the signs reproduced below:
      
By decisions of September and November 2000, the examiner rejected those applications for registration on the ground
         that the signs at issue were devoid of any distinctive character within the meaning of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94.
      
Following the annulment on October by the Second Board of Appeal of OHIM of one of the abovementioned rejection decisions,
         the examiner on July withdrew the objection concerning the other application for registration. The trade marks at
         issue were registered on September and April 2003.
      
On July 2007, Pi-Design and Bodum applied for those trade marks to be declared invalid pursuant to Article 51(1)(a) of
         Regulation No 40/94, on the ground that they had been registered in breach of Article 7(1)(e)(ii) of that regulation. In their
         observations of December 2007, Pi-Design and Bodum added that the registrations should also be declared invalid on the
         ground that the trade marks lacked distinctive character.
      
By decisions of and July 2008, the Cancellation Division of OHIM rejected, in their entirety, the applications for a
         declaration of invalidity.
      
On August 2008, Pi-Design and Bodum filed a notice of appeal against each of those decisions of the Cancellation Division.
      
By the contested decisions, the First Board of Appeal of OHIM, on the basis of the absolute ground for refusal set out in
         Article 7(1)(e)(ii) of Regulation No 40/94, upheld the appeals and annulled the decisions of the Cancellation Division.
      
In paragraphs to of the contested decisions, the First Board of Appeal observed, first, that, at the time the applications
         for registration were filed, the signs were simply classified as ‘figurative’, and no description was provided. Following
         the objections raised by the examiner, Yoshida stated that the sign was a two-dimensional representation of the ‘shape of
         a product’, namely the handle of a knife (Case R 1235/2008‑1), or that it represented the ‘design of knife handles’ (Case
         R 1237/2008‑1). In correspondence subsequent to the application for a declaration of invalidity filed by Pi-Design and Bodum,
         the sign was, however, described by Yoshida as ‘an arbitrary geometrical figure’ or a ‘pattern of dots’ (Case R 1235/2008‑1).
      
According to the Board of Appeal, that latter description was made with the specific aim of avoiding the application of Article 7(1)(e)(ii)
         of Regulation No 40/94, the photographs of the knives marketed by the proprietor confirming that the frame surrounding the
         black dots represented the outline of a knife handle and that those dots represented dents.
      
The Board stated in that context, in paragraph of the contested decisions, that ‘a trade mark must be examined in accordance
         with the circumstances of the case. Among these circumstances are, of course, the information and the documents voluntarily
         submitted by the trade mark owner in support of its application’.
      
Next, in paragraphs and of the decisions, the First Board of Appeal stated that ‘the sign is a figurative mark consisting
         of the two-dimensional representation of the handle of the products for which registration is sought.’ Nevertheless, according
         to the Board of Appeal, the classification of a mark as figurative did not always preclude the application of Article 7(1)(e)(ii)
         of Regulation No 40/94.
      
Lastly, in paragraphs to of the contested decisions, the First Board of Appeal considered whether the black dots representing
         dents performed a technical function. Based on the information relating to existing patents, it concluded that the dents were
         necessary to obtain a non-skid effect and that the fact that the same result could be obtained by other shapes did not preclude
         the application of the ground for refusal in question.
      
Having declared the registrations invalid on the basis of Article 7(1)(e)(ii) of Regulation No 40/94, the Board of Appeal
         did not consider it necessary to rule on the other ground for invalidity relied on by Pi-Design and Bodum, the admissibility
         of which was disputed by Yoshida.
      
 Procedure before the General Court and the judgments under appeal
By applications lodged at the General Court Registry on August and September 2010, Yoshida brought actions for annulment
         of each of the contested decisions.
      
In support of its actions, Yoshida relied on a single plea in law, alleging breach of Article 7(1)(e)(ii) of Regulation No 40/94.
         That plea was broken down into three parts, the first alleging that the scope of that provision had been misinterpreted; the
         second, that the subject-matter of the trade marks at issue had been incorrectly assessed; and the third, that the ground
         for refusal in question had been misapplied.
      
By the judgments under appeal, the General Court upheld the second part of the single plea in law relied on by Yoshida, the
         applicant in those cases, and annulled the contested decisions.
      
 Forms of order sought by the parties and the procedure before the Court of Justice 
Pi-Design and Bodum claim that the Court should:
      
–        set aside the judgments under appeal and declare the contested trade marks invalid;
–        in the alternative, refer the cases back to the General Court with the obligation, in the event of annulment of the contested
         decisions, to remit them to the Board of Appeal of OHIM with a view to the consideration of the ground for invalidity not
         examined by it; and
      
–        in any event, order Yoshida to pay the costs.
OHIM claims that the Court should:
      
–        set aside the judgments under appeal, and
–        order Yoshida to pay the costs.
Yoshida contends that the appeals should be dismissed and that Pi-Design and Bodum and OHIM should be ordered to pay the costs.
      
By order of the President of the Court of September 2012, Cases C‑337/P to C‑340/P were joined for the purposes of
         the written and oral procedure and the judgment.
      
 The appeals
Pi-Design and Bodum put forward a single ground of appeal in support of their appeals, alleging breach of Article 7(1)(e)(ii)
         of Regulation No 40/94.
      
OHIM puts forward two grounds of appeal in support of its appeals, the first alleging a breach by the General Court of its
         obligation under Articles and of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union to state reasons, and the
         second, as Pi-Design and Bodum [have alleged], breach of Article 7(1)(e)(ii) of Regulation No 40/94.
      
 Arguments of the parties
The single ground of appeal put forward by Pi-Design and Bodum, alleging breach of Article 7(1)(e)(ii) of Regulation No 40/94,
         consists, in essence, of two parts.
      
By the first part of that ground of appeal, Pi-Design and Bodum claim that the General Court erred in law in holding that
         the essential characteristics of the signs at issue were to be assessed solely by a visual analysis of those signs as filed.
      
In the second part of that ground of appeal, Pi-Design and Bodum submit that the General Court distorted the evidence, in
         the first place, by not taking into account information relating to existing European and American patents, a copy of which
         had been submitted to the General Court, and which clearly showed that the dots appearing on the signs were dents.
      
In the second place, the General Court failed to have regard to the fact that the signs at issue had been used in the European
         Union for a period of years prior to the applications for registration at issue, even though this was clear from the file
         submitted to the General Court.
      
The ground of appeal relating to breach of Article 7(1)(e)(ii) of Regulation No 40/put forward by OHIM is divided into
         three parts.
      
By the first part of that ground of appeal, OHIM claims that, by failing to draw the legal inferences flowing from the various
         meanings of the black dots, which meanings the General Court acknowledged in paragraph of the judgments under appeal, the
         General Court applied that provision incorrectly.
      
By the second part of that ground of appeal, OHIM alleges that the General Court distorted the facts by taking the view, in
         paragraphs and of the judgments under appeal, that the Board of Appeal had interpreted the graphic representation of
         the signs at issue by reference only to the representations of the goods actually marketed.
      
Moreover, OHIM takes the view that the General Court erred in law in holding, in paragraph of the judgments under appeal,
         that the graphic representation of a sign may not be interpreted in the light of evidence submitted by the parties.
      
By the third part of that ground of appeal, OHIM submits that, in paragraphs to of the judgments under appeal, the General
         Court erred in law, first, by stating that the requirement of legal certainty precludes examination on the basis of elements
         other than the applications for registration and, secondly, by determining that the scope of protection was limited to the
         two-dimensional representation of the black dots.
      
In this connection, OHIM observes that Yoshida claimed before the Tribunal de grande instance de Paris (Regional Court, Paris,
         France) that the two marks ‘were three-dimensional marks [which] consist of an ensemble of circular and curving inwards patterns
         that are displayed crosswise following a quadrilateral’. On the basis of that claim, Yoshida obtained an order prohibiting
         the use by competitors of knives the handles of which had dents.
      
Yoshida, for its part, contends that, contrary to the conclusion of the General Court in paragraph of the judgments under
         appeal, Article 7(1)(e)(ii) of Regulation No 40/is not applicable to the cases before the Court. It argues that that provision
         applies only to the shape of goods and that, by its applications for registration, which concerned purely figurative and two-dimensional
         designs of staggered black dots, it had not sought protection for a shape within the meaning of that provision.
      
Yoshida contends, in addition, that the appellants’ grounds of appeal should be dismissed as unfounded.
      
In that regard, Yoshida argues, inter alia, that in Case C‑299/Philips [2002] ECR I‑and Case C‑48/P Lego Juris v OHIM [2010] ECR I‑three­dimensional shapes and signs were at issue, and therefore the situations described in those cases
         cannot be applied to the present cases. According to Yoshida, the analysis of purely figurative and two-dimensional signs
         must be based only on the visual impression produced by those signs.
      
 Findings of the Court
It should be borne in mind at the outset that, according to settled case-law, trade mark law constitutes an essential element
         in the system of competition in the European Union. In that system, each undertaking must, in order to attract and retain
         customers by the quality of its goods or services, be able to have registered as trade marks signs enabling the consumer,
         without any possibility of confusion, to distinguish those goods or services from others which have another origin (Lego Juris v OHIM, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
A sign representing the shape of a product falls among the signs which may constitute a trade mark provided that it is capable
         of being represented graphically and capable of distinguishing the products or services of one undertaking from those of other
         undertakings. That follows, so far as Community trade marks are concerned, from Article of Regulation No 40/(see, to
         that effect, Joined Cases C‑456/P and C‑457/P Henkel v OHIM [2004] ECR I‑5089, paragraphs and 31, and Lego Juris v OHIM, paragraph 39).
      
It is also apparent from the case-law of the Court that each of the grounds for refusal of registration listed in Article 7(1)
         of Regulation No 40/must be interpreted in the light of the public interest underlying that ground (see, inter alia, Henkel v OHIM, paragraph 45, and Lego Juris v OHIM, paragraph 43).
      
In that context, the Court has had occasion to point out that Article 7(1)(e)(ii) of Regulation No 40/is intended to prevent
         trade mark law granting an undertaking a monopoly on technical solutions or functional characteristics of a product (Lego Juris v OHIM, paragraph 43).
      
The Court has also had occasion to make clear that a correct application of that provision requires that the essential characteristics
         of a sign for which registration as a trade mark is sought be properly identified by the authority deciding on that application
         (Lego Juris v OHIM, paragraph 68).
      
The identification of those essential characteristics must be carried out on a case­by-case basis, there being no hierarchy
         that applies systematically between the various types of elements of which a sign may consist. In determining the essential
         characteristics of a sign, the competent authority may either base its assessment directly on the overall impression produced
         by the sign, or first examine in turn each of the components of the sign concerned (Lego Juris v OHIM, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In particular, as the Court observed in paragraph in Lego Juris v OHIM, the identification of the essential characteristics of a sign with a view to a possible application of the ground for refusal
         of registration set out in Article 7(1)(e)(ii) of Regulation No 40/may, depending on the case, and in particular in view
         of the degree of difficulty of that sign, be carried out by means of a simple visual analysis of the sign or, on the contrary,
         be based on a detailed examination in which material relevant to the assessment is taken into account, such as surveys or
         expert opinions, or data relating to intellectual property rights conferred previously in respect of the goods concerned.
      
Having thus recalled the subject-matter and scope of Article 7(1)(e)(ii) of Regulation No 40/94, it should be examined whether,
         as the appellants claim, the General Court applied that provision incorrectly.
      
In the first place, it is not apparent from the judgments under appeal that the General Court took the view that the signs
         at issue did not consist of the shape of goods within the meaning of that provision.
      
First, the General Court rejected, in paragraphs to of the judgments under appeal, the first part of the single plea
         in law relied on by Yoshida, by ruling, in paragraph of the judgments under appeal, that ‘[r]egard being had to the wording
         of Article 7(1)(e)(ii) of Regulation No [40/94] and to the public-policy interest which it pursues, it must be concluded that
         it applies to any sign, whether two- or three-dimensional, where all the essential characteristics of the sign perform a technical
         function’.
      
Next, the General Court stated, in paragraph of the judgments under appeal, that ‘the concave character of the black dots
         is not part of the contested trade mark as filed and registered. There is nothing in the graphic representation of the contested
         mark to suggest that the black dots in question represent dents rather than a figurative pattern. Likewise, the registration
         of the contested mark was not accompanied by any description to that effect. Therefore, in concluding that the dots were concave
         in character, the Board of Appeal did not refer to the sign as filed, but to representations of the goods actually marketed
         by the applicant’.
      
Lastly, the General Court summarised, in paragraph of the judgments under appeal, the criterion for the scope of the examination
         to be carried out by the competent authority when assessing the characteristics of the signs at issue, by ruling that ‘only
         the shape as reproduced in the registration application may be the subject-matter of the examination of the trade mark’.
      
However, it follows from Lego Juris v OHIM that the competent authority may carry out a detailed examination that takes into account material relevant to identifying
         appropriately the essential characteristics of a sign, in addition to the graphic representation and any descriptions filed
         at the time of the application for registration.
      
The possibility afforded in Lego Juris v OHIM to the competent authority when examining a three-dimensional sign can be extended to the examination of any sign constituted
         by the shape of goods within the meaning of Article 7(1)(e)(ii) of Regulation No 40/(see by analogy, as regards Article
         7(1)(b) of the regulation, inter alia, Henkel v OHIM, paragraph 38, and Case C‑96/P Storck v OHIM [2012] ECR, paragraph 33).
      
It is important to ensure that economic operators cannot improperly appropriate for themselves certain signs which only incorporate
         a technical solution, registration of which as a trade mark would impede the use of that technical solution by other undertakings
         (see, to that effect, Lego Juris v OHIM, paragraph 48).
      
It is true, according to the case-law of the Court referred to in paragraphs and of the judgments under appeal, first,
         that the graphic representation of a mark must be self-contained, easily accessible and intelligible, in order that a sign
         may always be perceived unambiguously and in the same way so that the mark is guaranteed as an indication of origin. Secondly,
         it is apparent from the case-law of the Court that the function of the graphic representability requirement is, in particular,
         to define the mark itself in order to determine the precise subject of the protection afforded by the registered mark to its
         proprietor (see, to that effect, Case C‑273/Sieckmann [2002] ECR I‑11737, paragraphs to 52, and Case C‑307/Chartered Institute of Patent Attorneys [2012] ECR, paragraph 37).
      
Nevertheless, the requirements which must be satisfied by the graphic representation in order to fulfil its function, which
         concern a sign’s general aptness to constitute a trade mark within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 40/94, cannot
         restrict the competent authority’s examination under Article 7(1)(e)(ii) of the regulation in such a way as might undermine
         the public interest underlying the latter provision.
      
In the second place, as the General Court stated in paragraph of the judgments under appeal, the date of filing the application
         for registration of the Community trade mark is the material date for the examination of the ground for invalidity invoked
         (see order in Case C‑192/P Alcon v OHIM [2004] ECR I‑8993, paragraph 40, and order of May in Case C‑5/P Torresan v OHIM, paragraph 84).
      
None the less, as OHIM has stated in the second part of its second ground of appeal, the Court has held on a number of occasions
         that material which, although subsequent to the date of filing the application, enables conclusions to be drawn with regard
         to the situation as it was on that date can, without error of law, be taken into consideration (see orders in Alcon v OHIM, paragraph 41, and Torresan v OHIM, paragraph 84).
      
It follows that, in holding that the provisions at issue preclude consideration of the actual use made of the trade mark following
         its registration, the General Court erred in law.
      
Further, it should be noted that, by the second part of their single ground of appeal, Pi-Design and Bodum claim that the
         General Court distorted the evidence in the files submitted to it, inasmuch as the evidence shows that OHIM did in fact take
         into account the actual use made of the signs at the date of filing of the applications for registration.
      
It is apparent from a reading of the documents in the files submitted to the General Court, in particular, Annexes and to the responses of Pi-Design and Bodum at first instance, that, at the date of filing of the applications for registration,
         Yoshida was already marketing goods bearing the signs at issue, including in the European Union market.
      
It follows that, contrary to what the General Court held, the taking into account by OHIM of representations of the goods
         actually marketed by Yoshida did not necessarily entail an analysis based on the use of the signs at issue subsequent to the
         date of the registrations.
      
In the light of all those considerations, the ground of appeal alleging breach of Article 7(1)(e)(ii) of Regulation No 40/must be upheld and the appeals must be allowed.
      
Accordingly, the judgments under appeal must be set aside, without it being necessary to examine the other arguments of the
         parties, or the first ground of appeal put forward by OHIM concerning breach of the General Court’s obligation to state reasons
         in its judgments.
      
In accordance with the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court, where the Court quashes the decision of
         the General Court, it may itself give final judgment in the matter, where the state of the proceedings so permits, or refer
         the case back to the General Court for judgment.
      
In the circumstances of these cases, in order to assess the single plea in law raised by Yoshida, that the First Board of
         Appeal of OHIM misapplied Article 7(1)(e)(ii) of Regulation No 40/94, it is necessary, inter alia, to assess the essential
         characteristics of the signs at issue and their technical function (see, to that effect, Lego Juris v OHIM, paragraph 72).
      
In these cases, therefore, the conditions under which the Court may itself give final judgment are not met, so that Yoshida’s
         actions must be referred back to the General Court for judgment on that plea and the costs reserved.
      
Pi-Design and Bodum have claimed, in the alternative, that the cases should be referred back to the General Court with the
         obligation, in the event of annulment of the contested decisions, to remit them to the Board of Appeal of OHIM.
      
In this connection, suffice it to note that, in accordance with Article of the Statute of the Court, it is not for the
         Court of Justice to issue orders to the General Court; it is for the General Court, where a case is referred back, to give
         judgment in the matter without, however, calling in question the decision of the Court of Justice on points of law.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Seventh Chamber) hereby:
1.      Sets aside the judgments of the General Court of the European Union of May in Case T‑331/Yoshida Metal Industry v OHIM – Pi­Design and Others (Representation of a triangular surface with black dots) and Case T‑416/Yoshida Metal Industry v OHIM – Pi-Design and Others (Representation of a surface with black dots);
2.      Refers the cases back to the General Court of the European Union;
3.      Reserves the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 