
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-42/Proceedings brought by Diana Elisabeth Lindman(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Ålands förvaltningsdomstol (Finland))
         
«(Freedom to provide services – Lottery tickets – Amount won in a game of chance held in another Member State – Income tax – Tax on games of chance – Special regime in the Åland Islands)»
Opinion of Advocate General Stix-Hackl delivered on April Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber), November Summary of the Judgment
Freedom to provide services – Restrictions – Fiscal legislation – Taxation of winnings from games of chance – Exemption restricted to winnings from games conducted in national territory – Not permissible  (Art. EC) Article EC prohibits a Member State's legislation under which winnings from games of chance organised in other Member States
         are treated as income of the winner chargeable to income tax, whereas winnings from games of chance conducted in the Member
         State in question are not taxable.see para. 27, operative part
      
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)November (1)
((Freedom to provide services – Lottery tickets – Amount won in a game of chance held in another Member State – Income tax – Tax on games of chance – Special regime in the Åland Islands))
In Case C-42/02, 
 REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Ålands förvaltningsdomstolen (Finland) for a preliminary ruling in the
            proceedings brought before that court by 
            
 Diana Elisabeth Lindman,
 on the interpretation of Article EC,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),,
 composed of: C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Fourth Chamber, acting as President of the Fifth Chamber, D.A.O. Edward (Rapporteur) and P. Jann, Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: C. Stix-Hackl, Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
 Ms Lindman, in person, 
               
─
 the Finnish Government, by E. Bygglin, acting as Agent, 
               
─
 the Belgian Government, by A. Snoecx, acting as Agent, and by  P. Vlaemminck, avocat, 
               
─
 the Danish Government, by J. Molde, acting as Agent, 
               
─
 the Norwegian Government, by G. Hansson Bull and H. Klem, acting as Agents, 
               
─
 the Commission of the European Communities, by R. Lyal and K. Simonsson, acting as Agents, 
               
─
 the EFTA Surveillance Authority, by E. Wright and V. Kronenberger, acting as Agents, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of the Finnish Government, represented by E. Bygglin, the Belgian Government, represented
               by P. De Wael, acting as Agent,  the Commission, represented by K. Simonsson, and the EFTA Surveillance Authority, represented
               by E. Wright, at the hearing on January 2003,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 2003, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By order of February 2002, received at the Court on February 2002, the Ålands förvaltningsdomstolen (Administrative Court,
         Åland) referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC a question on the interpretation of Article EC. 
         
            
 That question was raised in the course of a dispute between Ms Lindman and the skatterättelsenämnden (Taxation Verification
         Committee) concerning its rejection of her appeal against her assessment to tax on an amount of money which she had won in
         a lottery held in Sweden. 
         
Legal background
A ─
 Community legislation
         
            
 Under the first paragraph of Article EC: Within the framework of the provisions set out below, restrictions on freedom to provide services within the Community shall
         be prohibited in respect of nationals of Member States who are established in a State of the Community other than that of
         the person for whom the services are intended.
         
B ─
 National legislation
         
            
 Under Article of the lotteriskattelagen (552/1992) (Law on tax on games of chance), tax on games of chance is payable to
         the State in respect of games conducted in Finland.  Under Article of that law lotteries are games of chance.  Article provides that it is the lottery's organiser who is chargeable to the tax. 
         
            
 By virtue of Article of the inkomstskattelagen (1535/1992) (Income Tax Law),  
         winnings from games of chance covered by Article of the lotteriskattelagen shall not constitute income chargeable to tax
         ....  It is clear from the file that the exemption applies only to games of chance covered by Article of the lotteriskattelagen,
         which include only those organised in Finland. 
         
C ─
 The special regime in the Åland Islands
         
            
 By virtue of the Självstyrelselagen för Åland (1144/1991) (Åland Self-Government Law), the regulation of lotteries and other
         gambling falls within the legislative competence of the region of Åland.  The holding of lotteries is subject to licence from
         the regional government the detailed rules of which are prescribed by the landskapslagen om lotterier (Regional law on games
         of chance,  
          Ålands författningssamling  10/1966).  The organisation of games of chance is governed by that law.  Licences to organise lotteries and gambling covered
         by Article of the landskapslagen om lotterier may be granted by a public law association established by regional legislation.
          The receipts from the association's activities must be entered in the budget of the Åland region and used to promote and
         support projects of public utility or in the public interest, as well as those which can be regarded as benefiting the association's
         activities and objectives. 
         The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred
            
 Ms Lindman, a Finnish national, resides in the commune of Saltvik, in the Åland Islands (Finland).  On January 1998, she
         won SEK as a result of a lottery draw by the company AB Svenska Spel, which took place in Stockholm (Sweden).  She
         had bought her winning ticket during a stay in Sweden. 
         
            
 That lottery win was regarded as earned income chargeable to income tax for the year and was assessed to national tax
         payable to the Finnish State, to local tax payable to the municipality of Saltvik, to church tax for the benefit of the parish
         and to an additional sickness insurance premium levied under the sjukförsäkringslagen (Sickness insurance law). 
         
            
 Ms Lindman appealed to the skatterättelsenämnden of Åland, to obtain rectification of the assessment against her.  That appeal
         was rejected on May on the ground that Article of the inkomstskattelagen does not preclude the taxation in Finland
         of winnings from foreign lotteries. 
         
            
 Ms Lindman then appealed to the Ålands förvaltningsdomstolen seeking reversal of the rejection by the skatterättelsenämnden,
         arguing that the assessment on the winnings in Sweden should be quashed, or, in the alternative, that the winnings should
         be taxed not as earned income, but as income from capital, which entails a lower tax rate. 
         
            
 The Ålands förvaltningsdomstolen considers that the taxation, either as earned  income or as income from capital, of winnings
         from games organised abroad may possibly be regarded as a special rule based on the place where the services were provided.
         
         
            
 Since it considered that an interpretation of Community law was needed before a decision could be given in the dispute before
         it, the Ålands förvaltningsdomstolen decided to stay proceedings and to refer to the Court for a preliminary ruling the following
         question: Does Article EC preclude a Member State from applying rules under which winnings from lotteries held in other Member States
         are regarded as taxable income of the winner chargeable to income tax, whereas winnings from lotteries held in the Member
         State in question are exempt from tax?
         Substance Observations submitted to the Court
         
            
 Ms Lindman asserts that the Finnish legislation is discriminatory, since, if she had resided in Sweden or if the amount at
         issue in the main proceedings had been won in a Finnish lottery, she would not have been charged income tax. 
         
            
 The Finnish, Belgian, Danish and Norwegian Governments submit that the Finnish legislation is compatible with Article EC.
          In that regard, they rely on the Court's case-law (Case C-275/Schindler  [1994] ECR I-1039; Case C-124/Läärä and Others  [1999] ECR I-6067, and Case C-67/Zenatti  [1999] ECR I-7289) to argue that the taxation of games of chance is only a specific aspect of the general regime governing
         games of chance, a field in which the Member States have a wide discretion.  According to those governments, any restrictions
         are justified by overriding reasons in the public interest relating to combating the pernicious consequences of games of chance,
         since if winnings from foreign lotteries were exempt, the public would be encouraged to participate in them. 
         
            
 More particularly, the Finnish Government contends that the reason for the taxation of winnings from games of chance organised
         outside Finland is the impossibility of taxing, in that Member State, foreign undertakings who offer gambling activities from
         abroad.   Were it otherwise, taxpayers in Finland and the organisers of games of chance would share a tax advantage, regardless
         of whether the receipts were intended to fulfil objectives in the public interest in the State of origin or whether that State's
         legislation sought to take account of the objectives of consumer protection and prevention of social damage. 
         
            
 The Commission and the EFTA Surveillance Authority submit that the taxation in a Member State of winnings from lotteries solely
         where they are organised in other Member States is contrary to Article EC and cannot be justified on grounds of public
         interest. 
         
            
 The Commission relies on the judgment in Case C-283/Fischer  [1998] ECR I-to argue that, in accordance with the principle of fiscal neutrality, a Member State may not treat a winner
         of a game of chance lawfully organised in another Member State less favourably than a winner who participated in a game organised
         in the first State. 
          The Court's reply
         
            
 As a preliminary point, it must be noted that,  although direct taxation falls within the competence of the Member States,
         they must none the less exercise that competence consistently with Community law (Case C-80/Wielockx  [1995] ECR I-2493, paragraph 16; Case C-264/ICI  [1998] ECR I-4695, paragraph 19; Case C-311/Royal Bank of Scotland  [1999] ECR I-2651, paragraph 19; Case C-35/Verkooijen  [2000] ECR I-4071, paragraph 32, and Case C-136/Danner  [2002] ECR I-8147, paragraph 28). 
         
            
 With regard to the provisions of the EC Treaty relating to freedom to provide services, they apply, as the Court has already
         held concerning the organisation of lotteries, to an activity which consists in enabling users to participate, for a payment,
         in gambling (see  
          Schindler , cited above, paragraph 19).  Therefore, such an activity falls within the scope of Article EC, provided that at least
         one of the providers is established in a Member State other than that in which the service is offered.  It is therefore necessary
         to examine the case from the viewpoint of freedom to provide services. 
         
            
 According to settled case-law, Article EC prohibits not only any discrimination, on grounds of nationality, against a provider
         of services established in another Member State, but also any restriction on or obstacle to freedom to provide services, even
         if they apply to national providers of services and to those established in other Member States alike (see Case C-131/Commission  v  
          Italy  [2003] ECR I-1659, paragraph 26). 
         
            
 It is clear, in the main proceedings, that foreign lotteries are treated differently for tax purposes from, and are in a disadvantageous
         position compared to, Finnish lotteries.  Under the lotteriskattelagen, only winnings from games of chance which are not licensed
         in Finland are regarded as taxable income, whereas winnings from games of chance organised in that Member State are not taxable
         income.  The Finnish Government has also admitted that the existence of such legislation means that Finnish taxpayers prefer
         to participate in a lottery organised in Finland rather than a lottery taking place in another Member State. 
         
            
 Contrary to that Government's submission, the fact that gaming providers established in Finland are subject to tax as organisers
         of gambling does not rid the Finnish legislation of its manifestly discriminatory character, since that tax is not analogous
         to the income tax charged on winnings from taxpayers' participation in lotteries held in other Member States. 
         
            
 The Finnish Government, whilst admitting that the national legislation is discriminatory, contends that it is justified by
         overriding reasons in the public interest such as the prevention of wrongdoing and fraud, the reduction of social damage caused
         by gaming, the financing of activities in the public interest and ensuring legal certainty. 
         
            
 The Norwegian Government cites also as justification the need to combat the damaging consequences of gambling addiction, which
         is a matter of public health.  Thus, there are rehabilitation centres and other infrastructures for treating gamblers; gambling
         creates social problems, such as depriving of resources the families of gambling addicts, divorce, and suicide. 
         
            
 In that regard, the reasons which may be invoked by a Member State by way of justification must be accompanied by an analysis
         of the appropriateness and proportionality of the restrictive measure adopted by that State (see, to that effect, Case C-55/Gebhard  [1995] ECR I-4165, and Case C-100/Oteiza Olazabal  [2002] ECR I-10981). 
         
            
 In the main proceedings, the file transmitted to the Court by the referring court discloses no statistical or other evidence
         which enables any conclusion as to the gravity of the risks connected to playing games of chance or,  
          a fortiori , the existence of a particular causal relationship between such risks and participation by nationals of the Member State
         concerned in lotteries organised in other Member States. 
         
            
 The reply, therefore, to the question referred must be that Article EC prohibits a Member State's legislation under which
         winnings from games of chance organised in other Member States are treated as income of the winner chargeable to income tax,
         whereas winnings from games of chance conducted in the Member State in question are not taxable. 
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the Finnish, Belgian, Danish and Norwegian Governments and by the Commission and the EFTA Surveillance
         Authority, which have submitted observations to the Court, are not recoverable.  Since these proceedings are, for the parties
         to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for
         that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
 in answer to the question referred to it by the Ålands förvaltningsdomstolen by order of February 2002, hereby rules: 
         
Timmermans
Edward 
Jann 
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on November 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
V. Skouris  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: Swedish.
Top  
 