
Case C-238/Asnef-Equifax, Servicios de Información sobre Solvencia y Crédito, SL
and
Administración del Estado
v
Asociación de Usuarios de Servicios Bancarios (Ausbanc)
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Tribunal Supremo)
(Competition – Article EC – System for the exchange between financial institutions of information on customer solvency – Reference for a preliminary ruling – Admissibility – Effect on trade between Member States – Restriction of competition – Benefit for consumers)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Preliminary rulings – Jurisdiction of the Court
(Art. EC)
2.        Competition – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Agreements between undertakings 
(Art. 81(1) EC)
3.        Competition – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Concerted practice – Meaning 
(Art. 81(1) EC)
4.        Competition – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Prejudicial to competition
(Art. 81(1) EC)
5.        Competition – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Not allowed – Exemption – Conditions 
(Arts 81(1) and (3) EC)
1.        In the context of the procedure provided for in Article EC, it is not for the Court, given the allocation of functions
         between itself and the national courts, to determine whether the decision to refer has been taken in accordance with the rules
         of national law governing the organisation of courts and their procedure. 
      
In the context of the cooperation between the Court and the national courts provided for by Article EC, it is solely for
         the national court, before which the dispute has been brought and which must assume responsibility for the subsequent judicial
         decision, to determine in the light of the particular circumstances of the case both the need for a preliminary ruling in
         order to enable it to deliver judgment and the relevance of the questions which it submits to the Court. Consequently, where
         the questions submitted for a preliminary ruling concern the interpretation of Community law, the Court is, in principle,
         bound to give a ruling. 
      
However, in exceptional circumstances, the Court must examine the conditions in which the case was referred to it by the national
         court, in order to assess whether it has jurisdiction. The spirit of cooperation which must prevail in preliminary ruling
         proceedings requires the national court for its part to have regard to the function entrusted to the Court of Justice, which
         is to contribute to the administration of justice in the Member States and not to give opinions on general or hypothetical
         questions. 
      
A reference from a national court may be refused only if it is quite obvious that the interpretation of Community law sought
         bears no relation to the actual facts of the main action or to its purpose, or where the problem is hypothetical or the Court
         does not have before it the factual or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions submitted to it.
      
Such is not the case where the solution to the dispute before the national court may call for the application of both Community
         law and national competition law and where, by its request for a preliminary ruling, the referring court seeks in essence
         to ensure respect for the primacy of Community law.
      
(see paras 14-17, 20-21)
2.        The interpretation and application of the condition contained in Article 81(1) EC relating to the effect of agreements on
         trade between Member States must take as its starting-point the purpose of that condition, which is to define, in the context
         of the law governing competition, the boundary between the areas respectively covered by Community law and the law of the
         Member States. Thus, Community law covers any agreement or any practice which is capable of affecting trade between Member
         States in a manner which might harm the attainment of the objectives of a single market between the Member States, in particular
         by sealing off national markets or by affecting the structure of competition within the common market.
      
For an agreement, decision or practice to be capable of affecting trade between Member States, it must be possible to foresee
         with a sufficient degree of probability, on the basis of a set of objective factors of law or of fact, that they have an influence,
         direct or indirect, actual or potential, on the pattern of trade between Member States in such a way as to cause concern that
         they might hinder the attainment of a single market between Member States. Moreover, that influence must not be insignificant.
      
Thus, an effect on intra-Community trade is normally the result of a combination of several factors which, taken separately,
         are not necessarily decisive. In order to assess whether an arrangement has an appreciable effect on trade between Member
         States, it is necessary to examine it in its economic and legal context.
      
In that regard, the mere fact that the participants in a national arrangement include undertakings from other Member States
         is an important element in the assessment, but, taken alone, it is not so decisive as to permit the conclusion that the criterion
         of trade between Member States being affected has been satisfied.
      
On the other hand, the fact that an arrangement relates only to the marketing of products in a single Member State is not
         sufficient to preclude the possibility that trade between Member States might be affected. An arrangement extending over the
         whole of the territory of a Member State has, by its very nature, the effect of reinforcing the partitioning of markets on
         a national basis, thus impeding the economic interpenetration which the Treaty is designed to bring about.
      
Furthermore, the fact that an agreement or practice encourages an increase in the volume of trade between Member States does
         not preclude the possibility that that agreement or practice may affect that trade.
      
Thus, with respect to a system for the exchange between financial institutions of information on customer solvency, it is
         for the national court to determine whether, in the light of the characteristics of the market at issue, there is a sufficient
         degree of probability that the implementation of such a system may have an influence, direct or indirect, actual or potential,
         on the supply of credit in the Member State concerned by operators from other Member States and that that influence is not
         insignificant.
      
In that assessment, it is for the national court to take account of the foreseeable development in the conditions of competition
         and in the pattern of trade between Member States. On that point, it must take into consideration, for example, possible development
         in cross-border activities and the foreseeable impact of any policy or legislative initiatives designed to reduce legal or
         technical barriers to trade.
      
(see paras 33-39, 43-44)
3.        It is inherent in the Treaty provisions on competition that every economic operator must determine autonomously the policy
         which it intends to pursue on the common market. Thus, such a requirement of autonomy precludes any direct or indirect contact
         between economic operators of such a kind as either to influence the conduct on the market of an actual or potential competitor
         or to reveal to such a competitor the conduct which an operator has decided to follow itself or contemplates adopting on the
         market, where the object or effect of those contacts is to give rise to conditions of competition which do not correspond
         to the normal conditions of the market in question, taking into account the nature of the products or the services provided,
         the size and number of the undertakings and also the volume of the market.
      
However, that requirement of independence does not deprive economic operators of the right to adapt themselves intelligently
         to the existing or anticipated conduct of their competitors.
      
Accordingly, the compatibility of a system for the exchange between financial institutions of information on customer solvency
         with the Community competition rules cannot be assessed in the abstract. It depends on the economic conditions on the relevant
         markets and on the specific characteristics of the system concerned, such as, in particular, its purpose and the conditions
         of access to it and participation in it, as well as the type of information exchanged – be that, for example, public or confidential,
         aggregated or detailed, historical or current – the periodicity of such information and its importance for the fixing of prices,
         volumes or conditions of service.
      
(see paras 52-54)
4.        By reducing the rate of borrower default, a system for the exchange between financial institutions of information on customer
         solvency is in principle capable of improving the functioning of the supply of credit. If, owing to a lack of information
         on the risk of borrower default, financial institutions are unable to distinguish those borrowers who are more likely to default,
         the risk thereby borne by such institutions will necessarily be increased and they will tend to factor it in when calculating
         the cost of credit for all borrowers, including those less likely to default, who will then have to bear a higher cost than
         they would if the institutions were in a position to evaluate the probability of repayment more precisely; a system for the
         exchange such as that described above is capable of reducing such a tendency.
      
Furthermore, by reducing the significance of the information held by financial institutions regarding their own customers,
         a system for the exchange between financial institutions of information on customer solvency appears, in principle, to be
         capable of increasing the mobility of consumers of credit and is apt to make it easier for new competitors to enter the market.
      
It follows that Article 81(1) EC must be interpreted as meaning that a system for the exchange of information on credit between
         financial institutions on customer solvency does not, in principle, have as its effect the restriction of competition within
         the meaning of that provision, provided that the relevant market or markets are not highly concentrated, that that system
         does not permit lenders to be identified and that the conditions of access and use by financial institutions are not discriminatory,
         in law or in fact.
      
(see paras 55-56, 61, 72, operative part 1)
5.        In the event that a system for the exchange of information on credit between financial institutions on customer solvency restricts
         competition within the meaning of Article 81(1) EC, the applicability of the exemption provided for in Article 81(3) EC is
         subject to the four cumulative conditions laid down in that provision and it is for the national court to determine whether
         those conditions are satisfied. In order for the condition that consumers be allowed a fair share of the benefit to be satisfied,
         it is not necessary, in principle, for each consumer individually to derive a benefit from an agreement, a decision or a concerted
         practice. However, the overall effect on consumers in the relevant markets must be favourable.
      
(see para. 72, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Competition – Article EC – System for the exchange between financial institutions of information on customer solvency – Reference for a preliminary ruling – Admissibility – Effect on trade between Member States – Restriction of competition – Benefit for consumers)
In Case C‑238/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, by the Tribunal Supremo (Spain), made by decision of April 2005,
         received at the Court on May 2005, in the proceedings
      
Asnef-Equifax, Servicios de Información sobre Solvencia y Crédito, SL,
Administración del Estado
v
Asociación de Usuarios de Servicios Bancarios (Ausbanc),
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of A. Rosas, President of Chamber, A. Borg Barthet, J. Malenovský, U. Lõhmus and A. Ó Caoimh (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on April 2006,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Asnef-Equifax, Servicios de Información sobre Solvencia y Crédito, SL, by A. Creus Carreras and O. Amador Peñate, abogados,
–        Asociación de Usuarios de Servicios Bancarios (Ausbanc), by L. Pineda Salido and M. Mateos Ferres, abogados, and also by M.
         Rodríguez Teijeiro, procuradora,
      
–        the Polish Government, by T. Nowakowski, acting as Agent,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by F. Castillo de la Torre and E. Gippini Fournier, acting as Agents, 
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on June 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article EC.
      
The reference was made in proceedings between Asnef-Equifax, Servicios de Información sobre Solvencia y Crédito, SL (‘Asnef-Equifax’)
         and Asociación de Usuarios de Servicios Bancarios (‘Ausbanc’) concerning a register of information between financial institutions
         on the solvency of customers (‘the register’).
      
 Legal context
 Community rules
According to recital 4, Council Regulation (EC) No 1/of December on the implementation of the rules on competition
         laid down in Articles and of the Treaty (OJ L 1, p. 1) is intended, among other things, to confer on the competition
         authorities and courts of the Member States the power to apply not only Article 81(1) EC but also Article 81(3) EC.
      
Article 3(1) and (2) of Regulation No 1/provides: 
      
‘1.      Where the competition authorities of the Member States or national courts apply national competition law to agreements, decisions
         by associations of undertakings or concerted practices within the meaning of Article 81(1) of the Treaty which may affect
         trade between Member States within the meaning of that provision, they shall also apply Article of the Treaty to such agreements,
         decisions or concerted practices. …
      
2.      The application of national competition law may not lead to the prohibition of agreements, decisions by associations of undertakings
         or concerted practices which may affect trade between Member States but which do not restrict competition within the meaning
         of Article 81(1) of the Treaty, or which fulfil the conditions of Article 81(3) of the Treaty or which are covered by a Regulation
         for the application of Article 81(3) of the Treaty. Member States shall not under this Regulation be precluded from adopting
         and applying on their territory stricter national laws which prohibit or sanction unilateral conduct engaged in by undertakings.’
      
 National rules
Spanish competition law is governed primarily by Law 16/on the protection of competition (Ley 16/de Defensa de la
         Competencia) of July (‘the LDC’). As the Tribunal Supremo observes, the wording of Articles and of that law is,
         in substance, practically identical to the wording of Article 81(1) and (3) EC. According to Article 4(1) of the LDC, the
         Tribunal de Defensa de la Competencia (Competition Tribunal) may authorise the agreements, decisions, recommendations and
         practices referred to in Article of that law in the circumstances and on the conditions set out in Article 3. 
      
 Main proceedings and questions referred for a preliminary ruling
On May 1998, Asnef-Equifax, to which the Asociación Nacional de Entidades Financieras (National Association of Financial
         Institutions) belongs, as an associate, submitted a request pursuant to Article of the LDC for authorisation of the register,
         which was to be administered by it. 
      
According to the rules drawn up for the operation of the register, its purpose ‘is to provide solvency and credit information
         through the computerised processing of data relating to the risks undertaken by participating organisations engaging in lending
         and credit activities’. The information contained in the register is similar to that provided for in Circular 3/1995, which
         regulates the Central de Información de Riesgos (risk information centre; ‘the CIR’) operated by the Spanish central bank
         and already accessible to financial organisations in Spain. The information in question relates to the identity and economic
         activity of debtors, as well as to special situations such as bankruptcy or insolvency. 
      
Contrary to the negative opinion of the Servicio de Defensa de la Competencia (administrative body responsible for the protection
         of competition), the Tribunal de Defensa de la Competencia, on November 1999, authorised the register by virtue of the exemption
         criteria of Article of the LDC for a period of five years, on condition, first, that it be accessible to all financial establishments
         on a non-discriminatory basis against payment of a corresponding fee and, secondly, that it not disclose the information which
         it contains on lenders. The decision of that tribunal does not address the question of the applicability of Article EC.
      
Ausbanc lodged an application before the Audiencia Nacional for annulment of the decision of the Tribunal de Defensa de la
         Competencia. By the judgment under appeal in the main proceedings, the Audiencia Nacional granted that application. It considered
         that the register, by restricting free competition, is caught by Article of the LDC and cannot be authorised under Article
         of that law, as the conditions necessary for its application are not satisfied. It is clear from the grounds of the majority
         decision of the Members of the Audiencia Nacional that that court referred not only to Spanish law but also to the judgment
         of the Court of Justice in Case C-7/P John Deere v Commission [1998] ECR I‑3111, and in particular to paragraphs 5, 10, and of that judgment. 
      
On an appeal on a point of law brought by Asnef-Equifax, the Tribunal Supremo considered that there was a reasonable doubt
         as to whether, in a fragmented market, agreements concluded for the purpose of setting up credit information registers are
         potentially restrictive of competition in so far as they are capable of promoting or facilitating collusion and whether, if
         appropriate, they are nevertheless capable of being authorised on the ground that the exemption criteria provided for in Article
         81(3) EC are satisfied. 
      
In those circumstances, the Tribunal Supremo decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court
         for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      May Article 81(1) [EC] be interpreted as meaning that agreements between financial institutions for the exchange of information
         on customer solvency and default may be regarded as compatible with the common market, if they affect the financial policies
         of the Union and the common market in credit and have the effect of restricting competition in the financial and credit institutions
         sector?
      
2.      May Article 81(3) [EC] be interpreted as meaning that a Member State, acting through its competition authorities, may authorise
         agreements on the exchange of information between financial institutions through the establishment of a credit information
         register on their customers, on the ground that its establishment benefits the consumers and users of those financial services?’
      
 The questions
 Admissibility of the reference for a preliminary ruling
In the first place, the Commission of the European Communities, observing that the decision of the Tribunal de Defensa de
         la Competencia is based not on Article EC but on Articles and of the LDC, questions the admissibility of the reference
         for a preliminary ruling. It expresses doubt as to whether the Tribunal Supremo, as a court seised of an appeal on points
         of law, can apply legal provisions other than those on which the courts below relied. Although the referring court asserts
         that Article EC is applicable to the main proceedings, it does not explain the ground for such an assertion. The Commission
         further observes that the decision whose lawfulness is challenged in the main proceedings was adopted in 2001, that is, before
         Regulation No 1/entered into force.
      
In the second place, the Commission claims that the decision for reference provides no information on whether the register
         is capable of appreciably affecting trade between Member States, whereas, in order for the obligations arising under Article
         of Regulation No 1/or the judgment in Case 14/Wilhelm and Others [1969] ECR to apply, Article EC must be materially applicable. 
      
At the outset, it must be observed that in the context of the procedure provided for in Article EC, it is not for the
         Court, given the allocation of functions between itself and the national courts, to determine whether the decision to refer
         has been taken in accordance with the rules of national law governing the organisation of courts and their procedure (see
         Case C-10/Balocchi [1993] ECR I-5105, paragraphs and 17, and Case C-435/WWF and Others [1999] ECR I-5613, paragraph 33).
      
Next, it must be borne in mind that, in accordance with settled case-law, in the context of the cooperation between the Court
         and the national courts provided for by Article EC, it is solely for the national court, before which the dispute has
         been brought and which must assume responsibility for the subsequent judicial decision, to determine in the light of the particular
         circumstances of the case both the need for a preliminary ruling in order to enable it to deliver judgment and the relevance
         of the questions which it submits to the Court. Consequently, where the questions submitted for a preliminary ruling concern
         the interpretation of Community law, the Court is, in principle, bound to give a ruling (see, in particular, Case C-415/Bosman [1995] ECR I-4921, paragraph 59, and Joined Cases C-295/to C-298/Manfredi and Others [2006] ECR I-0000, paragraph 26).
      
However, the Court has also stated that, in exceptional circumstances, it must examine the conditions in which the case was
         referred to it by the national court, in order to assess whether it has jurisdiction (Manfredi, paragraph 27). The spirit of cooperation which must prevail in preliminary ruling proceedings requires the national court
         for its part to have regard to the function entrusted to the Court of Justice, which is to contribute to the administration
         of justice in the Member States and not to give opinions on general or hypothetical questions (Case C‑144/Mangold [2005] ECR I‑9981, paragraph 36).
      
It is settled case-law that a reference from a national court may be refused only if it is quite obvious that the interpretation
         of Community law sought bears no relation to the actual facts of the main action or to its purpose, or where the problem is
         hypothetical or the Court does not have before it the factual or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions
         submitted to it (see, inter alia, Bosman, paragraph 61, and Case C-344/IATA and ELFAA [2006] ECR I‑403, paragraph 24).
      
In the present case, it is not obvious that the interpretation of Article EC bears no relation to the actual facts of the
         dispute before the national court or to its purpose. That dispute is clearly not hypothetical. 
      
Contrary to what the Commission implied at the hearing, it is clear from the decision for referral that the Tribunal Supremo
         considers that ‘the judgment [of the Audiencia Nacional] is founded on the legal principles laid down in Articles and of the [LDC] and on the application of the provisions of the former Article of the Treaty [establishing] the European Economic
         Community, as interpreted in the case-law of the Court of Justice …’. 
      
It is not impossible for the same factual situation to fall within the scope of both Community law and national competition
         law, even if they consider the practices concerned from different points of view (see, to that effect, Case C‑7/Bronner [1998] ECR I‑7791, paragraph and the case-law cited). 
      
Furthermore, the Tribunal Supremo expressly stated that the reason for its request for a preliminary ruling was the need to
         preclude contradictory or divergent interpretations, stating, in particular, that its request was ‘an embodiment of the duty
         of institutional cooperation between national courts and the Court of Justice’. Thus, the referring court seeks in essence
         to ensure respect for the primacy of Community law.
      
Furthermore, Ausbanc’s arguments to the effect that the register has no appreciable effect on trade between Member States,
         so that the Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the request for a preliminary ruling, concern the substance of the questions
         referred to it. Since the determination of the existence of such an effect is a matter for the appraisal of the national court,
         those arguments are, in principle, of no relevance to the determination of the admissibility of the request.
      
Finally, as regards the extent of the indications in the decision for referral relating to a possible effect on trade between
         Member States, it must be borne in mind that the need for precision with regard to the factual and legislative context applies
         in particular in the area of competition, which is characterised by complex factual and legal situations (see Case C-176/Lehtonen and Castors Braine [2000] ECR I‑2681, paragraph 22, and also the order in Case C-190/Viacom [2002] ECR I‑8287, paragraph 22).
      
Admittedly, in the present case the decision for referral provides no precise and detailed information concerning such an
         effect. However, that decision provided the Court with sufficient information to enable it to give a useful reply to the referring
         court, by interpreting the rules of Community law with regard to the situation forming the subject-matter of the main proceedings.
         
      
In those circumstances, the reference for a preliminary ruling must be held to be admissible. 
      
 Substance
By its two questions, which may appropriately be considered together, the referring court seeks in essence to ascertain whether
         Article EC must be interpreted as meaning that a credit information exchange system, such as the register, is caught by
         the prohibition laid down in paragraph of that article and, if so, whether such a system may benefit from the exemption
         provided for in paragraph of that article, by reason in particular of the possible existence of a benefit for consumers
         resulting from the implementation of that system. 
      
Ausbanc maintains that the register restricts competition in that it presupposes an exchange of information normally regarded
         as constituting business secrets between competitors, thus eliminating the risk factors inherent in any business decision
         and facilitating a homogeneous reaction by credit institutions towards an applicant for credit. Asnef-Equifax, the Polish
         Government and the Commission contend, essentially, that a register such as that in issue in the main proceedings does not
         restrict competition.
      
Under Article 81(1) EC, all agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of undertakings and concerted practices
         which may affect trade between Member States and which have as their object or effect the prevention, restriction or distortion
         of competition within the common market are incompatible with the common market. 
      
The Court must therefore examine whether those conditions may be satisfied in the case before the national court.
      
As a preliminary point, it should be pointed out, first, that it is apparent from the case-file that the Asociación Nacional
         de Entidades Financieras forms part, as a member, of Asnef-Equifax, which was entrusted with the administration of the register,
         and, secondly, that the necessary participation of the credit institutions in that register inevitably entails a certain amount
         of cooperation between competitors in the form of an indirect exchange of credit information. 
      
It follows that Article 81(1) EC may apply to the conception and the implementation of the register, without there being any
         need to characterise precisely the form of the cooperation thus established between those institutions. 
      
In effect, while that provision distinguishes between ‘concerted practices’, ‘agreements between undertakings’ and ‘decisions
         by associations of undertakings’, the aim is to have the prohibitions of that article catch different forms of coordination
         and collusion between undertakings (see Case C-49/P Commission v Anic Partecipazioni [1999] ECR I‑4125, paragraph 112). Accordingly, in the present case, a precise characterisation of the nature of the cooperation
         at issue in the main proceedings is not liable to alter the legal analysis to be carried out under Article EC.
      
 The effect on trade between Member States 
The interpretation and application of the condition contained in Article 81(1) EC relating to the effect of agreements on
         trade between Member States must take as its starting-point the purpose of that condition, which is to define, in the context
         of the law governing competition, the boundary between the areas respectively covered by Community law and the law of the
         Member States. Thus, Community law covers any agreement or any practice which is capable of affecting trade between Member
         States in a manner which might harm the attainment of the objectives of a single market between the Member States, in particular
         by sealing off national markets or by affecting the structure of competition within the common market (see Manfredi and Others, paragraph 41).
      
For an agreement, decision or practice to be capable of affecting trade between Member States, it must be possible to foresee
         with a sufficient degree of probability, on the basis of a set of objective factors of law or of fact, that they have an influence,
         direct or indirect, actual or potential, on the pattern of trade between Member States in such a way as to cause concern that
         they might hinder the attainment of a single market between Member States (see Case 42/Remia and Others v Commission [1985] ECR 2545, paragraph 22, and Case C‑475/Ambulanz Glöckner [2001] ECR I‑8089, paragraph 48). Moreover, that influence must not be insignificant (Case 22/Béguelin Import [1971] ECR 949, paragraph 16; Case C‑306/Javico [1998] ECR I-1983, paragraph 16; and Manfredi and Others, paragraph 42). 
      
Thus, an effect on intra-Community trade is normally the result of a combination of several factors which, taken separately,
         are not necessarily decisive (Joined Cases C‑215/and C‑216/Bagnasco and Others [1999] ECR I‑135, paragraph 47, and Case C‑359/P British Sugar v Commission [2004] ECR I‑4933, paragraph 27). In order to assess whether an arrangement has an appreciable effect on trade between Member
         States, it is necessary to examine it in its economic and legal context (see, to that effect, Case C‑393/Almelo [1994] ECR I‑1477, paragraph 37). 
      
In that regard, the mere fact that the participants in a national arrangement include undertakings from other Member States
         is an important element in the assessment, but, taken alone, it is not so decisive as to permit the conclusion that the criterion
         of trade between Member States being affected has been satisfied (see Manfredi and Others, paragraph 44).
      
On the other hand, the Court has already held that the fact that an arrangement relates only to the marketing of products
         in a single Member State is not sufficient to preclude the possibility that trade between Member States might be affected
         (see Case 246/Belasco and Others v Commission [1989] ECR 2117, paragraph 33). An arrangement extending over the whole of the territory of a Member State has, by its very
         nature, the effect of reinforcing the partitioning of markets on a national basis, thus impeding the economic interpenetration
         which the EC Treaty is designed to bring about (Case 8/Vereeniging van Cementhandelaren v Commission [1972] ECR 977, paragraph 29, and Manfredi and Others, paragraph 45). 
      
Furthermore, the fact that an agreement or practice encourages an increase in the volume of trade between Member States does
         not preclude the possibility that that agreement or practice may affect trade in the sense described at paragraph of this
         judgment (see, to that effect, Joined Cases 56/and 58/Consten and Grundig v Commission [1966] ECR 299, 341).
      
It is for the national court to determine whether, in the light of the characteristics of the market at issue, there is a
         sufficient degree of probability that the implementation of the register may have an influence, direct or indirect, actual
         or potential, on the supply of credit in Spain by operators from other Member States and that that influence is not insignificant.
      
However, when giving a preliminary ruling the Court may, where appropriate, provide clarification designed to give the national
         court guidance in its interpretation (see, inter alia, Case C-79/Payroll and Others [2002] ECR I‑8923, paragraph 29, and Manfredi and Others, paragraph 48).
      
In the present case, it is apparent from the case-file that the register is in principle open to any institution active in
         the sphere of loans and credit, that is to say a large range of undertakings of various profiles. Unlike the CIR, administered
         by the Spanish Central Bank, there is no provision for minimum thresholds, so that the credit information on the register
         relates to a larger number of credit transactions than that contained in the CIR. In addition, the information from the register
         is transmitted electronically and thus more efficiently than that provided by the CIR.
      
Hence, the possibility of having access to the register, as well as the conditions laid down for that purpose, appear capable
         of having an appreciable significance in the choice of undertakings established in Member States other than the Kingdom of
         Spain as to whether or not to do business in that State. 
      
According to settled case-law, and as follows from paragraph of this judgment, Article 81(1) EC does not require that the
         arrangements referred to in that provision have actually affected trade between Member States, but it does require that it
         be established that those arrangements are capable of having that effect (see, to that effect, Case 19/Miller v Commission [1978] ECR 131, paragraph 15; Case C‑219/P Ferriere Nord v Commission [1997] ECR I-4411, paragraph 19; and Bagnasco and Others, paragraph 48).
      
Thus, it is necessary to take account of the foreseeable development in the conditions of competition and in the pattern of
         trade between Member States. On that point, it is for the referring court to take into consideration, for example, possible
         development in cross-border activities and the foreseeable impact of any policy or legislative initiatives designed to reduce
         legal or technical barriers to trade. 
      
If the referring court considers that the register is capable of affecting trade between Member States in the sense described
         at paragraph of this judgment, it must examine whether that register has as its object or effect the restriction of competition
         within the meaning of Article 81(1) EC.
      
 The existence of a restriction of competition
It is common ground that the essential object of credit information exchange systems, such as the register, is to make available
         to credit providers relevant information about existing or potential borrowers, in particular concerning the way in which
         they have previously honoured their debts. The nature of the information available may vary according to the type of system
         in use. In the main proceedings, the register contains, as the Advocate General observed at points and of his Opinion,
         negative information, such as non-payment, as well as positive information, such as outstanding credit balances, collateral,
         guarantees and security, leasing transactions or temporary disposal of assets.
      
Such registers, which, as the Polish Government observes, exist in numerous countries, increase the amount of information
         available to credit institutions on potential borrowers, reducing the disparity between creditor and debtor as regards the
         holding of information, thus making it easier for the lender to foresee the likelihood of repayment. In doing so, such registers
         are in principle capable of reducing the rate of borrower default and thus of improving the functioning of the supply of credit.
         
      
As registers such as that in issue in the main proceedings do not thus have, by their very nature, the object of restricting
         or distorting competition within the common market within the meaning of Article 81(1) EC, it is for the national court to
         determine whether they have the effect of doing so. 
      
In that regard, it should be emphasised that the appraisal of the effects of agreements or practices in the light of Article
         EC entails the need to take into consideration the actual context to which they belong, in particular the economic and
         legal context in which the undertakings concerned operate, the nature of the goods or services affected, as well as the real
         conditions of the functioning and the structure of the market or markets in question (see, to that effect, Case C‑250/DLG [1994] ECR I‑5641, paragraph 31; Case C‑399/Oude Luttikhuis and Others [1995] ECR I‑4515, paragraph 10; and Javico, paragraph 22).
      
However, while Article 81(1) EC does not restrict such an assessment to actual effects alone, as that assessment must also
         take account of the potential effects of the agreement or practice in question on competition within the common market, an
         agreement will, however, fall outside the prohibition in Article EC if it has only an insignificant effect on the market
         (Case 5/Völk v Vervaecke [1969] ECR 295, paragraph 7; John Deere v Commission, paragraph 77; and Bagnasco and Others, paragraph 34). 
      
According to the case-law on agreements on the exchange of information, such agreements are incompatible with the rules on
         competition if they reduce or remove the degree of uncertainty as to the operation of the market in question with the result
         that competition between undertakings is restricted (John Deere v Commission, paragraph 90, and Case C‑194/P Thyssen Stahl v Commission [2003] ECR I‑10821, paragraph 81). 
      
In effect, it is inherent in the Treaty provisions on competition that every economic operator must determine autonomously
         the policy which it intends to pursue on the common market. Thus, according to that case-law, such a requirement of autonomy
         precludes any direct or indirect contact between economic operators of such a kind as either to influence the conduct on the
         market of an actual or potential competitor or to reveal to such a competitor the conduct which an operator has decided to
         follow itself or contemplates adopting on the market, where the object or effect of those contacts is to give rise to conditions
         of competition which do not correspond to the normal conditions of the market in question, taking into account the nature
         of the products or the services provided, the size and number of the undertakings and also the volume of the market (see Commission v Anic Partecipazioni, paragraphs and 117, as well as the case-law cited).
      
However, that requirement of independence does not deprive economic operators of the right to adapt themselves intelligently
         to the existing or anticipated conduct of their competitors (John Deere v Commission, paragraph 87; Commission v Anic Partecipazioni, paragraph 117; and Thyssen Stahl v Commission, paragraph 83).
      
Accordingly, as follows from paragraph of this judgment, the compatibility of an information exchange system, such as the
         register, with the Community competition rules cannot be assessed in the abstract. It depends on the economic conditions on
         the relevant markets and on the specific characteristics of the system concerned, such as, in particular, its purpose and
         the conditions of access to it and participation in it, as well as the type of information exchanged – be that, for example,
         public or confidential, aggregated or detailed, historical or current – the periodicity of such information and its importance
         for the fixing of prices, volumes or conditions of service. 
      
As indicated at paragraph of this judgment, registers such as the one at issue in the main proceedings, by reducing the
         rate of borrower default, are in principle capable of improving the functioning of the supply of credit. As the Advocate General
         observed, in substance, at point of his Opinion, if, owing to a lack of information on the risk of borrower default, financial
         institutions are unable to distinguish those borrowers who are more likely to default, the risk thereby borne by such institutions
         will necessarily be increased and they will tend to factor it in when calculating the cost of credit for all borrowers, including
         those less likely to default, who will then have to bear a higher cost than they would if the institutions were in a position
         to evaluate the probability of repayment more precisely. In principle, registers such as that mentioned above are capable
         of reducing such a tendency.
      
Furthermore, by reducing the significance of the information held by financial institutions regarding their own customers,
         such registers appear, in principle, to be capable of increasing the mobility of consumers of credit. In addition, those registers
         are apt to make it easier for new competitors to enter the market. 
      
None the less, whether or not there is in the main proceedings a restriction of competition within the meaning of Article
         81(1) EC depends on the economic and legal context in which the register exists, and in particular on the economic conditions
         of the market as well as the particular characteristics of the register. 
      
In that regard, first of all, if supply on a market is highly concentrated, the exchange of certain information may, according
         in particular to the type of information exchanged, be liable to enable undertakings to be aware of the market position and
         commercial strategy of their competitors, thus distorting rivalry on the market and increasing the probability of collusion,
         or even facilitating it. On the other hand, if supply is fragmented, the dissemination and exchange of information between
         competitors may be neutral, or even positive, for the competitive nature of the market (see, to that effect, Thyssen Stahl v Commission, paragraphs and 86). In the present case, it is common ground, as may be seen from paragraph of this judgment, that
         the referring court premissed its reference for a preliminary ruling on the existence of ‘a fragmented market’, which it is
         for that court to verify.
      
Secondly, in order that registers such as that at issue in the main proceedings are not capable of revealing the market position
         or the commercial strategy of competitors, it is important that the identity of lenders is not revealed, directly or indirectly.
         In the present case, it is apparent from the decision for referral that the Tribunal de Defensa de la Competencia imposed
         on Asnef-Equifax, which accepted it, a condition that the information relating to lenders contained in the register not be
         disclosed. 
      
Thirdly, it is also important that such registers be accessible in a non-discriminatory manner, in law and in fact, to all
         operators active in the relevant sphere. If such accessibility were not guaranteed, some of those operators would be placed
         at a disadvantage, since they would have less information for the purpose of risk assessment, which would also not facilitate
         the entry of new operators on to the market. 
      
It follows that, provided that the relevant market or markets are not highly concentrated, that the system does not permit
         lenders to be identified and that the conditions of access and use by financial institutions are not discriminatory, an information
         exchange system such as the register is not, in principle, liable to have the effect of restricting competition within the
         meaning of Article 81(1) EC.
      
While in those conditions such systems are capable of reducing uncertainty as to the risk that applicants for credit will
         default, they are not, however, liable to reduce uncertainty as to the risks of competition. Thus, each operator could be
         expected to act independently and autonomously when adopting a given course of conduct, regard being had to the risks presented
         by applicants. Contrary to Ausbanc’s contention, it cannot be inferred solely from the existence of such a credit information
         exchange that it might lead to collective anti-competitive conduct, such as a boycott of certain potential borrowers. 
      
Furthermore, since, as the Advocate General observed, in substance, at point of his Opinion, any possible issues relating
         to the sensitivity of personal data are not, as such, a matter for competition law, they may be resolved on the basis of the
         relevant provisions governing data protection. In the main proceedings, it is apparent from the documents before the Court
         that, under the rules applicable to the register, affected consumers may, in accordance with the Spanish legislation, check
         the information concerning them and, where necessary, have it corrected, or indeed deleted. 
      
 The applicability of Article 81(3) EC 
Only if the referring court finds, in the light of the considerations set out at paragraphs to of this judgment, that
         there is indeed in the dispute before it a restriction of competition within the meaning of Article 81(1) EC will it be necessary
         for that court to carry out an analysis by reference to Article 81(3) EC in order to resolve that dispute.
      
The applicability of the exemption provided for in Article 81(3) EC is subject to the four cumulative conditions laid down
         in that provision. First, the arrangement concerned must contribute to improving the production or distribution of the goods
         or services in question, or to promoting technical or economic progress; secondly, consumers must be allowed a fair share
         of the resulting benefit; thirdly, it must not impose any non-essential restrictions on the participating undertakings; and,
         fourthly, it must not afford them the possibility of eliminating competition in respect of a substantial part of the products
         or services in question (see, to that effect, Joined Cases 43/and 63/VBVB and VBBB v Commission [1984] ECR 19, paragraph 61, as well as Remia and Others v Commission, paragraph 38). 
      
It is clear from the documents before the Court, and in particular from the second question referred by the national court,
         that that court seeks an answer from the Court in respect of, in particular, the second of those conditions, which provides
         that consumers are to be allowed a fair share of the profit resulting from the agreement, decision or practice in question.
         The national court asks, in essence, whether, where all consumers do not derive a benefit from the register, the register
         might none the less benefit from the exemption provided for in Article 81(1) EC.
      
Apart from the potential effects described at paragraphs and of this judgment, registers such as the one at issue in
         the main proceedings are capable of helping to prevent situations of overindebtedness for consumers of credit as well as,
         in principle, of leading to a greater overall availability of credit. In the event that the register restricted competition
         within the meaning of Article 81(1) EC, those objective economic advantages might be such as to offset the disadvantages of
         such a possible restriction. It would be for the national court, if necessary, to verify that. 
      
Admittedly, in principle it is not inconceivable that, as Ausbanc suggests, certain applicants for credit will, owing to the
         existence of such registers, be faced with increased interest rates, or even be refused credit.
      
However, without its being necessary to decide whether such applicants would none the less benefit from a possible credit
         discipline effect or from protection against overindebtedness, that circumstance cannot in itself prevent the condition that
         consumers be allowed a fair share of the benefit from being satisfied.
      
Under Article 81(3) EC, it is the beneficial nature of the effect on all consumers in the relevant markets that must be taken
         into consideration, not the effect on each member of that category of consumers.
      
Moreover, as follows from paragraphs and of this judgment, registers such as the one at issue in the main proceedings
         are, under favourable conditions, capable of leading to a greater overall availability of credit, including for applicants
         for whom interest rates might be excessive if lenders did not have appropriate knowledge of their personal situation. 
      
In the light of all of the foregoing, the questions referred to the Court should be answered as follows:
      
–        Article 81(1) EC must be interpreted as meaning that a system for the exchange of information on credit between financial
         institutions, such as the register, does not, in principle, have as its effect the restriction of competition within the meaning
         of that provision, provided that the relevant market or markets are not highly concentrated, that that system does not permit
         lenders to be identified and that the conditions of access and use by financial institutions are not discriminatory, in law
         or in fact. 
      
–        In the event that a system for the exchange of information on credit, such as that register, restricts competition within
         the meaning of Article 81(1) EC, the applicability of the exemption provided for in Article 81(3) EC is subject to the four
         cumulative conditions laid down in that provision. It is for the national court to determine whether those conditions are
         satisfied. In order for the condition that consumers be allowed a fair share of the benefit to be satisfied, it is not necessary,
         in principle, for each consumer individually to derive a benefit from an agreement, a decision or a concerted practice. However,
         the overall effect on consumers in the relevant markets must be favourable. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article 81(1) EC must be interpreted as meaning that a system for the exchange of information on credit between financial
            institutions, such as the register of information on customer solvency at issue in the main proceedings, does not, in principle,
            have as its effect the restriction of competition within the meaning of that provision, provided that the relevant market
            or markets are not highly concentrated, that that system does not permit lenders to be identified and that the conditions
            of access and use by financial institutions are not discriminatory, in law or in fact. 
2.      In the event that a system for the exchange of information on credit, such as that register, restricts competition within
            the meaning of Article 81(1) EC, the applicability of the exemption provided for in Article 81(3) EC is subject to the four
            cumulative conditions laid down in that provision. It is for the national court to determine whether those conditions are
            satisfied. In order for the condition that consumers be allowed a fair share of the benefit to be satisfied, it is not necessary,
            in principle, for each consumer individually to derive a benefit from an agreement, a decision or a concerted practice. However,
            the overall effect on consumers in the relevant markets must be favourable.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Spanish.
      
Top  
 