
Case C-442/Kingdom of Spain
v
Council of the European Union
(Fisheries – Regulation (EC) No 1954/– Regulation (EC) No 1415/– Management of the fishing effort – Fixing of the maximum annual fishing effort – Reference period – Community fishing areas and resources – Biologically sensitive areas – Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Kingdom of Spain and the Portuguese Republic and the adjustments to the
         Treaties – Plea of illegality – Admissibility – Principle of non-discrimination – Misuse of powers)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Plea of illegality – Incidental nature 
(Arts 230, fifth para., EC and EC)
2.        Procedure – Res judicata
3.        Fisheries – Conservation of the resources of the sea – System for the management of fishing effort relating to certain Community
            fishing areas and resources
(Art. 34(2) EC; Council Regulation No 1954/2003, Arts 3, and 6)
4.        Fisheries – Conservation of the resources of the sea – System for the management of fishing effort relating to certain Community
            fishing areas and resources
(Art. EC; Council Regulation No 1954/2003, Art. 6)
1.        A Member State may, in the course of legal proceedings, challenge the legality of a regulation against which it has not brought
         an action for annulment before the expiry of the time-limits laid down in the fifth paragraph of Article EC. Whereas,
         to be admissible, such a plea of illegality should, in principle, have been raised in the application, it will also be admissible
         if it is raised expressly only in the reply, without any pleas in law not already put forward in the application being introduced
         in support thereof, if it was already implicitly but clearly contained in the application.
      
(see paras 22-24)
2.        A plea of illegality raised by a Member State in regard to a regulation does not infringe the principle of res judicata in
         respect of an earlier judgment if the Court did not rule in that judgment on the legality of provisions of the regulation
         covered by the plea of illegality but rejected the pleas on the basis of which annulment of those articles was sought on the
         ground that they were inadmissible. The principle of res judicata extends only to matters of fact and law actually or necessarily
         settled by the judicial decision in question.
      
(see para. 25)
3.        The principle of non-discrimination, as laid down in Article 34(2) EC, requires that comparable situations must not be treated
         differently and that different situations must not be treated in the same way unless such treatment is objectively justified.
      
The provisions of Articles 3, and of Regulation No 1954/on the management of the fishing effort relating to certain
         Community fishing areas and resources are applicable in an identical manner to all Member States. In particular, the reference
         period from to 2002, which serves, pursuant to those provisions, for the assessment and then for the allocation of levels
         of fishing effort for the fisheries and areas covered by them is the same for the whole of the European Community. The limitation
         of the fishing effort, fixed on the basis of the effort actually exerted during that period by each national fleet in those
         areas and fisheries, thus applies to all Community fishing vessels regardless of nationality. Therefore, the measures contained
         in those provisions cannot be regarded as discriminating against a Member State unless, on the one hand, that Member State
         was in a different position from the other Member States when those provisions were adopted and, on the other, it is not objectively
         justified that the Member State should be subject, in some circumstances, to the same fishing effort management regime as
         the other Member States.
      
Making a Member State which found itself in a different situation from the other Member States at the time that Regulation
         No 1954/was adopted subject to the same arrangements for management of the fishing effort as the other Member States,
         laid down in the said regulation appears to be objectively justified inasmuch as, on the one hand, those arrangements lay
         down a method for assessing fishing effort which is based on an objective criterion, namely the fishing effort actually exerted
         by each Member State in the areas and fisheries concerned during a recent period of five years, and, on the other hand, the
         purpose of the arrangements is to conserve fisheries resources in order to ensure, according to the fourth recital in the
         preamble to the regulation, that there is no increase in the overall levels of existing fishing effort.
      
(see paras 35-36, 40-41)
4.        A measure is vitiated by misuse of powers only if it appears, on the basis of objective, relevant and consistent evidence
         to have been taken with the exclusive or main purpose of achieving an end other than that stated or of evading a procedure
         specifically prescribed by the Treaty for dealing with the circumstances of the case.
      
Neither the fact that technical measures for the protection of juveniles of marine organisms may also fall within another
         regulation nor the fact that there may be other biologically sensitive areas shows that there has been a misuse of powers
         on the part of the Council in the adoption of specific fishing effort management arrangements for a biologically sensitive
         area in Article of Regulation No 1954/on the management of the fishing effort relating to certain Community fishing
         areas and resources.
      
(see paras 49-50)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Fisheries – Regulation (EC) No 1954/– Regulation (EC) No 1415/– Management of the fishing effort – Fixing of the maximum annual fishing effort – Reference period – Community fishing areas and resources – Biologically sensitive areas – Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Kingdom of Spain and the Portuguese Republic and the adjustments to the
         Treaties – Plea of illegality – Admissibility – Principle of non-discrimination – Misuse of powers)
      
In Case C‑442/04,
ACTION for annulment under Article EC, brought on October 2004,
Kingdom of Spain, represented by E. Braquehais Conesa and A. Sampol Pucurull, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Council of the European Union, represented by J. Monteiro and F. Florindo Gijón, acting as Agents,
      
defendant,
supported by
Commission of the European Communities, represented by T. van Rijn and F. Jimeno Fernández, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
intervener,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of Chamber, J. Makarczyk, P. Kūris (Rapporteur), J.‑C. Bonichot and C. Toader, Judges,
Advocate General: Y. Bot,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2008,
gives the following
Judgment
In its application, the Kingdom of Spain is seeking annulment of Articles to of Council Regulation (EC) No 1415/of
         July fixing the maximum annual fishing effort for certain fishing areas and fisheries (OJ L 258, p. 1).
      
 Legal context
 Regulation (EC) No 1954/Article 4(1) of Council Regulation (EC) No 2371/of December on the conservation and sustainable exploitation
         of fisheries resources under the Common Fisheries Policy (OJ L 358, p. 59) provides that ‘the Council shall establish
         Community measures governing access to waters and resources and the sustainable pursuit of fishing activities’. Among such
         measures, Article 4(2)(f) of that regulation mentions measures limiting ‘fishing effort’, that term meaning, for a fishing
         vessel, the product of its capacity and its activity and, for a group of vessels, the sum of the fishing effort of all vessels
         in the group.
      
Council Regulation (EC) No 1954/of November on the management of the fishing effort relating to certain Community
         fishing areas and resources and modifying Regulation (EC) No 2847/and repealing Regulations (EC) No 685/and (EC) No
         2027/(OJ L 289, p. 1) is one of the measures which, according to Article thereof, establishes the criteria and procedures
         for a system relating to the management of fishing effort in ICES areas V, VI, VII, VIII, IX and X and CECAF divisions 34.1.1,
         34.1.and 34.2.0.
      
According to the second and fourth recitals in the preamble thereto, Regulation No 1954/is intended, inter alia – following
         the expiry on December of the provisions of the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Kingdom of Spain
         and the Portuguese Republic and the adjustments to the Treaties (OJ 1985, 302, p. 23, ‘the Act of Accession’) governing access
         to certain waters and resources – to adapt to the new legal situation certain provisions of Council Regulation (EC) No 685/of March on the management of the fishing effort relating to certain Community fishing areas and resources (OJ L 71, p. 5) and Council Regulation (EC) No 2027/of June establishing a system for the management of fishing effort
         relating to certain Community fishing areas and resources (OJ L 199, p. 1), as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No
         149/of January (OJ L 18, p. 3), and to ensure that there is no increase in the overall levels of existing
         fishing effort in the areas involved.
      
Article of Regulation No 1954/2003, entitled ‘Measures concerning the catching of demersal species and certain molluscs
         and crustaceans’, provides as follows: 
      
‘1.      Except for the area defined in Article 6(1), Member States shall:
(a)       assess the levels of fishing effort exerted by vessels equal to or more than metres in length overall, as an annual average
         of the period to 2002, in each of the ICES areas and CECAF divisions referred to in Article for demersal fisheries,
         excluding demersal fisheries, those covered by Council Regulation (EC) No 2347/of December establishing specific
         access requirements and associated conditions applicable to fishing for deep-sea stocks and fisheries for scallops, edible
         crab and spider crab, as laid down in the Annex to this Regulation. For the calculation of fishing effort the fishing capacity
         of a vessel shall be measured as the installed power expressed in kilowatts (kW);
      
(b)       allocate the level of fishing effort assessed conforming to [point] (a) in each ICES area or CECAF division, with regard to
         each of the fisheries mentioned in [point] (a).
      
…’
According to Article of Regulation No 1954/2003:
      
‘1.      The fishing effort of fishing vessels equal to or less than metres in length overall shall be assessed globally for each
         fishery and area or division referred to in Article 3(1) during the period to 2002.
      
2.      The fishing effort of fishing vessels equal to or less than metres in length overall shall be assessed globally for each
         fishery and area or division referred to in Article 6(1) during the period to 2002.
      
3.      Member States shall ensure that the fishing effort of these vessels is limited to the level of fishing effort assessed conforming
         to paragraphs and 2.’
      
Moreover, Article of Regulation No 1954/establishes a specific effort regime applicable to a biologically sensitive
         area off the Irish coast in which ‘Member States shall assess the levels of fishing effort exerted by vessels equal to or
         more than metres in length overall, as an annual average of the period to 2002, for demersal fisheries, excluding
         those covered by Regulation (EC) No 2347/2002, and fisheries for scallops, edible crab and spider crab, and allocate the level
         of fishing effort thus assessed for each of those fisheries.’
      
Finally, Article 11(1) and (2) of Regulation No 1954/provides that, on the basis of the information to be communicated
         to the Commission by the Member States, the Commission is to submit to the Council a proposal for a Regulation fixing the
         maximum annual fishing effort for each Member State and for each area and fishery defined in Articles and and that the
         Council, acting by qualified majority on the proposal from the Commission, is to decide on that effort. In implementation
         of that provision, the Council adopted Regulation No 1415/2004.
      
 Regulation No 1415/Regulation No 1415/is drafted in the following terms:
      
‘Article Subject matter
This Regulation sets the maximum annual fishing effort for each Member State and for each area and fishery defined in Articles
         and of Regulation (EC) No 1954/2003.
      
Article Maximum levels
1.      The maximum levels of annual fishing effort by group of species, area and fishery, and by Member State, for the areas referred
         to in Article 3(1)(a) and (b) of Regulation (EC) No 1954/2003, are set out in Annex I to this Regulation.
      
2.      The maximum levels of annual fishing effort by group of species, area and fishery, and by Member State, for the area referred
         to in Article 6(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1954/2003, are set out in Annex II to this Regulation.
      
Article Transiting through an area
1.      Each Member State shall ensure that the utilisation of fishing effort allocations by area, as defined in Articles and of Regulation (EC) No 1954/2003, will not result in more time spent fishing by comparison to fishing effort levels exerted
         during the reference period.
      
2.      Fishing effort established as a result of a vessel transiting through an area where no fishing operation had taken place during
         the reference period shall not be used for the purpose of carrying out fishing operations in that area. Each Member State
         shall record such fishing effort separately.
      
Article Methodology
Each Member State shall ensure that the method used to record fishing effort is the same as the one used in assessing the
         levels of fishing effort according to Articles and of Regulation (EC) No 1954/2003.
      
Article Compliance with other fishing effort limitation schemes
The maximum levels of annual fishing effort fixed in Annexes I and II shall be without prejudice to fishing effort limitations
         fixed under recovery plans or any other management measure under Community law provided that the measure with the lower amount
         of fishing effort is complied with.
      
Article Entry into force
This Regulation shall enter into force on the 20th day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union. 
      
This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States.’
 Procedure and form of order sought
Since the Kingdom of Spain brought an action on January 2004, registered as Case C‑36/04, for annulment of Articles 3,
         and of Regulation No 1954/2003, it was decided on March to stay proceedings in the present case until judgment
         had been delivered in that action.
      
By order of the President of the Court of March 2005, the Commission was granted leave to intervene in support of the form
         of order sought by the Council in the present case.
      
By judgment of March in Case C‑36/Spain v Council [2006] ECR I‑2981, the Court dismissed the application for annulment of Articles 3, and – only – of Regulation No 1954/2003,
         since it considered that those provisions were not severable from the rest of that regulation, with the result that the action
         was inadmissible.
      
Following delivery of that judgment, and the resumption of the proceedings in the present case, the Kingdom of Spain formally
         raised, in its reply, a plea of illegality in regard to Regulation No 1954/2003, and maintained its claim that the Court should
         annul Articles to of Regulation No 1415/and order the Council to pay the costs.
      
The Council and the Commission contend that the Court should dismiss the action and order the Kingdom of Spain to pay the
         costs.
      
 Admissibility of the plea of illegality
 Arguments of the parties
The Council contends that the Kingdom of Spain’s plea of illegality concerning Regulation No 1954/is inadmissible since,
         on the one hand, it was raised out of time – that is, in the reply rather than in the application – and, on the other, the
         Member State cannot in any event challenge the validity of that regulation after the expiry of the time-limit laid down in
         the fifth paragraph of Article EC.
      
It argues, first, that Article 42(2) of the Rules of Procedure prohibits the introduction of new pleas in law in the course
         of proceedings and that the dismissal of the Kingdom of Spain’s action in Spain v Council, cited above, cannot be regarded as a new fact for the purposes of that provision.
      
The Council points out, secondly, that if a Member State were permitted to challenge the validity of a Community regulation
         after the expiry of the time-limit laid down in the fifth paragraph of Article EC by raising a plea of illegality each
         time an institution adopts a measure implementing that regulation, it would be possible to challenge indefinitely Community
         measures producing legal effects, which would be contrary to the purpose of the time-limits for bringing actions, which is
         to ensure legal certainty. Although the Kingdom of Spain challenged Regulation No 1954/within those time-limits in Spain v Council and the measure is not a decision, application should none the less be made in the present case of the case-law to the effect
         that the addressee of a decision adopted by a Community institution which has not been challenged by him within the time-limits
         laid down in the fifth paragraph of Article EC cannot plead the illegality of that decision, which has become definitive
         as against that person (Case 52/Commission v France [1983] ECR 3707, paragraph 10; Case C‑188/TWD Textilwerke Deggendorf [1994] ECR I‑833, paragraph 13; and Case C‑239/Nachi Europe [2001] ECR I‑1197, paragraph 29).
      
The Commission, which is intervening in support of the Council and which contends that the action should be dismissed as unfounded,
         states that Regulation No 1954/is so closely linked to Regulation No 1415/2004, which merely implements it, that the
         present action is merely an almost literal repetition of the action in Spain v Council. The present action has not really been brought against Regulation No 1415/but against Articles 3, and of Regulation
         No 1954/2003, since none of the pleas put forward mention Regulation No 1415/specifically or directly. In short, by continuing
         the present procedure after the delivery of judgment in Spain v Council, the Kingdom of Spain is seeking to avoid the consequences of that judgment. Since its application was dismissed in the latter
         case, the present case is ‘without purpose’.
      
In addition, in the Commission’s view, the applicant cannot raise a plea of illegality in regard to a measure in respect of
         which it could have brought an action for annulment. Moreover, that plea, which does not raise a question of public policy,
         should have been expressly put forward at the stage of the application. It was raised out of time and constitutes the introduction
         of a new plea in law and an amendment of the initial application, contrary to Article of the Rules of Procedure. For all
         of those reasons, the Commission considers that the present action should be dismissed without there being any need to examine
         the substance of the case.
      
The Kingdom of Spain claims that Regulations Nos 1954/and 1415/are directly linked in law and that the judgment
         in Spain v Council constitutes a new matter of fact and of law which came to light in the course of the procedure, with the result that the
         plea of illegality which it has raised is admissible. It adds that the plea does not undermine the principle of legal certainty
         or the principle of res judicata because it was raised within the time-limits for bringing an action against the basic regulation and the implementing regulation,
         and the Court did not rule on the substance of the case in its earlier judgment.
      
 Findings of the Court
Pursuant to Article EC, ‘[n]otwithstanding the expiry of the period laid down in the fifth paragraph of Article 230, any
         party may, in proceedings in which a regulation adopted jointly by the European Parliament and the Council, or a regulation
         of the Council, of the Commission, or of the [European Central Bank] is at issue, plead the grounds specified in the second
         paragraph of Article in order to invoke before the Court of Justice the inapplicability of that regulation’.
      
It follows from that article that a Member State may, in the course of legal proceedings, challenge the legality of a regulation
         against which it has not brought an action for annulment before the expiry of the time-limits laid down in the fifth paragraph
         of Article EC. It should be pointed out in that regard that since the right of the Member States to bring an action for
         annulment of a regulation is not limited, the plea of inadmissibility raised by the Council and the Commission – to the effect,
         essentially, that a Member State may not plead the illegality of a regulation after the expiry of the abovementioned time-limits
         if it could have sought the annulment thereof within those time-limits – would mean, if accepted, that Member States do not
         have the right to query, in the course of legal proceedings, the legality of a regulation in order to invoke its inapplicability
         before the Court. As the Advocate General points out in paragraph of his Opinion, since such an approach would constitute
         an infringement of the terms of Article EC which gives that right to ‘any party’ (see Case C‑11/Commission v ECB [2003] ECR I‑7147, paragraph 76), the plea of inadmissibility must be rejected.
      
As regards the plea of inadmissibility raised by the Council and the Commission contending that the plea of illegality raised
         by the Kingdom of Spain is out of time, it is common ground that the plea of illegality was formally submitted in the reply,
         after delivery of the judgment in Spain v Council dismissing the applicant’s action challenging Articles 3, and of Regulation No 1954/2003, whereas, to be admissible,
         such a plea should, in principle, have been raised in the application and, contrary to the Kingdom of Spain’s argument, dismissal
         of that action cannot be regarded as constituting a matter of fact or of law which came to light in the course of the procedure
         within the meaning of Article 42(2) of the Rules of Procedure (see, to that effect, Case 11/Dürbeck v Commission [1982] ECR 1251, paragraph 17).
      
However, in the present case, it is clear from the application that the Kingdom of Spain is seeking annulment of Articles
         to of Regulation No 1415/– that is to say, all the provisions contained in the regulation – on the sole ground that
         Regulation No 1415/implements Articles 3, and of Regulation No 1954/2003, the legality of which it challenges on
         the basis that those articles infringe the principle of non-discrimination and that the Council misused its powers when it
         adopted Article of the latter regulation. However, although the Kingdom of Spain raised expressly in its reply a plea of
         illegality in regard to Regulation No 1954/as a whole, it did not introduce in support thereof any pleas in law not already
         put forward in the application, in regard to which the Council was able to express its position in the defence. It is thus
         apparent that the plea of illegality was implicitly but clearly contained in the application, with the result that the plea
         of inadmissibility based on the allegedly late submission of the plea of illegality must also be rejected.
      
It should also be noted that the plea of illegality raised by the Kingdom of Spain in regard to Regulation No 1954/does
         not infringe the principle of res judicata. That principle extends only to matters of fact and of law actually or necessarily settled by the judicial decision in question
         (Joined Cases C‑238/P, C‑244/P, C‑245/P, C‑247/P, C‑250/P to C‑252/P and C‑254/P Limburgse Vinyl Maatschappij and Others v Commission [2002] ECR I‑8375, paragraph and the case-law cited therein). However, in its judgment in Spain v Council, the Court did not rule on the legality of Articles 3, and of Regulation No 1954/– covered by the plea of illegality
         raised in the present case – but rejected the pleas on the basis of which annulment of those articles was sought, on the ground
         that the pleas were inadmissible. 
      
It follows from all the foregoing that the plea of illegality raised by the Kingdom of Spain is admissible and the substance
         of the submissions put forward in support thereof must be considered; those submissions allege, first, breach of the principle
         of non-discrimination and, secondly, misuse of powers.
      
 The merits of the plea of illegality
 Alleged breach of the principle of non-discrimination
 Arguments of the parties
Relying on Article EC and Article 34(2) EC, the Kingdom of Spain claims that Articles 3, and of Regulation No 1954/2003,
         implemented by Regulation No 1415/2004, are discriminatory in regard to the Spanish fleet as compared with that of other Member
         States since the Council failed to take into account the specific situation of the Spanish fleet under the rules of the Act
         of Accession. That discrimination is to be found in the reference period used in those articles for the calculation of the
         fishing effort, and in the delimitation of the biologically sensitive area defined in Article 6(1) of Regulation No 1954/2003.
      
First of all, the reference period, running from to 2002, corresponds to a period in which – by reason of the transitional
         arrangements under the Act of Accession, which expired on December – the Kingdom of Spain was subject to greater restrictions
         in regard to fishing than the other Member States. Since 1996, after the revision of the transitional arrangements in pursuant to Regulations Nos 685/and 2027/95, only the Spanish fleet was subject to rules which, on the one hand, restricted
         access to ICES areas V b, VI, VII and VIII a, b, d and e, as provided for in Article of the Act of Accession, and, on
         the other, limited the number of ships that may be present at any one time in the sensitive area known as the ‘Irish Box’,
         which is now partially covered by the biologically sensitive area defined in Article 6(1) of Regulation No 1954/2003. Consequently,
         since the Member States were not in an identical position during the reference period, the use of that period to calculate
         the fishing effort has the effect of perpetuating the transitional measures and, in consequence, of discriminating on grounds
         of nationality.
      
Secondly, the establishment of the biologically sensitive area and the procedure for the calculation of the maximum permissible
         fishing effort in that area discriminate against the Spanish fleet and show an intention to continue to apply measures similar
         to those applied to the former Irish Box, which were also discriminatory in regard to the Spanish fleet. The reason given
         in the seventh recital in the preamble to Regulation No 1954/for the delimitation of that area – namely, the existence
         in the area of a high concentration of juvenile hake – in fact merely serves to justify the continuance of those discriminatory
         measures.
      
The Council states that the limitation of the fishing effort is a measure intended to limit the number of days on which certain
         ships fish in particular waters, with a view to conserving fisheries resources and also to make more efficient the catch limitations
         laid down for certain stocks of fish. It argues that the limitation of the fishing effort on the basis of the effort carried
         out by each national fleet in each area and for each fishery in the period from to 2002, as laid down in Regulation No
         1954/2003, applies to all Community fishing vessels regardless of nationality, with the result that there is no overt discrimination
         based on nationality. Although all covert forms of discrimination are also prohibited, the Council argues that account must
         nevertheless be taken of the case-law to the effect that a measure will not be regarded as discriminatory unless it is arbitrary,
         that is, devoid of adequate justification and not based on objective criteria (Case 106/Kind v EEC [1982] ECR 2885, paragraph 22; Case 179/Bozzetti [1985] ECR 2301, paragraph 34; and Case C‑353/Greece v Council [1994] ECR I‑3411, paragraph 25). However, the criterion used in the present case to limit the fishing effort – namely, the
         effort deployed in a recent earlier period – is fully justified, appropriate and proportionate to the objective sought.
      
In addition, in the Council’s view, the applicant does not show that the limitations on the fishing effort laid down in Regulations
         Nos 685/and 2027/were more strict than those imposed on the other Member States; nor does it show that, in the absence
         of those limitations, the effort exerted by the Spanish ships would have been greater than that actually exerted during the
         period from to 2002.
      
With regard to the limitation of the fishing effort in the biologically sensitive area defined in Article of Regulation
         No 1954/2003, the Council states that a specific restriction of the fishing effort in that area is intended to guard against
         the risk that, by reason of the restrictions applying to large areas such as the ICES areas and CECAF divisions, the fishing
         effort would be concentrated in specific areas, such as the area at issue, in which there is a high concentration of juvenile
         hake. That biologically sensitive area is not to be confused with the Irish Box since it covers less than half of it, with
         the result that even supposing that the limitations imposed on the Kingdom of Spain in the Irish Box by Regulations Nos 685/and 2027/were more strict than those applied to other Member States and that the Spanish fleet’s effort had been higher
         in the Irish Box in the period from to 2002, it has not been shown that that has given rise to any negative consequences
         for the Spanish fleet.
      
The Commission, pointing out that the method fixed by Regulation No 1954/for calculating the fishing effort is identical
         for all the Member States, contends that the reference period from to involved no discrimination against the Spanish
         fleet. It states that whereas the maximum fishing effort limits had been fixed under the rules introduced in on the basis
         of theoretical data, the maximum fishing effort must now be calculated, pursuant to Regulation No 1954/2003, on the basis
         of an objective criterion, namely the fishing effort actually exerted during a recent, representative period.
      
With regard to the biologically sensitive area, the Commission is of the opinion that the period from to can validly
         serve as a reference period for calculating the fishing effort in that area, which does exactly coincide with the Irish Box,
         because it reflects the effort effectively deployed by the Spanish fleet and causes it no harm. The Spanish fleet developed
         an intense fishing activity in certain areas adjacent to the Irish Box which today are part of the biologically sensitive
         area and the fishing effort thus exerted is taken into account in the fishing effort it can deploy in the whole of that area
         today. Moreover, the Kingdom of Spain produces nothing to show that the limit in force in the Irish Box has reduced the activity
         of its fleet or even that the Spanish fishing fleet has reached that limit.
      
 Findings of the Court
Compliance with the principle of non-discrimination, as laid down in Article 34(2) EC, requires that comparable situations
         must not be treated differently and that different situations must not be treated in the same way unless such treatment is
         objectively justified (see, inter alia, Case C‑44/Fishermen’s Organisations and Others [1995] ECR I‑3115, paragraph 46; Case C‑304/Spain v Commission [2004] ECR I‑7655, paragraph 31; and Case C‑141/Spain v Council [2007] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 40).
      
In the present case, the provisions of Articles 3, and of Regulation No 1954/2003, the illegality of which is pleaded
         by the Kingdom of Spain, are applicable in an identical manner to all Member States. In particular, the reference period from
         to 2002, which serves, pursuant to those provisions, for the assessment and then for the allocation of levels of fishing
         effort for the fisheries and areas covered by them is the same for the whole European Community. The limitation of the fishing
         effort, fixed on the basis of the effort actually exerted during that period by each national fleet in those areas and fisheries,
         thus applies to all Community fishing vessels regardless of nationality. Therefore, the measures contained in those provisions
         cannot be regarded as discriminating against the Kingdom of Spain unless, on the one hand, that Member State was, as it claims,
         in a different position from the other Member States when those provisions were adopted and, on the other, it is not objectively
         justified that the Kingdom of Spain should be subject, in some circumstances, to the same fishing effort management regime
         as the other Member States. 
      
It should be noted, as Advocate General Léger pointed out in points and of his Opinion in Spain v Council, cited above, to which the Advocate General in the present case refers in point of his Opinion, that the Kingdom of Spain
         was subject from the time of its accession to the European Union until December to a number of restrictions relating
         to access to certain fishing areas and resources and that, although its situation gradually came into line with that of the
         other Member States, it retained certain particular features until the end of that period, hence during the 1998-reference
         period used in the provisions at issue for determining the fishing effort.
      
Articles to of the Act of Accession lay down the arrangements governing access to Community waters and their resources,
         thereby limiting the fishing opportunities open to Spanish fishing vessels in certain areas of Community waters. Thus, inter
         alia, Article of the Act of Accession, referred to by the Kingdom of Spain in its application, provides for a list to
         be drawn up of vessels – specified with their technical characteristics in the list of names in Annex IX to the Act of
         Accession – which may be authorised to fish in ICES areas V b, VI, VII, VIII a, b and d, and lays down the conditions governing
         the number of ships on that list that may be present in the areas concerned at the same time. Article of the Act of Accession
         also excludes access to the Irish Box. Article of the Act of Accession provides that the arrangements defined in Articles
         to thereof are to remain in force until the expiry of the period laid down in Article 8(3) of Council Regulation (EEC)
         No 170/of January establishing a Community system for the conservation and management of fishery resources (OJ
         L 24, p. 1), that is to say, until December 2002. However, Article of the Act of Accession provides for a procedure
         for the assessment and adjustment of those arrangements, indicating that the adjustments which proved to be necessary were
         to take effect on January 1996.
      
The Council thus adopted Regulation (EC) No 1275/of May on adjustments to the arrangements in the fisheries chapters
         of the Act of Accession of Spain and Portugal (OJ L 140, p. 1) and Regulations Nos 685/and 2027/95, repealed by Regulation
         No 1954/2003. Article of Regulation No 1275/provides, with regard to the Kingdom of Spain, that with effect from January
         1996, the arrangements regarding access to waters and resources laid down in Articles to of the Act of Accession are
         to be adjusted and incorporated – in accordance with the subsequent articles of Regulation No 1275/– into the Community
         measures provided for in Articles and of that Regulation, which are applicable to all Community vessels. Article of
         Regulation 1275/provides that the Council is to adopt, in accordance with Articles and of Council Regulation (EEC)
         No 3760/of December establishing a Community system for fisheries and aquaculture (OJ L 389, p. 1), the Community
         measures laying down the conditions of access to the zones and resources subject to specific rules pursuant to Articles to of the Act of Accession and that such measures must comply with the principle of no increase in fishing effort the
         level of which is laid down in Articles 158, 160, and of the Act of Accession. Pursuant to Article of Regulation
         No 1275/94, the Council adopted Regulation No 685/which established, with effect from January 1996, the criteria and
         procedures for the introduction of a system for the management of fishing effort in ICES areas V b, VI, VII, VIII, IX and
         X and CECAF divisions 34.1.1, 34.1.2, and 34.2.0. That system was introduced by Regulation No 2027/95, which fixed the maximum
         annual fishing effort for each Member State and for each fishery. With regard to the Irish Box, Article 3(5) of Regulation
         No 685/provides that the Member States concerned are to assess the fishing effort in that area on the basis of the level
         of existing activity for their respective vessels, except for those flying the flag of Spain, whose number in the area may
         not exceed 40.
      
Consequently, the Kingdom of Spain found itself, as it claims, in a different situation from the other Member States at the
         time that Regulation No 1954/was adopted, marked, in particular, by no increase, in the period from to 2002, in
         the fishing opportunities as limited by the Act of Accession and by the number of Spanish vessels which could be in the Irish
         Box at the same time being limited to 40. 
      
However, making the Kingdom of Spain subject to the same arrangements for management of the fishing effort as the other Member
         States, laid down in Regulation No 1954/2003, appears to be objectively justified. On the one hand, those arrangements lay
         down a method for assessing fishing effort which is based on an objective criterion, namely the fishing effort actually exerted
         by each Member State in the areas and fisheries concerned during a recent period of five years. On the other hand, the purpose
         of the arrangements is to conserve fisheries resources in order to ensure, according to the fourth recital in the preamble
         to Regulation No 1954/2003, that there is no increase in the overall levels of existing fishing effort.
      
It should be noted that the objective of conserving fisheries resources and the principle of relative stability of fishing
         are paramount in all Community rules in this field, including, from the Act of Accession to the adoption of Regulation No 1954/2003,
         those intended to integrate the Kingdom of Spain into the general arrangements under the common fisheries policy. Thus, the
         third recital in the preamble to Regulation No 1275/states that ‘the new provisions must make possible the full integration
         of Spain … into the general scheme of the common fisheries policy and must fully comply with the “acquis communautaire”, particularly
         with regard to the principle of relative stability and the exceptions to the principle of free access to waters as laid down
         by … Regulation (EEC) No 3760/92’. Regulation No 1275/also states, in the fourth and fifth recitals in the preamble, that
         ‘free access to waters must be accompanied by supervision of the fishing capacity deployed, in order to ensure that the means
         in question are appropriate to the resources available’ and that ‘these adjustments must not entail an increase in the overall
         levels of existing fishing effort per ICES and CECAF division nor adversely affect resources subject to quantitative catch
         restrictions’. Similarly, the third and fourth recitals in the preamble to Regulation No 685/state that ‘it is necessary
         to safeguard existing balances and the acquis communautaire, particularly the principle of relative stability’ and that ‘it
         is necessary to ensure that there is no increase in the overall levels of existing fishing effort within the areas and stocks
         covered by the Act of Accession’.
      
In addition, with regard to the biologically sensitive area subject to specific fishing effort management rules under Article
         of Regulation No 1954/2003, it is clear from the file, first of all, that the overlap between that area and the Irish Box
         is limited, since less than half the box is covered. It cannot therefore be claimed that the establishment of the biologically
         sensitive area and the procedure for the calculation of the maximum annual fishing effort in the area show an intention to
         continue to apply measures similar to those applied in the Irish Box. Also, it follows from the seventh recital in the preamble
         to Regulation No 1954/2003, and Article thereof, that the specific restriction of the fishing effort provided for in that
         article is also intended to conserve fisheries resources in an area in which there is a high concentration of juvenile hake
         and that the method used to assess the level of the fishing effort is based on an objective criterion, namely, the fishing
         effort exerted by vessels equal to or more than metres in length overall, as an annual average of the period to 2002,
         for demersal fisheries.
      
It follows that, notwithstanding the fact that the Kingdom of Spain found itself in a different situation from the other Member
         States at the time that Regulation No 1954/was adopted, Articles 3, and of that regulation cannot be regarded as
         constituting a breach of the principle of non-discrimination in regard to the Kingdom of Spain.
      
In those circumstances, the present submission must be rejected as unfounded.
      
 Alleged misuse of powers
 Arguments of the parties
The Kingdom of Spain claims that the real purpose of the establishment of the biologically sensitive area under Article of Regulation No 1954/was not to protect juvenile hake but to maintain the discrimination against the Spanish fleet in
         that area. On the basis of a study submitted by the Spanish delegation in May 2003, it claims that there were other areas
         with similar biological characteristics and that the adoption of measures of this kind for the protection of juvenile hake
         is governed by Council Regulation (EC) No 850/of March for the conservation of fishery resources through technical
         measures for the protection of juveniles of marine organisms (OJ L 125, p. 1). By adopting Article of Regulation No
         1954/2003, the Council thus misused its powers.
      
The Council contends essentially that that submission is ineffective, since Regulation No 1415/2004, which is the subject
         of the present action, contains only measures implementing Regulation No 1954/and was adopted under the procedure provided
         for therein, with the result that no procedure has been evaded. 
      
The Commission points out that the fact that there might be other biologically sensitive areas or that other measures could
         be envisaged does not establish the existence of a misuse of powers.
      
 Findings of the Court
As the Court has held time and again, a measure is only vitiated by misuse of powers if it appears, on the basis of objective,
         relevant and consistent evidence to have been taken with the exclusive or main purpose of achieving an end other than that
         stated or of evading a procedure specifically prescribed by the Treaty for dealing with the circumstances of the case (see
         Case C‑331/FEDESA and Others [1990] ECR I‑4023, paragraph 24, and Case C‑110/Netherlands v Council [2001] ECR I‑8763, paragraph 137).
      
However, in the present case, the Kingdom of Spain has not shown that the specific fishing effort management arrangements
         laid down in Article of Regulation No 1954/for the biologically sensitive area at issue were adopted with the exclusive
         or main purpose of achieving an end other than the protection of juvenile hake. Moreover, as the Commission contends and as
         the Advocate General points out in paragraph of his Opinion, neither the fact that technical measures for the protection
         of juveniles of marine organisms may also fall within another regulation nor the fact that there may be other biologically
         sensitive areas shows that there has been a misuse of powers on the part of the Council in the adoption of Article of Regulation
         No 1954/2003. 
      
This submission must therefore be rejected as unfounded.
      
It follows from all the foregoing that the plea of illegality raised by the Kingdom of Spain in regard to Regulation No 1954/in support of its action must be rejected and since no other plea in law has been put forward concerning the legality of Regulation
         No 1415/2004, the present action must be dismissed.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Council has applied for costs and the Kingdom of Spain has been
         unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs. In accordance with the first subparagraph of Article 69(4) of those
         Rules, the Commission must bear its own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Dismisses the action;
2.      Orders the Kingdom of Spain to pay the costs;
3.      Orders the Commission of the European Communities to bear its own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Spanish.
      
Top  
 