
Avis juridique important
|
61989JJudgment of the Court (Fourth Chamber) of May 1991.  -  Sheptonhurst Ltd v Newham Borough Council.  -  Reference for a preliminary ruling: High Court of Justice, Queen's Bench Division - United Kingdom.  -  Interpretation of Articles and of the EEC Treaty - National legislation prohibiting the sale of sex articles from unlicensed sex establishments.  -  Case C-350/89.  
European Court reports Page I-Pub.RJ Page Pub somm 
Summary
Parties
Operative part
Keywords
++++Free movement of goods - Quantitative restrictions - Measures having equivalent effect - Legislation prohibiting the marketing of sex articles from certain outlets - Whether permissible  (EEC Treaty, Art. 30)  
Summary
Article of the Treaty should be construed as meaning that national provisions prohibiting the sale of lawful sex articles from unlicensed sex establishments do not constitute a measure having an effect equivalent to a quantitative restriction on imports.  (The Court' s reply in this judgment is the same as that in its judgment in Case C-23/Quietlynn Ltd and Richards v Southend Borough Council [1990] ECR I-3059, which involved substantially identical questions.)  
Parties
In Case C-350/89,  REFERENCE to the Court under Article of the EEC Treaty by the High Court of Justice, Queen' s Bench Division, for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending before that court between  Sheptonhurst Limited  and  Newham Borough Council,  on the interpretation of Articles and of the EEC Treaty,  THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),  composed of: M. Díez de Velasco, President of the Chamber, C.N. Kakouris and P.J.G. Kapteyn, Judges,  (The grounds of the judgment are not reproduced.)  in answer to the question referred to it by the High Court, Queen' s Bench Division, by order of October 1988, hereby rules:  
Operative part
Article of the EEC Treaty should be construed as meaning that national provisions prohibiting the sale of lawful sex articles from unlicensed sex establishments do not constitute a measure having an effect equivalent to a quantitative restriction on imports. 
Top  
 