
Order of the Court (Fifth Chamber) of June – Royal Appliance International v OHIM
(Case C‑448/P)
Appeal – Community trade mark – Regulation (EC) No 40/– Article 8(1)(b) – Earlier mark ‘sensixx’ – Word mark ‘Centrixx’ – Relative ground for refusal – Likelihood of confusion – Application for revocation of an earlier mark – Proceedings pending before the national courts – Request for a stay of the proceedings before the General Court
1.                     Community trade mark – Appeals procedure – Appeal before the Community judicature – Jurisdiction of the Court of First Instance
            – Review of the legality of decisions of the Boards of Appeal – Annulment or alteration for reasons appearing after the judgment
            was delivered – Excluded (Council Regulation No 40/94, Art. 63) (see paras 43-44)
2.                     Appeals – Grounds – Incorrect assessment of the facts and evidence – Inadmissibility – Review by the Court of the assessment
            of the facts and evidence – Possible only where the clear sense of the evidence has been distorted (Art. 256(1) second para.,
            TFEU; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.) (see para. 77)
Re: 
Appeal brought against the judgment of the Court of First Instance (First Chamber) of September in Case T-446/Royal Appliance International
 v 
OHIM
 – 
BSH Bosch und Siemens Hausgeräte
, by which the Court of First Instance dismissed the action for annulment brought against the decision of the Fourth Board
                  of Appeal of OHIM of October 2007, rejecting the registration of the word mark ‘Centrixx’ as a Community trade mark for
                  certain goods in Class 7, by granting the opposition by the proprietor of the national word mark ‘sensixx’ – Failure to stay
                  the proceedings while awaiting the resolution of the dispute pending before the national courts concerning the application
                  for revocation of the earlier mark – Infringement of Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation (EC) No 40/– Likelihood of confusion
                  between two marks.
               
Operative part: 
1.
	The appeal is dismissed. 
2.
	Royal Appliance International GmbH is ordered to pay the costs.
Top  
 