
Case C-133/József Uzonyi
v
Mezőgazdasági és Vidékfejlesztési Hivatal Központi Szerve
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Fővárosi Bíróság)
(Agriculture – Common agricultural policy – Support schemes – Regulation (EC) No 1782/– Article 143ba – Separate sugar payment – Grant – Decision of the new Member States – Conditions – Objective and non-discriminatory criteria)
Summary of the Judgment
Agriculture – Common agricultural policy – Direct support schemes – Common rules – Separate sugar payment
(Council Regulation No 1782/2003, Art. 143ba(1))
Article 143ba(1) of Regulation  No 1782/establishing common rules for direct support schemes under the common agricultural
         policy and establishing certain support schemes for farmers and amending Regulations No 2019/93, No 1452/2001, No 1453/2001,
         No 1454/2001, No 1868/94, No 1251/1999, No 1254/1999, No 1673/2000, No 2358/and No 2529/2001, as amended by Regulation
         No 319/2006, must be interpreted as precluding national provisions which exclude from entitlement to a separate sugar payment
         a farmer not having delivery rights who delivers sugar beet to a sugar manufacturer through an integrátor which does have such rights, when on the other hand those provisions grant a separate payment to a farmer having delivery
         rights who delivers sugar beet direct to a sugar manufacturer, and to a farmer not having delivery rights who is a member
         of a producer group which does have delivery rights and who delivers sugar beet to a sugar manufacturer through that group.
      
(see para. 46, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
September (*)
      
(Agriculture – Common agricultural policy – Support schemes – Regulation (EC) No 1782/– Article 143ba – Separate sugar payment – Grant – Decision of the new Member States – Conditions – Objective and non-discriminatory criteria)
In Case C‑133/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Fövárosi Bíróság (Hungary), made by decision of February
         2009, received at the Court on April 2009, in the proceedings
      
József Uzonyi
v
Mezőgazdasági és Vidékfejlesztési Hivatal Központi Szerve,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of J.‑C. Bonichot, President of Chamber, C. Toader, K. Schiemann, L.� Bay Larsen (Rapporteur) and A. Prechal, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: B. Fülöp, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on July 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Mr Uzonyi, by Y. Uzonyi, ügyvéd,
–        the Hungarian Government, by R. Somssich, M. Fehér and K. Szíjjártó, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by B. Simon and F. Clotuche-Duvieusart, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 143ba(1) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1782/of September establishing common rules for direct support schemes under the common agricultural policy and establishing
         certain support schemes for farmers and amending Regulations (EEC) No 2019/93, (EC) No 1452/2001, (EC) No 1453/2001, (EC)
         No 1454/2001, (EC) No 1868/94, (EC) No 1251/1999, (EC) No 1254/1999, (EC) No 1673/2000, (EEC) No 2358/and (EC) No 2529/(OJ L 270, p. 1), as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 319/of February (OJ L 58, p. 32, ‘Regulation
         No 1782/2003’).
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between Mr Uzonyi and the Mezőgazdasági és Vidékfejlesztési Hivatal Központi Szerve
         (Central body of the Office for Agriculture and Rural Development, ‘the Hivatal’) concerning an application for a separate
         sugar payment.
      
 Legal context
 Community law
The first subparagraph of Article 143ba(1) of Regulation No 1782/2003, headed ‘Separate sugar payment’ provides: 
      
‘By way of derogation from Article 143b the new Member States applying the single area payment scheme may decide by April
         2006, to grant in respect of the years 2006, and 2008, a separate sugar payment to farmers eligible under the single
         area payment scheme. It shall be granted on the basis of objective and non-discriminatory criteria such as: 
      
–        the quantities of sugar beet, cane or chicory covered by delivery contracts concluded in accordance with Article of Regulation
         (EC) No 1260/2001,
      
–        the quantities of sugar or inulin syrup produced in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1260/2001,
–        the average number of hectares under sugar beet, cane or chicory used for the production of sugar or inulin syrup and covered
         by delivery contracts concluded in accordance with Article of Regulation (EC) No 1260/and in respect of a representative period which could be different for each product of one or more of the marketing years
         2004/2005, 2005/and 2006/to be determined by Member States before April 2006.’
      
Article 1(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 2011/of December adapting Regulation (EC) No 1782/establishing
         common rules for direct support schemes under the common agricultural policy and establishing certain support schemes for
         farmers, Regulation (EC) No 318/on the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector and Regulation (EC) No
         320/establishing a temporary scheme for the restructuring of the sugar industry in the Community, by reason of the accession
         of Bulgaria and Romania to the European Union (OJ L 384, p. 1), which entered into force on January 2007, replaced
         the second sentence of the first subparagraph of Article 143ba(1) with the following:
      
‘It shall be granted in respect of a representative period which could be different for each product of one or more of the
         marketing years 2004/2005, 2005/and 2006/to be determined by Member States before April 2006, and on the basis
         of objective and non-discriminatory criteria such as:
      
–        the quantities of sugar beet, cane or chicory covered by delivery contracts concluded in accordance with Article of Regulation
         (EC) No 1260/or Article of Regulation (EC) No 318/as appropriate,
      
–        the quantities of sugar or inulin syrup produced in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1260/or Regulation (EC) No 318/as appropriate,
      
–        the average number of hectares under sugar beet, cane or chicory used for the production of sugar or inulin syrup and covered
         by delivery contracts concluded in accordance with Article of Regulation (EC) No 1260/or Article of Regulation (EC)
         No 318/as appropriate.’
      
That amendment, which does not apply ratione temporis in the main proceedings, is relied on in those proceedings by the defendant as a factor for consideration when interpreting
         Article 143ba of Regulation No 1782/2003.
      
 National provisions
Article 2(1) of Decree (Rendelet) of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (FVM) No 48/(VI.22) concerning the separate sugar payment granted
         to farmers eligible under the single area payment scheme (Magyar Közlöny 2006/75; ‘the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development Decree’) provides:
      
‘The following farmers shall be entitled to the payment:
(a)       those eligible for a single area payment under the specific legal provisions in the reference marketing year;
(b)       those who are entitled to deliver sugar beet during the reference period or have a contract based on the Slovenian sugar quota;
(c)       those who have complied with the obligations attaching to their sugar beet delivery rights.
…’
Delivery rights are based on the quantity of sugar beet needed to manufacture the quantity of sugar covered by the sugar quota
         assigned to the Member State under Community law.
      
Article of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development Decree provides: 
      
‘(1)      The following documentary evidence must be attached to the application for payment:
(a)       a document supplied by the Sugar Board showing the quantity (in tonnes) of the delivery rights (16%) assigned to the applicant
         as at July and July (to be calculated on the basis of a standard yield of kg/t);
      
(b)       a document supplied by the body administering the sugar beet processing quota showing the quantity (in tonnes) of ‘A’ and
         ‘B’ (16%) sugar beet delivered under cultivation contracts in marketing year 2004/or 2005/(the processors’ documents
         are to be adjusted, where necessary, to take into account a standard sugar yield of kg);
      
(c)       a document supplied by the relevant Regional Federation of Sugar Beet Producers showing that the applicant has complied with
         the obligations attaching to its delivery rights;
      
(d)       any other documents providing evidence of eligibility.
(2)       In the case of members of a producer group, the processors shall certify the total quantity delivered by the producer group,
         whilst the latter shall certify the quantities delivered by the individual members within the group.
      
…’
 The main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling 
On June 2006, Mr Uzonyi, the applicant in the main proceedings, submitted an application to the Hivatal for a separate
         sugar payment, for the year 2006, in respect of his sugar beet production delivered through an integrátor, a body which acts as an intermediary and coordinator and assists farmers belonging to it with their production activity.
      
Mr Uzonyi, however, could provide evidence of his sugar beet delivery rights and of his compliance with the obligations attaching
         to those rights only in relation to the integrátor.
      
By decision of April 2007, the Hivatal refused his application on the ground that he was not eligible for the assistance
         because he had failed to supply the documentary evidence required under Article 5(1) of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
         Development Decree.
      
Mr Uzonyi lodged a complaint against the decision refusing his application. 
      
That complaint was rejected on July by a decision of the Minister for Agriculture and Rural Development, the predecessor
         to the Hivatal, the defendant in the main proceedings. 
      
As grounds for that decision, it was stated that only farmers who have sugar beet delivery rights and who have complied with
         the obligations attaching thereto are eligible for the payment. Thus, in so far as the documents annexed to the application
         did not relate to the delivery rights, and compliance with the obligations attaching thereto, of the applicant himself but
         to those of the integrátor, the requirements of Article 5(1) of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development Decree were not met. 
      
Mr Uzonyi brought an appeal against the decision rejecting his application before the referring court. He claimed there was
         discrimination between sugar beet producers who delivered sugar beet themselves and those who delivered sugar beet through
         integrátors. He claimed application by analogy of Article 5(2) of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development Decree, which relates
         to deliveries of beet through producer groups.
      
The defendant in the main proceedings submits before the referring court that the objective and non-discriminatory criteria
         are to be applied, not in relation to the persons eligible for payment who are covered by Article 143ba of Regulation No 1782/2003,
         but as regards the representative period to which that provision refers. It finds confirmation of its submission in the amendment
         made to Article 143ba of Regulation No 1782/by Article 1(2) of Regulation No 2011/2006. It contends that that amendment
         simply clarified the wording of the provision without altering the meaning. Both before and after the amendment, objective
         and non-discriminatory criteria are therefore to be applied only in relation to the representative period.
      
The referring court considers that Articles and of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development Decree exclude from
         the payment those farmers who have not concluded a direct contract with the sugar manufacturer but have concluded a cultivation
         contract with an integrátor having delivery rights based on the areas farmed by the producers belonging to it. Those farmers are not in a position to
         prove that they themselves have delivery rights, as required by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development Decree,
         in order to obtain the payment. 
      
The referring court points out that, in contrast, farmers who are members of a producer group and who have not concluded a
         direct contract with the sugar manufacturer but have concluded a cultivation contract with a group which has delivery rights
         based on the areas farmed by its members may obtain a separate sugar payment under the provisions in force of Article 5(2)
         of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development Decree by producing the documents supplied by that group.
      
In its view, account must be taken of the settled case-law of the Court of Justice according to which the second subparagraph
         of Article 34(2) EC, which prohibits all discrimination in the context of the common agricultural policy, is merely a specific
         expression of the general principle of equal treatment.
      
The referring court considers that the wording of the provision of EU law to be interpreted is unclear and, furthermore, that
         that provision was subsequently amended. It adds that if the Court were to rule that under Article 143ba of Regulation No
         1782/producers of sugar beet delivering it through an integrátor are just as entitled to the separate sugar payment as producers who deliver the sugar beet themselves, such a payment could
         then also be granted, in respect of 2006, to the applicant in the main proceedings and to many others who have brought proceedings
         currently pending before the courts, by the application by analogy of Article 5(2) of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
         Development Decree.
      
In those circumstances, the Fövárosi Bíróság (Budapest Municipal Court) decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following
         question to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Does it follow from the provision contained in Article 143ba(1) of Regulation (EC) 1782/in the version in force until
         December 2006, which stated that “[payment] shall be granted on the basis of objective and non-discriminatory criteria”,
         that, as regards eligibility for the separate sugar payment under the single area payment scheme, it was not possible to draw
         a distinction between farmers on the basis of whether they delivered the sugar beet for processing directly (themselves) or
         indirectly (through an integrátor)?’ 
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
By its question, read in the light of the grounds of the order for reference, the national court is effectively seeking to
         determine whether Article 143ba(1) of Regulation No 1782/must be interpreted as precluding national provisions such as
         those at issue in the main proceedings, which exclude from entitlement to a separate sugar payment a farmer not having delivery
         rights who delivers sugar beet to a sugar manufacturer through an integrátor who does have such rights, while those provisions grant a separate payment to a farmer having delivery rights who delivers
         sugar beet directly to a sugar manufacturer, and to a farmer not having delivery rights who is a member of a producer group
         which does have delivery rights and who delivers sugar beet to a sugar manufacturer through that group.
      
In order to reply to that question it is necessary to establish whether such national provisions make for discrimination prohibited
         under Article 143ba of Regulation No 1782/2003.
      
With regard to the contentions made by the defendant in the main proceedings, as a preliminary point, the Court finds that:
      
–        Article 143ba of Regulation No 1782/2003, in all languages and in the version applicable in the main proceedings, clearly
         provides that the separate sugar payment is to be granted on the basis of objective and non-discriminatory criteria to farmers
         eligible under the single area payment scheme; 
      
–        none of the language versions of that article establishes a connection between objective and non-discriminatory criteria,
         on the one hand, and determination of representative periods, on the other hand.
      
The subsequent amendment of Article 143ba under Article 1(2) of Regulation No 2011/does not affect those findings.
      
Although it cannot be excluded that, by way of exception, an amending provision may be a factor for consideration when interpreting
         an amended provision, such a possibility is excluded a priori where the earlier provision is clear in all language versions.
      
However, it is apparent that the amending provision relied on in the present case is not clear in all the available nineteen
         versions of it. In six of those versions, namely the Danish, Estonian, French, Hungarian, Polish and Portuguese versions,
         it contains differences in wording which give rise, at the very least, to uncertainty as to whether objective and non-discriminatory
         criteria must be applied when granting the payment or when determining the representative period.
      
Furthermore, the thirteen other language versions, namely the versions in Spanish, Czech, German, Greek, English, Italian,
         Latvian, Lithuanian, Dutch, Slovene, Slovak, Finnish and Swedish are worded as clearly as the provision to be interpreted.
      
The Court must therefore hold that Article 143ba of Regulation No 1782/requires the new Member States to apply objective
         and non-discriminatory criteria when granting a separate sugar payment.
      
Consequently, that article merely restates the principle of non-discrimination laid down in the second subparagraph of Article
         34(2) EC.
      
In that regard, the Court has consistently held that the prohibition on discrimination in the context of the common agricultural
         policy is merely a specific expression of the general principle of equal treatment, which requires that comparable situations
         not be treated differently and different situations not be treated alike unless such treatment is objectively justified (see,
         in particular, with regard to the second subparagraph of Article 34(2) EC, Case C‑313/Franz Egenberger [2006] ECR I‑6331, paragraph 33; Case C‑33/Agrana Zucker [2009] ECR I‑5035, paragraph 46, and Case C‑365/Agrana Zucker [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 42).
      
Regulation No 319/inserted Article 143ba into Regulation No 1782/in the version preceding the changes made by that
         regulation.
      
It is clear from the second, sixth, seventh and ninth to eleventh recitals in the preamble to Regulation No 319/that
         its objective is to provide income support for ‘farmers’ who produce sugar beet and are eligible under the single area payment
         scheme.
      
That regulation does not establish any connection between the granting of a separate sugar payment and whether the farmers
         deliver the sugar beet to the sugar manufacturer directly or indirectly. Nor does it establish any connection between a separate
         sugar payment and whether or not a farmer has delivery rights.
      
In the light of the objective of Regulation No 319/2006, farmers producing sugar beet are therefore in comparable situations
         whether they deliver that product to a sugar manufacturer directly or indirectly and whether or not they themselves have delivery
         rights under national provisions.
      
According to the interpretation of the national law applying in the main proceedings as given by the referring court and confirmed
         by it in response to a request for clarification made by the Court because of the differences of interpretation of that law
         that had appeared in the written observations lodged before it, a farmer belonging to an integrátor, who does not have delivery rights and who delivers sugar beet to a sugar manufacturer through an integrátor which does have delivery rights cannot be granted a separate sugar payment directly, unlike either a farmer having delivery
         rights who delivers sugar beet himself or a farmer not having delivery rights who delivers beet to a sugar manufacturer through
         a producer group to which he belongs which does have such rights.
      
It follows that national provisions such as those at issue in the main proceedings treat comparable situations differently.
      
It is therefore necessary to ascertain whether such difference in treatment is objectively justified.
      
In its written observations the Hungarian Government maintained that the integrátor is usually better placed to carry out the administrative work relating to the separate sugar payment. The procedure under
         the national provisions is usually more favourable to the producer. It ensures that applications are dealt with more effectively
         since the administration only has to rule on applications from integrátors and not on applications from all the producers belonging to integrátors. 
      
During the oral procedure the Hungarian Government stated that, in its view, in order to meet the requirements of Article
         143ba of Regulation No 1782/2003, an integrátor must itself be eligible under the single area payment scheme.
      
However, it should be noted that, according to the interpretation given by the referring court, the fact that a farmer belongs
         to a producer group having delivery rights does not preclude that farmer being granted a separate sugar payment directly,
         even though the farmer himself does not have delivery rights.
      
It thus appears that farmers who are members of a producer group may submit an application for a separate sugar payment themselves
         without any objections being raised that it would be more efficient for the applications to be dealt with collectively. Such
         objections are likely to be as valid for that category of farmers as for the category of farmers belonging to an integrátor who do not have delivery rights.
      
All the same, even if such objections might be raised against farmers who belong to an integrátor or are members of a group and do not themselves deliver to sugar manufacturers, they would not in any event constitute an
         objective justification for treatment that drew a distinction between those two types of farmer and farmers who deliver to
         the sugar manufacturer themselves.
      
In particular, those objections could not be raised if the conditions laid down for granting a separate payment upon application
         by an intermediary ultimately had the effect of depriving the farmers concerned of entitlement to that payment, for example,
         in circumstances where:
      
–        those farmers, if the intermediary failed to act, would not be allowed to make a direct application for a separate payment
         in its stead;
      
–        submission of an application for a separate payment on behalf of the farmers by an intermediary was conditional upon the intermediary
         itself being eligible under the single area payment scheme, although Article 143ba of Regulation No 1782/makes that requirement
         only in respect of a farmer claiming the separate payment and not in respect of an intermediary representing him.
      
It must therefore be held that a difference in treatment such as the one at issue in the main proceedings is not objectively
         justified.
      
Consequently, the answer to the question referred for a preliminary ruling is that Article 143ba(1) of Regulation No 1782/must be interpreted as precluding national provisions such as those at issue in the main proceedings which exclude from entitlement
         to a separate sugar payment a farmer not having delivery rights who delivers sugar beet to a sugar manufacturer through an
         integrátor which does have such rights, although those provisions grant a separate payment to a farmer having delivery rights who delivers
         sugar beet direct to a sugar manufacturer, and to a farmer not having delivery rights who is a member of a producer group
         which does have delivery rights and who delivers sugar beet to a sugar manufacturer through that group. 
      
In any event, it is for the national court to assess whether it is possible for it to give the national provisions an interpretation
         which is consistent with the relevant Community law.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
Article 143ba(1) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1782/of September establishing common rules for direct support
            schemes under the common agricultural policy and establishing certain support schemes for farmers and amending Regulations
            (EEC) No 2019/93, (EC) No 1452/2001, (EC) No 1453/2001, (EC) No 1454/2001, (EC) No 1868/94, (EC) No 1251/1999, (EC) No 1254/1999,
            (EC) No 1673/2000, (EEC) No 2358/and (EC) No 2529/2001, as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 319/of February
            2006, must be interpreted as precluding national provisions such as those at issue in the main proceedings which exclude from
            entitlement to a separate sugar payment a farmer not having delivery rights who delivers sugar beet to a sugar manufacturer
            through an integrátor which does have such rights, although those provisions grant a separate payment to a farmer having delivery rights who delivers
            sugar beet direct to a sugar manufacturer, and to a farmer not having delivery rights who is a member of a producer group
            which does have delivery rights and who delivers sugar beet to a sugar manufacturer through that group. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Hungarian.
      
Top  
 