
ORDER OF THE COURT (Ninth Chamber)
February (*)
      
(Appeals — Community trade mark — Figurative mark in colour including the word element ‘ARIS’ — Opposition by the proprietor of the Community figurative mark in red and blue including the word elements ‘ARISA ASSURANCES
         S.A.’ — Refusal of registration)
      
In Case C‑370/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on July 2014,
Argo Group International Holdings Ltd, established in Hamilton, Bermuda (United Kingdom), represented by F. Petillion and J. Janssen, advocaten,
      
appellant,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM), 
defendant at first instance,
Arisa Assurances SA, established in Luxembourg (Luxembourg), 
      
intervener at first instance,
THE COURT (Ninth Chamber),
composed of K. Jürimäe, President of the Chamber, M. Safjan (Rapporteur) and A. Prechal, Judges,
Advocate General: M. Szpunar,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the decision taken, after hearing the Advocate General, to give a decision by reasoned order in accordance
         with Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court,
      
makes the following
Order
By its appeal, Argo Group International Holdings Ltd (‘Argo Group’) asks the Court to set aside the judgment of the General
         Court of the European Union in Argo Group International Holdings v OHIM — Arisa Assurances (ARIS), T‑247/12, EU:T:2014:(‘the judgment under appeal’), by which that Court dismissed its action for annulment of the decision
         of the Second Board of Appeal of the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM) of March
         (Case R 193/2011-2) relating to opposition proceedings between Arisa Assurances SA and Argo Group (‘the contested decision’).
      
 Legal context
Article 8(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EC) No 207/of February on the Community trade mark (OJ L 78, p. 1)
         provides:
      
‘1.      Upon opposition by the proprietor of an earlier trade mark, the trade mark applied for shall not be registered:
...
(b)      if because of its identity with, or similarity to, the earlier trade mark and the identity or similarity of the goods or services
         covered by the trade marks there exists a likelihood of confusion on the part of the public in the territory in which the
         earlier trade mark is protected; the likelihood of confusion includes the likelihood of association with the earlier trade
         mark.’
      
 Background to the dispute
On November 2008, Art Risk Insurance and Information Services Corp. (‘Art Risk Insurance and Information Services’) filed
         an application for registration of a Community trade mark with OHIM.
      
Registration as a mark was sought for the following figurative sign:
      
The services in respect of which registration was sought are in Class of the Nice Agreement concerning the International
         Classification of Goods and Services for the Purposes of the Registration of Marks of June 1957, as revised and amended,
         and correspond to the following description: ‘Insurance services; writing title insurance for fine art, cultural artifacts
         [sic], antiquities, and other collectable tangible personal property; financial risk management services for the art and art-associated
         industries, including art museums, art foundations, cultural and non-profit institutions, private collectors, artists, art
         dealers, and art-associated banking, fiduciary, insurance, legal, and non-profit providers; financial risk management services
         in relation to other forms of insurance, including property and casualty insurance for the art and art-associated industries’.
      
Art Risk Insurance and Information Services was already the proprietor of the Community word mark ARIS, registered on September
         2005.
      
On June 2009, Arisa Assurances SA filed a notice of opposition, pursuant to Article of Regulation No 207/2009, to registration
         of the mark at issue in respect of the services referred to in paragraph of this order.
      
That opposition was based on the earlier Community figurative mark reproduced below, which was filed on July and registered
         on January under the number in respect of ‘insurance and reinsurance’ in Class of the Nice Agreement:
      
The ground relied on in support of that opposition was that set out in Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 207/2009.
      
By decision of November 2010, the Opposition Division of OHIM upheld the opposition brought by Arisa Assurances SA and
         rejected the application for registration of the mark at issue.
      
On January 2011, Art Risk Insurance and Information Services filed a notice of appeal against that decision with the Board
         of Appeal of OHIM, pursuant to Articles to of Regulation No 207/2009.
      
On March 2011, Art Risk Insurance and Information Services applied for the transfer of its trade mark application to Argo
         Group. The transfer was entered in the Register of Community trade marks on March 2011.
      
By the contested decision, the Second Board of Appeal of OHIM dismissed the appeal. It reached the same conclusion as the
         Opposition Division, finding that there was a likelihood of confusion and rejecting the contention that the two signs in question
         had coexisted in the European Union.
      
 The procedure before the General Court and the judgment under appeal
On June 2012, Argo Group brought an action for annulment of the contested decision before the General Court. In support
         of that action, it put forward four pleas in law alleging, in essence, infringement of Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation No 207/2009.
      
By the judgment under appeal, the General Court dismissed that action as unfounded.
      
The General Court first of all held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the Second Board of Appeal of OHIM
         had not erred in its definition of the relevant public in the circumstances and nor had it erred as regards the public that
         it took into consideration when assessing the likelihood of confusion.
      
Next, the General Court held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that Argo Group had failed to establish that the
         Second Board of Appeal of OHIM was wrong to find, in the contested decision, that the signs at issue were similar. In that
         regard, the General Court inter alia stated, in paragraph of that judgment, that that Board of Appeal had not erred in
         its determination of the dominant components of the signs at issue and, in paragraphs and of that judgment, that the
         Board of Appeal had carried out an overall assessment of the signs at issue when assessing the phonetic and conceptual similarity
         of those signs.
      
Lastly, the General Court held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the Second Board of Appeal of OHIM had
         been right to conclude that there was a likelihood of confusion and to dismiss the appeal against the decision of the Opposition
         Division of OHIM.
      
 Form of order sought on appeal
By its appeal, Argo Group claims that the Court should, first, set aside the judgment under appeal, secondly, annul the contested
         decision and the decision of the Opposition Division of OHIM of November or, in the alternative, remit the case to
         the General Court and, thirdly, order OHIM to pay the costs.
      
 The appeal
Under Article of its Rules of Procedure, where an appeal is, in whole or in part, manifestly inadmissible or manifestly
         unfounded, the Court of Justice may at any time, acting on a proposal from the Judge-Rapporteur and after hearing the Advocate
         General, decide by reasoned order to dismiss that appeal in whole or in part.
      
It is appropriate to apply that provision to the present case.
      
In support of its appeal, Argo Group puts forward a single ground of appeal alleging infringement of Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation
         No 207/2009, which is divided into five parts.
      
 The first part of the single ground of appeal
The first part of the single ground of appeal is based on the allegedly incorrect application of Article 8(1)(b) of Regulation
         No 207/on account of a misinterpretation of the judgment in Grupo Sada v OHIM — Sadia (GRUPO SADA), T‑31/03, EU:T:2005:169. Argo Group submits that, a correct interpretation of that judgment requires account to be taken
         of the coexistence on the market of the Community word mark ARIS, registered on September 2005, and the earlier Community
         figurative mark ARISA ASSURANCES S.A. in the course of the global assessment of the likelihood of confusion. According to
         Argo Group, that word mark is identical to the figurative mark ARIS and there is no valid reason for not having taken it into
         account. 
      
In that regard, it must be borne in mind that, in accordance with Article TFEU and the first paragraph of Article of
         the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, an appeal lies on points of law only. The General Court thus has
         exclusive jurisdiction to find and appraise the relevant facts and assess the evidence. The appraisal of those facts and the
         assessment of that evidence thus do not, save where the facts and evidence are distorted, constitute a point of law which
         is subject, as such, to review by the Court of Justice on appeal (see, inter alia, order in Cooperativa Vitivinícola Arousana v OHIM, C‑649/P, EU:C:2012:603, paragraph 39). 
      
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the General Court simply reproduced, word for word, the finding in paragraph of the judgment in Grupo Sada v OHIM — Sadia (GRUPO SADA), EU:T:2005:169, without in any way interpreting it. Argo Group is thus, in reality, disputing the appraisal of the facts
         which the General Court carried out in the light of that finding. 
      
It is apparent from a reading of paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal that the General Court carried out, in the
         light of the relevant case-law, an overall assessment of the likelihood of confusion and an analysis relating to the coexistence
         of the earlier marks on the market. Given that the conclusion which the General Court reached, in the light of the evidence
         which it had, is part of the appraisal of the facts and, consequently, falls outside of the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice
         in an appeal (see orders in Royal Appliance International v OHIM, C‑448/P, EU:C:2010:384, paragraph 80, and Yorma’s v OHIM, C‑191/P, EU:C:2012:62, paragraph 53), it is necessary to reject as manifestly inadmissible the first part of the single
         ground of appeal, which, in essence and under the guise of an alleged error of interpretation of an earlier judgment of the
         General Court, calls into question that appraisal of the facts.
      
 The second part of the single ground of appeal
In the context of the second part of the single ground of appeal, Argo Group alleges that the General Court infringed the
         principles of legal certainty and of the protection of legitimate expectations. It submits that, as the figurative mark in
         respect of which registration is sought is a variant of an already existing word mark, the General Court thus failed to have
         regard to Argo Group’s legitimate expectation of being able to use its mark in various forms and using various fonts.
      
In that regard, it is, however, sufficient to note at the outset that, as is apparent from settled case-law, to allow a party
         to put forward for the first time before the Court of Justice a plea in law which it has not raised before the General Court
         would mean allowing that party to bring before the Court, whose jurisdiction in appeals is limited, a wider case than that
         heard by the General Court. In an appeal the Court’s jurisdiction is thus confined to examining the assessment by the General
         Court of the pleas argued before it (see, inter alia, judgment in Dansk Rørindustri and Others v Commission, C‑189/P, C‑202/P, C‑205/P to C‑208/P and C‑213/P, EU:C:2005:408, paragraph 165).
      
It must be stated that, before the General Court, Argo Group did not claim that failure to take into account the alleged coexistence
         of the marks would, in the circumstances of this case, result in infringement of the principles of legal certainty and of
         the protection of legitimate expectations (see, by analogy, Dansk Rørindustri and Others v Commission, EU:C:2005:408, paragraph 166).
      
Consequently, the second part of the single ground of appeal must be rejected as manifestly inadmissible.
      
 The third part of the single ground of appeal
By the third part of the single ground of appeal, Argo Group submits that the judgment under appeal unjustifiably limits the
         harmonious development of economic activities throughout the European Union. In that respect, Argo Group refers to the American
         law principle called ‘Morehouse defense’ to the effect that the relevant public cannot be confused by a mark in respect of
         which registration has been applied for if the trade mark applicant has already previously registered a substantially similar
         mark which has not been challenged by the opponent.
      
As is apparent from Article TFEU and the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice and from
         Articles 168(1)(d) and 169(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, an appeal must indicate precisely the contested
         elements of the judgment which the appellant seeks to have set aside as well as the legal arguments specifically advanced
         in support of the appeal (see judgment in Acino v Commission, C‑269/P, EU:C:2014:255, paragraph and the case-law cited, and order in Zoo Sport v OHIM, C‑676/P, EU:C:2014:2080, paragraph 17).
      
That requirement is not satisfied by a ground of appeal which, without even including an argument specifically identifying
         the error allegedly vitiating the judgment under appeal, merely reproduces arguments previously submitted before the General
         Court. Such a ground of appeal amounts in reality to no more than a request for re-examination of a plea submitted before
         the General Court, which the Court of Justice does not have jurisdiction to undertake (see, inter alia, judgments in Eurocermex v OHIM, C‑286/P, EU:C:2005:422, paragraph 50, and Evropaïki Dynamiki v ECB, C‑401/P, EU:C:2011:370, paragraph 55). 
      
In the present case, Argo Group confines itself, in criticising the judgment under appeal, to reiterating the arguments submitted
         at first instance, which seek to establish why the Community trade mark system should favour the registration, by the proprietor
         of a trade mark, of a similar mark.
      
The fact remains that the General Court responded to those arguments in a full and detailed manner in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal. The General Court inter alia dwelt, in paragraph of that judgment, on the fact that not only
         is the registered word mark ARIS different from the figurative marks at issue, but also that the evidence provided by Argo
         Group concerns only the sign in respect of which registration is applied for and does nothing to indicate the presence of
         that sign on the European Union market; nor does it give any indication of how the relevant public has been exposed to the
         marks at issue on that market.
      
Argo Group does not, in that regard, claim that there is any distortion of the facts and evidence submitted to the General
         Court.
      
Consequently, the third part of the single ground of appeal must be rejected as manifestly inadmissible.
      
 The fourth part of the single ground of appeal
In the context of the fourth part of the single ground of appeal, Argo Group complains, in essence, that the General Court
         distorted the facts by upholding, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the unfounded assessment of the Second Board
         of Appeal of OHIM that the relevant public would not take the elements ‘assurances’ or ‘s.a.’ in the earlier mark into account
         when comparing the signs at issue.
      
In accordance with the settled case-law of the Court of Justice, a distortion of the facts must be obvious from the documents
         on the Court’s file, without there being any need to carry out a new assessment of the facts and the evidence (judgments in
         General Motors v Commission, C‑551/P, EU:C:2006:229, paragraph 54, and Viega v Commission, C‑276/P, EU:C:2013:163, paragraph 30).
      
That is demonstrably not true of the assessment referred to in paragraph of the present order, by which the General Court
         did not carry out any distortion which is apparent from the documents on the Court’s file; the fourth part of the ground of
         appeal in actual fact simply seeks, in the present case, to have the Court of Justice substitute its own appraisal of the
         facts for that carried out by the General Court.
      
The fourth part of the single ground of appeal must therefore be rejected as manifestly unfounded.
      
 The fifth part of the single ground of appeal
By the fifth part of the single ground of appeal, Argo Group submits that the judgment under appeal is vitiated by a failure
         to state reasons inasmuch as it is not apparent from that judgment for what reason, other than an erroneous interpretation
         of the judgment in Grupo Sada v OHIM — Sadia (GRUPO SADA), EU:T:2005:169, the coexistence of the word mark ‘ARIS’ should not be taken into account.
      
In that regard, it is sufficient to point out that, as has been stated in paragraph of the present order, the General Court,
         first, concluded after a detailed assessment that the registered word mark ARIS is different from the figurative marks at
         issue and, secondly, held that the evidence provided by Argo Group does nothing to indicate the presence on the European Union
         market of the sign in respect of which registration is sought and fails to give any indication of how the relevant public
         has been exposed to the marks at issue on that market.
      
In so doing, the General Court set out to the requisite legal standard the reasons why it considered that there was no need
         to take the alleged coexistence of that word mark into account in the present case.
      
The fact that the General Court arrived at a different conclusion from the appellant cannot in itself vitiate the judgment
         under appeal for failure to state reasons (see, to that effect, judgment in Gogos v Commission, C‑583/P, EU:C:2010:287, paragraph 35).
      
In view of the foregoing considerations, the fifth part of the single ground of appeal must be rejected as manifestly unfounded.
      
It follows from all of the foregoing that the appeal must be dismissed as, in part, manifestly inadmissible and, in part,
         manifestly unfounded.
      
 Costs
Under Article of the Rules of Procedure, applicable to the procedure on appeal pursuant to Article 184(1) of those rules,
         a decision as to costs is to be given in the order which closes the proceedings.
      
As the present order has been adopted prior to notification of the appeal to the defendant at first instance and, therefore,
         before the latter has incurred costs, it is appropriate to decide that the appellant must bear its own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Ninth Chamber) hereby orders:
1.      The appeal is dismissed. 
2.      Argo Group International Holdings Ltd shall bear its own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 