
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Eighth Chamber)
September (*)
      
(Appeals — Agriculture — Common organisation of the markets — Fruit and vegetable sector — Regulation (EC) No 1580/— Article 52(2a) — Implementing Regulation (EU) No 543/— Articles 50(3) and 60(7) — Aid to producer organisations — Products processed from fruit and vegetables — Flat rate covering certain processing operations — Eligibility of investments and actions connected with the processing — Actions for annulment — Admissibility — Whether directly concerned)
In Joined Cases C‑455/P, C‑457/P and C‑460/P,
THREE APPEALS under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on August and August
         2013,
      
Confederazione Cooperative Italiane, established in Rome (Italy), 
      
Cooperativas Agro-Alimentarias, established in Madrid (Spain),
      
Fédération française de la coopération fruitière, légumière and horticole (Felcoop), established in Paris (France),
      
represented by M. Merola and C. Santacroce, avvocati,
appellants in Case C‑455/P,
European Commission, represented by K. Skelly, A. Marcoulli and B. Schima, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
appellant in Case C‑457/P
supported by:
French Republic, represented by D. Colas and C. Candat, acting as Agents,
      
Sociedad Cooperativa de Exportación de Frutos Cítricos Anecoop (Anecoop) S. Coop., established in Valencia (Spain),
      
Cooperativa Agrícola Nuestra Señora del Oreto (CANSO) Coop. V., established in Valencia,
      
Cooperativa Agrícola «Sant Bernat» (Carlet) Coop. V., established in Valencia,
      
Cooperativa Agrícola SCJ (COPAL) Coop. V., established in Valencia,
      
Grupo AN S. Coop., established in Navarra (Spain),
      
Acopaex S. Coop., established in Badajoz (Spain),
      
Las Marismas de Lebrija Sociedad Cooperativa Andaluza (Las Marismas), established in Seville (Spain),
      
Associació de Cooperatives Agràries de les Terres de Lleida (ACTEL), established in Lleida (Spain),
      
Unió Corporació Alimentária (UNIO) SCCL, established in Reus (Spain),
      
Union Coopérative Agricole France Prune (France Prune), established in Casseneuil (France),
      
Agrial SCA, established in Caen (France), 
      
Triskalia, established in Landerneau (France),
      
Union Fermière Morbihannaise (UFM), established in Locminé (France),
      
VOG Products Soc. agr. coop., established in Laives (Italy),
      
Consorzio Padano Ortofrutticolo (CO.PAD.OR.) Soc. agr. coop., established in Collecchio (Italy),
      
Consorzio Casalasco del Pomodoro Soc. agr. coop., established in Rivarolo del Re (Italy),
      
Agricoltori Riuniti Piacentini (ARP) Soc. agr. coop., established in Gariga di Podenzano (Italy),
      
Orogel Fresco Soc. agr. coop., established in Pievesestina di Cesena (Italy),
      
Conserve Italia Soc. agr. coop., established in San Lazzaro di Savena (Italy),
      
Fruttagel Soc. agr. coop., established in Alfonsine (Italy),
      
represented by M. Merola and C. Santacroce, avvocati,
Unione Nazionale tra le Organizzazioni di Produttori Ortofrutticoli, Agrumari e di Frutta in Guscio (Unaproa), established in Rome, represented initially by S. Crisci and subsequently by G. Coppo, avvocati,
      
interveners,
Italian Republic, represented by G. Palmieri, acting as Agent, and S. Varone, avvocato dello Stato, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
appellant in Case C‑460/P,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
Associazione Nazionale degli Industriali delle Conserve Alimentari Vegetali (Anicav), established in Naples (Italy), represented by S. Estima Martins and R. Oliveira, advogados,
      
applicant at first instance in Case T‑454/10,
Agrupación Española de Fabricantes de Conservas Vegetales (Agrucon), established in Madrid,
      
Associazione Italiana Industrie Prodotti Alimentari (AIIPA), established in Milan (Italy), 
      
Associazione Nazionale degli Industriali delle Conserve Alimentari Vegetali (Anicav), established in Naples, 
      
Campil-Agro-Industrial do Campo do Tejo Lda, established in Pontével (Portugal), 
      
Evropaïka Trofima AE, established in Larissa (Greece), 
      
FIT — Fomento da Indústria do Tomate SA, established in Marateca (Portugal), 
      
Konservopoiia Oporokipeftikon Filippos AE, established in Imathia (Greece), 
      
Panellinia Enosi Konservopoion, established in Athens (Greece), 
      
Elliniki Etairia Konservon AE, established in Nafplio (Greece), 
      
Anonimos Viomichaniki Etairia Konservon D. Nomikos, established in Athens, 
      
Italagro — Indústria de Transformação de Produtos Alimentares SA, established in Castanheira do Ribatejo (Portugal), 
      
Kopaïs AVEE Trofimon & Poton, established in Athens, 
      
Serraïki Konservopoiia Oporokipeftikon Serko AE, established in Serres (Greece), 
      
Sociedade de Industrialização de Produtos Agrícolas — Sopragol SA, established in Mora (Portugal), 
      
Sugalidal — Indústrias de Alimentação SA, established in Benavente (Portugal), 
      
Sutol — Indústrias Alimentares Lda, established in Alcácer do Sal (Portugal), 
      
ZANAE Zymai Artopoiias Nikoglou AE Viomichania Emporio Trofimon, established in Sindos (Greece),
      
represented by S. Estima Martins and R. Oliveira, advogados,
applicants at first instance in Case T‑482/11,
Associazione Italiana Industrie Prodotti Alimentari (AIIPA), established in Milan,
      
Agrupación Española de Fabricantes de Conservas Vegetales (Agrucon), established in Madrid, 
      
AIT — Associação dos Industriais de Tomate, established in Lisbon (Portugal), 
      
Panellinia Enosi Konservopoion, established in Athens, 
      
Kopaïs AVEE Trofimon & Poton, established in Athens, 
      
Evropaïka Trofima AE, established in Larissa, 
      
Konservopoiia Oporokipeftikon Filippos AE, established in Imathia, 
      
Anonimos Viomichaniki Etairia Konservon D. Nomikos, established in Athens, 
      
Serraïki Konservopoiia Oporokipeftikon Serko AE, established in Serres, 
      
Elliniki Etaireia Konservon AE, established in Nafplio, 
      
ZANAE Zymai Artopoiias Nikoglou AE Viomichania Emporio Trofimon, established in Sindos,
      
represented by S. Estima Martins and R. Oliveira, advogados,
interveners at first instance in Case T‑454/10,
Confederazione Cooperative Italiane, established in Rome,
      
Cooperativas Agro-Alimentarias, established in Madrid, 
      
Fédération française de la coopération fruitière, légumière and horticole (Felcoop), established in Paris, 
      
VOG Products Soc. agr. coop., established in Laives, 
      
Consorzio Padano Ortofrutticolo (CO.PAD.OR.) Soc. agr. coop., established in Collecchio, 
      
Consorzio Casalasco del Pomodoro Soc. agr. coop., established in Rivarolo del Re, 
      
ARP Agricoltori Riuniti Piacentini Soc. agr. coop., established in Podenzano, 
      
Orogel Fresco Soc. agr. coop., established in Cesena, 
      
Conserve Italia Soc. agr. coop., established in San Lazzaro di Savena,
      
interveners at first instance in Cases T‑454/and T-482/11,
THE COURT (Eighth Chamber),
composed of A. Ó Caoimh, President of the Chamber, E. Jarašiūnas (Rapporteur) and C.G. Fernlund, Judges,
Advocate General: N. Wahl,
Registrar: I. Illéssy, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on June 2015,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By their appeals, Confederazione Cooperative Italiane, Cooperativas Agro-Alimentarias, Fédération française de la coopération
         fruitière, légumière et horticole (Felcoop), the European Commission and the Italian Republic seek the annulment of the judgment
         of the General Court of the European Union in Anicav and Others v Commission (T‑454/and T‑482/11, EU:T:2013:282; ‘the judgment under appeal’), by which that Court annulled the second subparagraph
         of Article 52(2a) of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1580/of December laying down implementing rules of Council
         Regulations (EC) No 2200/96, (EC) No 2201/and (EC) No 1182/in the fruit and vegetable sector (OJ L 350, p. 1),
         as amended by Commission Regulation (EU) No 687/of July (OJ L 199, p. 12; ‘Regulation No 1580/2007’), and
         Article 50(3) of Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 543/of June laying down detailed rules for the application
         of Council Regulation (EC) No 1234/in respect of the fruit and vegetables and processed fruit and vegetables sectors
         (OJ L 157, p. 1), in so far as those articles provide that the value of ‘non-genuine processing activities’ is to be
         included in the value of marketed production (VMP) of fruit and vegetables intended for processing, and also annulled Article 60(7)
         of Regulation No 543/2011. 
      
 Legal context
Council Regulation (EC) No 1234/of October establishing a common organisation of agricultural markets and on
         specific provisions for certain agricultural products (‘Single CMO’ Regulation) (OJ L 299, p. 1), as amended by Council
         Regulation No 361/of April (OJ L 121, p. 1; ‘the “Single CMO” Regulation’) applies, pursuant to its Article 1(1)(i)
         and (j) respectively, to the fruit and vegetables sector and the processed fruit and vegetables sector. 
      
Regulation No 361/incorporated into Regulation No 1234/certain provisions of Council Regulation (EC) No 1182/of September laying down specific rules as regards the fruit and vegetable sector, amending Directives 2001/112/EC
         and 2001/113/EC and Regulations (EEC) No 827/68, (EC) No 2200/96, (EC) No 2201/96, (EC) No 2826/2000, (EC) No 1782/and
         (EC) No 318/and repealing Regulation (EC) No 2202/(OJ L 273, p. 1). It thus inserted into Regulation No 1234/Section IVa, entitled ‘Aid in the fruit and vegetables sector’, of Chapter IV of Title I of Part II of that regulation, which
         includes Articles 103a to 103h. 
      
Under Article 103b of the ‘Single CMO’ Regulation: 
      
‘1.      Producer organisations in the fruit and vegetables sector may set up an operational fund. The fund shall be financed by: 
(a)      financial contributions of members or of the producer organisation itself; 
(b)      Community financial assistance which may be granted to producer organisations. 
2.      Operational funds shall be used only to finance operational programmes approved by Member States in accordance with Article 103g.’
Article 103c of the ‘Single CMO’ Regulation provides:
      
‘1.      Operational programmes in the fruit and vegetables sector shall have two or more of the objectives referred to in Article 122(c)
         or of the following objectives: 
      
…
(b)      improvement of product quality; 
(c)      boosting products’ commercial value; 
(d)      promotion of the products, whether in a fresh or processed form; 
…’
According to Article 103d(2) of the ‘Single CMO’ Regulation, the Community financial assistance is to be capped at 4.1% of
         the VMP of each producer organisation, but may attain 4.6% of that value, provided that the amount in excess of 4.1% is used
         solely for crisis prevention and management measures.
      
Article 103f(2) of the ‘Single CMO’ Regulation provides that Member States are to establish a national strategy for sustainable
         operational programmes in the fruit and vegetable market and states the elements which that strategy must include.
      
Article of the ‘Single CMO’ Regulation, which concerns the producer organisations, provides:
      
‘Member States shall recognise producer organisations, which: 
(a)      are constituted by producers of one of the following sectors: 
…
(iii) fruit and vegetables in respect of farmers growing one or more products of that sector and/or of such products solely intended
         for processing 
      
…
(b)      are formed on the initiative of the producers; 
(c)      pursue a specific aim which may in particular, or as regards the fruit and vegetables sector shall, include one or more of
         the following objectives:
      
(i)      ensuring that production is planned and adjusted to demand, particularly in terms of quality and quantity 
(ii)      concentration of supply and the placing on the market of the products produced by its members; 
(iii) optimising production costs and stabilising producer prices. 
…’
Regulation (EEC) No 1580/2007, in its initial version, laid down detailed rules for the application of Regulation No 1182/2007.
         Article 52(1) and (6) thereof provided in particular that the VMP of a producer organisation is to be calculated ‘on the basis
         of the production of members of producer organisations, for which the producer organisation is recognised’ and that the marketed
         production shall be invoiced at the ‘ex-producer organisation’ stage, where applicable, as product which is packaged, prepared,
         or has undergone first-stage processing. That regulation was amended by Regulation No 687/2010, recital in the preamble
         to which states: 
      
‘The calculation of the value of fruit and vegetables intended for processing has proven difficult. For control purposes and
         for the sake of simplification, it is appropriate to introduce a flat rate for the purposes of calculating the value of fruit
         and vegetables intended for processing, representing the value of the basic product, namely fruit and vegetables intended
         for processing, and activities which do not amount to genuine processing activities. Since the volumes of fruit and vegetables
         needed for the production of processed fruit and vegetables differ largely between groups of products, those differences should
         be reflected in the applicable flat rates.’
      
Thus, Article 52(2a) of Regulation No 1580/provides:
      
‘The [VMP] shall not include the value of processed fruit and vegetables or any other product that is not a product of the
         fruit and vegetables sector. 
      
However, the [VMP] of fruit and vegetables intended for processing, which have been transformed into one of the processed
         fruit and vegetables listed in Part X of Annex I to [the ‘Single CMO’ Regulation] or any other agricultural product referred
         to in this Article and described further in Annex VIa to this Regulation, by either a producer organisation, an association
         of producer organisations or their members, who are producers or their cooperatives, or subsidiaries as referred to in paragraph of this Article, either by themselves or through outsourcing, shall be calculated as a flat rate in percentage applied to
         the invoiced value of those processed products. 
      
That flat rate shall be: 
(a)      53% for fruit juices; 
(b)      73% for concentrated juices; 
(c)      77% for tomato concentrate; 
(d)      62% for frozen fruit and vegetables; 
(e)      48% for canned fruit and vegetables; 
(f)      70% for canned mushrooms of the genus Agaricus;
      
(g)      81% for fruits provisionally preserved in brine; 
(h)      81% for dried fruits; 
(i)      27% for other processed fruit and vegetables; 
(j)      12% for processed aromatic herbs; 
(k)      41% for paprika powder.’
Annex VIII to Regulation No 1580/contains the list of operations and expenditure not eligible under the operational programmes.
         
      
Regulation No 1580/has been repealed and replaced by Implementing Regulation No 543/2011, Article 50(3) of which repeats
         the text of Article 52(2a) of Regulation No 1580/2007. 
      
Article 60(7) of Implementing Regulation No 543/provides:
      
‘Investments and actions related to the transformation of fruit and vegetables into processed fruit and vegetables may be
         eligible for support where such investments and actions pursue the objectives referred to in Article 103c(1) of [the ‘Single
         CMO’ Regulation], including those referred to in point (c) of the first paragraph of Article of that Regulation, and provided
         that they are identified in the national strategy referred to in Article 103f(2) of [the “Single CMO” Regulation].’ 
      
 The proceedings before the General Court and the judgment under appeal
By application lodged at the Registry of the General Court on September 2010, the Associazione Nazionale degli Industriali
         delle Conserve Alimentari Vegetali (Anicav) brought the action in Case T‑454/10. By application lodged at the Registry of
         the General Court on September 2011, Agrupación Española de Fabricantes de Conservas Vegetales (Agrucon), Associazione Italiana
         Industrie Prodotti Alimentari (AIIPA), Anicav, Campil-Agro-Industrial do Campo do Tejo Lda, Evropaïka Trofima AE, FIT — Fomento da Indústria do Tomate SA, Konservopoiia Oporokipeftikon Filippos AE, Panellinia Enosi Konservopoion, Elliniki Etairia Konservon AE, Anonymos Viomichaniki Etaireia Konservon D. Nomikos, Italagro — Indústria de Transformação de Produtos Alimentares SA, Kopaïs AVEE Trofimon & Poton, Serraïki Konservopoiia Oporokipeftikon Serko AE, Sociedade de Industrialização de Produtos Agrícolas — Sopragol SA, Sugalidal — Indústrias de Alimentação SA, Sutol — Indústrias Alimentares Lda and ZANAE Zymai Artopoiias Nikoglou AE Viomichania Emporio Trofimonont (‘Agrucon and Others’)
         brought the action in Case T‑482/11.
      
By five documents lodged at the Registry of the General Court on and January 2011, AIIPA, Agrucon, AIT – Associação dos Industriais de Tomate, Panellinia Enosi Konservopoion, Kopaïs AVEE Trofimon & Poton, Evropaïka Trofima AE, Konservopoiia Oporokipeftikon Filippos AE, Anonymos Viomichaniki Etaireia Konservon D. Nomikos, Serraïki Konservopoiia Oporokipeftikon Serko AE, Elliniki Etaireia Konservon AE and ZANAE Zymai Artopoiias Nikoglou AE Viomichania
         Emporio Trofimon (‘AIIPA and Others’) sought leave to intervene in Case T‑454/in support of the form of order sought by
         Anicav while, by four documents lodged at the Registry of the General Court on January 2011, Confederazione Cooperative
         Italiane, Cooperativas Agro-Alimentarias, Felcoop, VOG Products Soc. agr. coop., Consorzio Padano Ortofrutticolo (CO.PAD.OR.) Soc. agr. coop., Consorzio Casalasco del Pomodoro Soc. agr. coop., ARP Agricoltori Riuniti Piacentini Soc. agr. coop., Orogel Fresco Soc. agr. coop. and Conserve Italia Soc. agr. coop. (‘Confederazione Cooperative Italiane and Others’) sought
         leave to intervene in the same case in support of the form of order sought by the Commission. 
      
By two documents lodged at the Registry of the General Court on December 2011, the interveners in support of the form of
         order sought by the Commission in Case T-450/also sought leave to intervene in Case T‑482/11. 
      
By order of the President of the Second Chamber of the General Court of October 2012, Cases C‑454/and C‑482/were
         joined for the purposes of the written and oral procedure and of the judgment. 
      
In Case T‑454/10, Anicav and AIIPA and Others sought the annulment of Article of and Annex VIII to Regulation No 1580/2007,
         as amended by Regulation No 687/2010. 
      
In Case T‑482/11, Agrucon and Others sought the annulment of Articles 50(3) and 60(7) of Implementing Regulation No 543/2011.
      
In both cases, the Commission and the interveners supporting it contended that the actions should be dismissed as inadmissible
         and, in any event, as unfounded. 
      
In the judgment under appeal, the General Court, firstly, rejected the Commission’s pleas of an absolute bar on proceedings
         and seeking to have the actions brought in Cases T‑454/and T‑482/declared inadmissible on the basis of the applicants’
         lack of standing to bring proceedings and, in Case T‑454/10, Anicav’s lack of legal interest in bringing proceedings.
      
With regard to the standing to bring proceedings of the applicants at first instance, the Commission argued that those parties
         were not directly concerned, within the meaning of the fourth paragraph of Article TFEU, by Article 52(2a) of Regulation
         No 1580/nor by Articles 50(3) and 60(7) of Implementing Regulation No 543/(‘the contested provisions’), and the
         General Court, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, considered that those provisions introduced a system under
         which producer organisations were eligible to receive aid covering processing activities also carried out by processors which
         were not members of a producer organisation, that those provisions did not leave any margin of discretion to the Member States
         and that the competitive position of the applicants and their members was the direct result of those provisions, so that they
         were directly concerned thereby. 
      
Finding, moreover, that Regulation No 1580/and Implementing Regulation No 543/were regulatory acts within the meaning
         of the fourth paragraph of Article TFEU, the General Court took the view that the contested provisions do not entail implementing
         measures, noting that although the payment of EU aid under those provisions was made through the national authorities, the
         fact remained that the instruments pursuant to which those authorities made the payments in question did not refer to the
         applicants at first instance and were neither addressed to nor served upon them, and that the applicable national rules did
         not necessarily provide for the adoption of acts capable of being challenged before the national courts. 
      
Secondly, on the substance, the General Court upheld the first two pleas in law raised by the applicants at first instance,
         which it examined together, alleging, respectively, infringement of the ‘Single CMO’ Regulation and of the principle of non-discrimination,
         and by which the applicants at first instance argued that, on the one hand, the possibility of granting aid under the operational
         programmes for processing activities was not provided for under that regulation and, on the other, the contested provisions
         were discriminatory since they restricted aid for processing activities to producer organisations and thus excluded processors
         which were not members of such organisations.
      
Accordingly, the General Court held that the effects produced by the second subparagraph of Article 52(2)a of Regulation No 1580/and Article 50(3) of Implementing Regulation No 543/on the relations between the Commission, the Member States and the
         producer organisations were to be maintained to the extent only that payments to producer organisations executed pursuant
         to those provisions since the entry into force of Regulation No 687/and until delivery of this judgment were to be considered
         definitive. However, it did not maintain the effects of Article 60(7) of Implementing Regulation No 543/on the ground
         that the funding relating to that provision was by its nature vitiated in its entirety by the illegality found. 
      
 Procedure before the Court and the forms of order sought by the parties
By orders of the President of the Court of Justice of March and July 2014, the French Republic, Sociedad Cooperativa de
         Exportación de Frutos Cítricos Anecoop (Anecoop) S. coop., Cooperativa Agrícola Nuestra Señora del Oreto (CANSO) Coop. V., Cooperativa Agrícola «Sant Bernat» (Carlet) Coop. V., Cooperativa Agrícola SCJ (COPAL) Coop. V., le Grupo AN S. Coop., Acopaex S. Coop., Las Marismas de Lebrija Sociedad Cooperativa Andaluza (Las Marismas), Associació de Cooperatives Agràries de les Terres de Lleida (ACTEL), Unió Corporació Alimentária (UNIO) SCCL, Union Coopérative Agricole France Prune (France Prune), Agrial SCA, Triskalia, Union Fermière Morbihannaise (UFM), VOG Products Soc. agr. coop., Consorzio Padano Ortofrutticolo (CO.PAD.OR.) Soc. agr. coop., Consorzio Casalasco del Pomodoro Soc. agr. coop., Agricoltori Riuniti Piacentini (ARP) Soc. agr. coop., Orogel Fresco Soc. agr. coop., Conserve Italia Soc. agr. coop., Fruttagel Soc. agr. coop. (‘Anecoop and Others’) and Unione
         Nazionale tra le Organizzazioni di Produttori Ortofrutticoli, Agrumari e di Frutta in Guscio (Unaproa) were granted leave
         to intervene in Case C‑457/P in support of the form of order sought by the Commission. 
      
After hearing the parties and the Advocate General, the Court decided to join Cases C‑455/P, C‑457/P and C‑460/P
         for the purposes of the oral procedure and the judgment, in accordance with Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court
         of Justice. 
      
Confederazione Cooperative Italiane, Cooperativas Agro-Alimentarias, Felcoop, the Commission, supported by the French Republic,
         Anecoop and Others and Unaproa, and the Italian Republic (‘the appellants’) request the Court to set aside the judgment under
         appeal and, with the exception of the French Republic, seek an order that the applicants at first instance be ordered to pay
         the costs. 
      
Confederazione Cooperative Italiane, Cooperativas Agro-Alimentarias, Felcoop, the Commission and the parties intervening in
         support of it in Case C‑457/P also request the Court to give final ruling in the dispute by declaring that the actions
         in Cases T‑454/and T‑482/were inadmissible. In the alternative, were those actions to be held to be admissible, they
         request that the judgment under appeal be set aside and the action referred back to the General Court for judgment and, in
         the further alternative, the setting aside of all or part of the judgment under appeal as regards the effects of the annulment
         pronounced. 
      
Anicav, Agrucon and Others and AIIPA and Others (‘the other parties to the appeal’) contend that the appeal should be dismissed
         and seek an order that the appellants pay the costs. 
      
 The appeal
 The standing of the applicants at first instance to bring proceedings
 Arguments of the parties
The appellants argue that the General Court erred in law by holding that the actions for annulment brought by the applicants
         at first instance were admissible under the fourth paragraph of Article TFEU. 
      
Confederazione Cooperative Italiane, Cooperativas Agro-Alimentarias, Felcoop and Anecoop and Others submit, first of all,
         that the General Court incorrectly interpreted the contested provisions, leading to an incorrect application of the fourth
         and sixth paragraphs of Article TFEU. The aid scheme in question and the alleged discrimination between the industrial
         processors of fruit and vegetables and the producer organisations active in processing activities does not follow from the
         contested provisions, but from the ‘Single CMO’ Regulation providing for the funding of the operations programmes of those
         organisations. Thus, by their actions, the applicants at first instance seek in reality to challenge a legislative act without
         having the standing to do so, by circumventing the time-limit set in the sixth paragraph of Article TFEU. 
      
Next, concerning whether the applicants at first instance are directly concerned by the contested provisions, Confederazione
         Cooperative Italiane, Cooperativas Agro-Alimentarias and Felcoop are of the opinion that the General Court wrongly confirmed
         that those provisions had directly caused a competitive disadvantage for the industrial processors of fruit and vegetables
         as against the producer organisations, while the provisions on the flat rates do not establish an aid scheme, but merely regulate
         a technical aspect of the pre-existing aid scheme, namely the method for calculation of the VMP of the producer organisations,
         and do not alter the legal situation of the processors. Similarly, the eligibility of investments and actions connected with
         the processing of fruit and vegetables is not a consequence of Article 60(7) of Implementing Regulation No 543/2011, but follows
         from the basic choice to grant effective support to the producer organisations which the EU legislature made in the ‘Single
         CMO’ Regulation. Thus, processors of fruit and vegetables fall entirely outside the scope of the contested provisions. 
      
Furthermore, the appellants are of the opinion that the General Court erred in law in assimilating the position of the applicants
         at first instance to that of a competitor of a State aid recipient when competition law cannot be applied to the aid schemes
         which form the very essence of the Common Agricultural Policy. The Commission and Unaproa also note, in that regard, that
         the aid management rules in the fruit and vegetables sector by virtue of the ‘Single CMO’ Regulation are not specific in nature
         but are of general application. 
      
In the submission of Confederazione Cooperative Italiane, Cooperativas Agro-Alimentarias, Felcoop, the French Republic, Anecoop
         and Others and Unaproa, the General Court was also incorrect in considering that the contested provisions left no margin of
         discretion to the Member States. In fact, the Member States and the competent local authorities are not deprived of their
         discretion to calculate the VMP and the eligibility of investments and actions connected with the processing of fruit and
         vegetables for aid paid under an operational programme is not purely automatic, since such investments and actions must be
         identified in the national strategy. 
      
Finally, according to the appellants, the General Court similarly erred in law in holding that the contested provisions do
         not contain any implementing measures, although those provisions, forming part of the general system implementing the rules
         on the operational funds and operations programmes of the producer organisations in the fruit and vegetables sector provided
         for in the ‘Single CMO’ Regulation, presuppose, for their implementation, that the national authorities approve the draft
         operational programmes notified by those producer organisations after having, inter alia, checked the provisional calculation
         of the VMP, that those organisations make an application for aid and provide supporting documents and that an act approving
         the amount of the aid is adopted. With regard, more particularly, to the eligibility of the investments and actions, they
         add that the selection thereof is entirely entrusted to the national authorities. 
      
Since the participants in the hearing had been requested by the Court to focus their oral arguments on the main points to
         be drawn from the judgment in T & L Sugars and Sidul Açúcares v Commission (C‑456/P, EU:C:2015:284), delivered on April 2015, the appellants submitted in particular that that judgment confirmed
         that the applicants at first instance, as industrial processors of fruit and vegetables, could not be regarded as being directly
         concerned by the contested provisions, since those provisions did not affect their legal position. According to them, it follows
         from that judgment that the competitive disadvantage alleged is, at most, only a factual consequence of those provisions and
         that the case-law in State aid matters cannot be applied by analogy to aids under the Common Agricultural Policy. 
      
The other parties to the appeal, first of all contesting the allegation that they are indirectly disputing the ‘Single CMO’
         Regulation, state that they are not challenging the choice made by the legislature in that regulation to distinguish between
         the fresh fruit and vegetables sector and the processed fruit and vegetables sector and to allow the grant of aid only to
         the first of those sectors. However, they do contest the fact that the producer organisations receive EU aid for activities
         falling within the processed fruit and vegetables sector, in breach of the ‘Single CMO’ Regulation.
      
They argue, next, that the contested provisions do concern them directly since, by allowing the inclusion of activities known
         as ‘non-genuine processing activities’ in the VMP and the eligibility of the investments and action connected with the processing
         activities carried out by the producer organisations for aid, the legal position of the industrial processors defined by the
         ‘Single CMO’ Regulation has been significantly altered, since they are placed at a competitive disadvantage. 
      
They add that the rules on the flat rates and the eligibility of the investments and action connected with processing activities
         leave no margin of discretion to the Member States, since the rules on those rates must be directly and fully followed by
         the Member States and the possibility that the national authorities may decide not to include processing activities in the
         list of eligible expenditure is purely theoretical.
      
Finally, the other parties to the appeal state, with regard to the lack of implementing measures, that the national procedures
         are not implementing measures of Article 52(2a) of Regulation No 1580/or of Article 50(3) of Implementing Regulation
         No 543/2011, but mere administrative procedures followed by the national authorities which act as intermediary for the payment
         of the aid. The rules for calculation of the aid are, for their part, clearly set out in those regulations and, as such, are
         directly applicable, without the need for implementing measures. Similarly, the national strategies are not implementing measures
         of Article 60(7) of Implementing Regulation No 543/2011, but rather implementing measures of Article 103f(2) of the ‘Single
         CMO’ Regulation. Their aim is not to declare the investments and actions connected with processing activities eligible for
         EU aid. 
      
In any event, the contested provisions, in their view, adversely affect their rights without needing or even permitting any
         implementing measures from the EU or the Member States to have that effect. The specific measures adopted in that context
         concern only the producer organisations and not the processors who cannot challenge them or even have knowledge of them. 
      
At the hearing, the other parties to the appeal submitted in particular that the present case can be distinguished from that
         which gave rise to the judgment in T & L Sugars and Sidul Açúcares v Commission (C‑456/P, EU:C:2015:284) in that the present case concerns the same activity, using the same raw materials and producing
         the same products. Moreover, since, in their view, the contested provisions run counter to the ‘Single CMO’ Regulation, there
         is no reason not to assess the fact of being directly concerned as in State aid matters.
      
 Findings of the Court
By their actions, the applicants at first instance sought the annulment of Article 52(2a) of Regulation No 1580/and of
         Article 50(3) of Implementing Regulation No 543/which fix the flat rates applicable to various categories of fruit and
         vegetables enabling the calculation of the VMP of fruit and vegetables intended for processing which were processed by the
         producer organisations, which VMP is used to ascertain the amount of Community financial aid which may be granted to the producer
         organisations to fund the operational programmes approved by the Member States. In addition, they sought the annulment of
         Article 60(7) of Implementing Regulation No 543/by virtue of which the investments and actions connected with the processing
         of fruit and vegetables into processed fruit and vegetables eligible for aid if they pursue the objectives of the operational
         programmes and have been identified in the national strategy. 
      
In order to hold that the applicants at first instance were directly concerned, for the purpose of final limb of the fourth
         paragraph of Article TFEU, by the contested provisions,, the General Court, after having taken the view that those provisions
         did not leave any discretion to the Member States, stated as follows: 
      
‘As regards the Commission’s argument that the competitive disadvantage stemming from the contested provisions for the applicants
         [at first instance] and their members is an indirect factual consequence, it must be pointed out that the effect on the competitive
         position of [those] applicants and of their members results directly from the specific flat rates laid down in Article 52(2)a
         of Regulation No 1580/and in Article 50(3) of Implementing Regulation No 543/and from the eligibility of investments
         and actions related to the transformation of fruit and vegetables for European Union funding under Article 60(7) of Regulation
         No 543/2011, so that the contested provisions are of direct concern to the applicants and their members (see, to that effect,
         the judgment of the General Court of July in Métropole télévision and Others v Commission, T‑528/93, T‑542/93, T‑543/and T‑546/[EU:T:1996:99], paragraph 64). 
      
Moreover, the Commission’s interpretation of the meaning of direct concern would prevent any individual from seeking the annulment
         of an act whose object is the payment of aid to his competitors, since the associated disadvantage would be merely an indirect
         factual consequence. If, by virtue of settled case-law, it is established that the competitor of an aid recipient is directly
         concerned by a Commission decision authorising a Member State to pay that aid where the intention of that State to make such
         payment is not in doubt (see, to that effect, judgments of the General Court of April in AAC and Others v Commission, T‑442/[EU:T:1995:80], paragraphs and 46; ASPEC and Others v Commission, T‑435/[EU:T:1995:79], paragraphs and 61; and Skibsværftsforeningen and Others v Commission, T‑266/[EU:T:1996:153], paragraph 49), a provision of EU law which provides for the grant of aid by the European Union
         itself is a fortiori likely to be of direct concern within the meaning of the fourth paragraph of Article TFEU to the competitor of the recipient
         of that aid.’ 
      
In that regard, it must be borne in mind that, in accordance with the settled case-law of the Court of Justice, the condition
         that the contested decision must be of direct concern to a natural or legal person, as laid down in the fourth paragraph of
         Article TFEU, requires that the contested EU measure must directly affect the legal situation of the individual and leave
         no discretion to its addressees responsible for implementing it, such implementation being purely automatic and resulting
         from EU rules without the application of other intermediate rules (see judgments in Glencore Grain v Commission, C‑404/P, EU:C:1998:196, paragraph 41; Front national v Parliament, C‑486/P, EU:C:2004:394, paragraph 34; Commission v Ente per le Ville Vesuviane and Ente per le Ville Vesuviane v Commission, C‑445/P and C‑455/P, EU:C:2009:529, paragraph 45, and Stichting Woonpunt and Others v Commission, C‑132/P, EU:C:2014:100, paragraph 68).
      
In the judgment in T & L Sugars and Sidul Açúcares v Commission (C‑456/P, EU:C:2015:284), the Court held that undertakings engaged in the refining of imported cane sugar were not directly
         concerned by two Commission regulations, of which they sought the annulment, which allowed EU producers to market a limited
         quantity of out-of-quota sugar and isoglucose. In paragraph of that judgment, the Court noted that ‘since the appellants
         [in that case did] not have the status of producers of sugar and their legal situation [was] not directly affected by those
         regulations, those regulations [were] not of direct concern to them within the meaning of the final limb of the fourth paragraph
         of Article TFEU’. 
      
The position of the applicants at first instance in the present case in relation to the contested provisions is analogous
         to that of the applicants in the case which gave rise to that judgment in relation to those two regulations. Since they are
         not producers of fruit and vegetables, but industrial processors of fruit and vegetables, to justify their standing to bring
         proceedings, they rely only on the fact that those provisions place them at a competitive disadvantage. 
      
Such a fact cannot of itself allow the view to be taken that their legal position is affected by the contested provisions,
         adopted in the context of the Common Agricultural Policy and that, accordingly, those provisions are of direct concern to
         them (see, to that effect, judgment in T & L Sugars and Sidul Açúcares v Commission, C‑456/P, EU:C:2015:284, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Consequently, by holding, in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, that the contested provisions were of direct
         concern to the applicants at first instance on the single ground that the provisions affected their competitive position,
         the General Court erred in law.
      
Thus, without it being necessary to examine the grounds of the judgment under appeal according to which the contested provisions
         do not leave any margin of discretion to the Member States and do not include implementing measures, that judgment must be
         set aside in so far as it declared that the actions seeking annulment of those provisions were admissible.
      
 Admissibility of the actions at first instance
In accordance with the second sentence of the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the
         European Union, if the decision of the General Court is set aside the Court of Justice may give final judgment in the matter
         where the state of the proceedings so permits. 
      
In the present case, it follows from the grounds set out in paragraphs to of this judgment that the General Court was
         incorrect to declare that the actions at first instance seeking the annulment of the contested provisions were admissible.
         
      
Since the General Court did not rule on the action in Case T‑454/in so far as it sought the annulment of Annex VIII to
         Regulation No 1580/on the ground, set out in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that there was no need for that
         Court to annul that annex if it annulled Article 52(2a) of that regulation and therefore did not rule on the plea that there
         was an absolute bar to proceeding also raised by the Commission against that application, it must be held that that plea is
         inadmissible, in any event, on the same grounds as those set out in paragraphs and of the present judgment. 
      
It follows therefrom that the actions for annulment brought in Cases T‑454/and T‑482/must be dismissed as inadmissible.
         
      
 Costs
Under Article 184(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, where the appeal is well founded and the Court itself
         gives final judgment in the case, the Court is to make a decision as to costs. Under Article 138(1) of those Rules, applicable
         to appeal proceedings by virtue of Article 184(1) thereof, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they
         have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. 
      
In accordance with the second sentence of Article 184(4) of those Rules, where an intervener at first instance, who did not
         himself bring the appeal and who took part in the written or oral part of the procedure, the Court may decide that he is to
         bear his own costs. 
      
Pursuant to the first subparagraph of Article 140(1) of the Rules of Procedure, also applicable to appeal proceedings by virtue
         of Article 184(1) of those Rules, the Member States and institutions which intervene in the proceedings are to bear their
         own costs. 
      
In the present case, since the applicants at first instance have been unsuccessful and Confederazione Cooperative Italiane,
         Cooperativas Agro-Alimentarias, Felcoop, the Italian Republic, Anecoop and Others and Unaproa applied for costs, like the
         Commission in Case C‑457/P, they must be ordered jointly to pay the costs incurred at first instance and/or in the present
         appeals by the latter parties. 
      
AIT — Associação dos Industriais de Tomate and the French Republic must be ordered to bear their own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Eighth Chamber) hereby:
1.      Sets aside the judgment of the General Court of the European Union in Anicav and Others v Commission (T‑454/and T‑482/11,
            EU:T:2013:282) in that it declared admissible the actions brought in Cases T‑454/and T‑482/which seek the annulment
            of the second subparagraph of Article 52(2a) of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1580/of December laying down implementing
            rules of Council Regulations (EC) No 2200/96, (EC) No 2201/and (EC) No 1182/in the fruit and vegetable sector, as
            amended by Commission Regulation (EU) No 687/of July 2010, and Articles 50(3) and 60(7) of Commission Implementing
            Regulation (EU) No 543/of June laying down detailed rules for the application of Council Regulation (EC) No 1234/in respect of the fruit and vegetables and processed fruit and vegetables sectors; 
2.      Dismisses the actions for annulment brought in Cases T‑454/and T‑482/as inadmissible;
3.      Orders Associazione Nazionale degli Industriali delle Conserve Alimentari Vegetali (Anicav), Agrupación Española de Fabricantes
            de Conservas Vegetales (Agrucon), Associazione Italiana Industrie Prodotti Alimentari (AIIPA), Campil-Agro-Industrial do Campo
            do Tejo Lda, Evropaïka Trofima AE, FIT — Fomento da Indústria do Tomate SA, Konservopoiia Oporokipeftikon Filippos AE, Panellinia
            Enosi Konservopoion, Elliniki Etairia Konservon AE, Anonymos Viomichaniki Etaireia Konservon D. Nomikos, Italagro — Indústria
            de Transformação de Produtos Alimentares SA, Kopaïs AVEE Trofimon & Poton, Serraïki Konservopoiia Oporokipeftikon Serko AE,
            Sociedade de Industrialização de Produtos Agrícolas — Sopragol SA, Sugalidal — Indústrias de Alimentação SA, Sutol — Indústrias
            Alimentares Lda, and ZANAE Zymai Artopoiias Nikoglou AE Viomichania Emporio Trofimon to pay the costs incurred at first instance
            and/or in the appeals by Confederazione Cooperative Italiane, Cooperativas Agro-Alimentarias, Fédération française de la coopération
            fruitière, légumière et horticole (Felcoop), the European Commission in Case C‑457/P, the Italian Republic, Sociedad Cooperativa
            de Exportación de Frutos Cítricos Anecoop (Anecoop) S. Coop, Cooperativa Agrícola Nuestra Señora del Oreto (CANSO) Coop. V.,
            Cooperativa Agrícola «Sant Bernat» (Carlet) Coop. V., Cooperativa Agrícola SCJ (COPAL) Coop. V., Grupo AN S. Coop., Acopaex
            S. Coop., Las Marismas de Lebrija Sociedad Cooperativa Andaluza (Las Marismas), Associació de Cooperatives Agràries de les
            Terres de Lleida (ACTEL), Unió Corporació Alimentária (UNIO) SCCL, Union Coopérative Agricole France Prune (France Prune),
            Agrial SCA, Triskalia, Union Fermière Morbihannaise (UFM), VOG Products Soc. agr. coop., Consorzio Padano Ortofrutticolo (CO.PAD.OR.)
            Soc. agr. coop., Consorzio Casalasco del Pomodoro Soc. agr. coop., Agricoltori Riuniti Piacentini (ARP) Soc. agr. coop., Orogel
            Fresco Soc. agr. coop., Conserve Italia Soc. agr. coop., Fruttagel Soc. agr. coop. and Unione Nazionale tra le Organizzazioni
            di Produttori Ortofrutticoli, Agrumari e di Frutta in Guscio (Unaproa);
4.      Orders AIT — Associação dos Industriais de Tomate and the French Republic to bear their own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 