
Case C-433/Commission of the European Communities
v
Federal Republic of Germany
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Negotiation, conclusion, ratification and implementation of bilateral agreements by a Member State – Transport of goods or passengers by inland waterway – External competence of the Community – Article EC – Regulations (EEC) No 3921/and (EC) No 1356/96)
Opinion of Advocate General Tizzano delivered on March Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), July Summary of the Judgment
1.     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations — Subject-matter of the proceedings — Determination in the course of the pre-litigation
            procedure — Subsequent restriction — Whether permissible
(Art. EC)
2.     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations — Examination of the merits by the Court — Situation to be taken into consideration
            — Situation at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion
(Art. EC)
3.     International agreements — Competence of the Community — Creation of exclusive external competence of the Community by reason
            of the exercise of its internal competence — Conditions — Transport by inland waterway — Regulation No 3921/— Community
            legislation insufficient to effect the transfer of exclusive external competence to the Community
(Arts 71(1) EC and 80(1) EC; Council Regulation No 3921/91)
4.     Procedure — Originating application — Subject-matter of the dispute — Definition — Alteration during the proceedings — Prohibited
5.     Member States — Obligations — Duty of cooperation — Decision authorising the Commission to negotiate a multilateral agreement
            on behalf of the Community — Duties of the Member States — Duties of action and abstention — Scope
(Art. EC)
1.     Although it is true that the subject-matter of the proceedings brought under Article EC is circumscribed by the pre-litigation
         procedure provided for by that provision and that, consequently, both the Commission’s reasoned opinion and the application
         must be based on the same complaints, that requirement cannot be stretched so far as to mean that in every case the statement
         of the subject-matter of the proceedings in the reasoned opinion must be exactly the same as the form of order sought in the
         originating application if the subject-matter of the proceedings has not been extended or altered but simply limited.
      
(see para. 28)
2.     The question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations must be determined by reference to the situation
         prevailing in the Member State at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion and the Court cannot take account
         of any subsequent changes.
      
(see para. 32)
3.     The Community acquires exclusive external competence by reason of the exercise of its internal competence, where the international
         commitments fall within the scope of the common rules or, in any event, within an area which is already largely covered by
         such rules, even if there is no contradiction between those rules and the commitments. 
      
Thus, whenever the Community has included in its internal legislative acts provisions relating to the treatment of nationals
         of non-member countries or expressly conferred on its institutions powers to negotiate with non-member countries, it acquires
         an exclusive external competence in the spheres covered by those acts.
      
The same applies, even in the absence of any express provision authorising its institutions to negotiate with non-member countries,
         where the Community has achieved complete harmonisation in a given area, because the common rules thus adopted could be affected
         if the Member States retained freedom to negotiate with non-member countries. 
      
As regards the conditions for access by non-Community carriers to national transport by inland waterway in a Member State,
         the Community has not acquired exclusive external competence. Regulation No 3921/laying down the conditions under which
         non-resident carriers may transport goods or passengers by inland waterway within a Member State does not govern the situation
         of those carriers to the extent that it covers only carriers established in a Member State and the harmonisation achieved
         by that regulation is not complete.
      
(see paras 44-48, 50, 52-53)
4.     A party may not alter the actual subject-matter of the dispute during the proceedings, so that the substance of the application
         must be examined solely with reference to the conclusions contained in the application instituting the proceedings.
      
(see para. 61)
5.     The duty of genuine cooperation imposed by Article EC is of general application and does not depend either on whether the
         Community competence concerned is exclusive or on any right of the Member States to enter into obligations towards non-member
         countries. 
      
In particular, the Member States are subject to special duties of action and abstention in a situation in which the Commission
         has submitted to the Council proposals which, although they have not been adopted by the Council, represent the point of departure
         for concerted Community action.
      
It follows that the adoption by the Council of a decision authorising the Commission to negotiate a multilateral agreement
         on behalf of the Community which marks the start of a concerted Community action at international level, requires for that
         purpose, if not a duty of abstention on the part of the Member States, at the very least a duty of close cooperation between
         the latter and the Community institutions in order to facilitate the achievement of the Community tasks and to ensure the
         coherence and consistency of the action and its international representation.
      
(see paras 64-66)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations – Negotiation, conclusion, ratification and implementation of bilateral agreements by a Member State – Transport of goods or passengers by inland waterway – External competence of the Community – Article EC – Regulations (EEC) No 3921/and (EC) No 1356/96)
In Case C-433/03,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on October 2003,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by C. Schmidt, W. Wils and A. Manville, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Federal Republic of Germany, represented by W.-D. Plessing, acting as Agent, and G. Schohe, Rechtsanwalt,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, R. Silva de Lapuerta (Rapporteur), C. Gulmann, J. Makarczyk and P.
         Kūris, Judges,
      
Advocate General: A. Tizzano,
Registrar: R. Grass,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application the Commission of the European Communities seeks a declaration from the Court that: 
(a)      by individually negotiating, concluding, ratifying and arranging for the entry into force of:
–       the agreement between the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Government of Romania on inland waterway transport,
         signed in Bonn on October (BGBl. II, p. 770), (‘the agreement concluded with Romania’), 
      
–       the agreement between the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Government of the Republic of Poland on inland
         waterway transport, signed in Warsaw on November (BGBl. II, p. 779), (‘the agreement concluded with Poland’),
         and 
      
–       the agreement between the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Government of Ukraine on inland waterway transport,
         signed in Bonn on July (BGBl. II, p. 258), (‘the agreement concluded with Ukraine’), and
      
(b)      by refusing to denounce the agreements concluded with Romania, Poland and Ukraine and: 
–       the agreement between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Government of the Socialist Republic of Czechoslovakia on inland
         waterway transport, signed in Prague on January (BGBl. II, p. 1035), (‘the agreement concluded with Czechoslovakia’),
         and
      
–       the agreement between the Federal Republic of Germany and the People’s Republic of Hungary on inland waterway transport, signed
         in Budapest on January (BGBl. II, p. 1026), (‘the agreement concluded with Hungary’),
      
the Federal Republic of Germany has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC and Council Regulation (EEC) No 3921/of December laying down the conditions under which non-resident carriers may transport goods or passengers by inland
         waterway within a Member State (OJ L 373, p. 1), as regards the agreements mentioned in point (a), and Council Regulation
         (EC) No 1356/of July on common rules applicable to the transport of goods or passengers by inland waterway between
         Member States with a view to establishing freedom to provide such transport services (OJ L 175, p. 7), as regards the
         agreements mentioned under point (b).
      
 Legal background
 Community legislation
 The provisions of the EC Treaty
Article EC is worded as follows:
‘Member States shall take all appropriate measures, whether general or particular, to ensure fulfilment of the obligations
         arising out of this Treaty or resulting from action taken by the institutions of the Community. They shall facilitate the
         achievement of the Community’s tasks.
      
They shall abstain from any measure which could jeopardise the attainment of the objectives of this Treaty.’
As regards transport, Article EC provides that the objectives of the Treaty are to be pursued by Member States within the
         framework of a common transport policy.
      
Article 71(1) EC provides:
‘For the purpose of implementing Article 70, and taking into account the distinctive features of transport, the Council shall,
         acting in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article and after consulting the Economic and Social Committee
         and the Committee of the Regions, lay down:
      
(a)       common rules applicable to international transport to or from the territory of a Member State or passing across the territory
         of one or more Member States; 
      
(b)      the conditions under which non-resident carriers may operate transport services within a Member State; 
(c)      measures to improve transport safety; 
(d)      any other appropriate provisions.’
On the basis of that provision the Council adopted Regulations No 3921/and No 1356/96.
 Regulation No 3921/In the third recital in its preamble, Regulation No 3921/provides that non-resident carriers should be allowed to carry
         out national transport operations for goods and passengers by inland waterway under the same conditions as those imposed by
         the Member State concerned on its own carriers.
      
For that purpose the first paragraph of Article of Regulation No 3921/provides that, with effect from January 1993,
         any carrier of goods or passengers by inland waterway is to be permitted to carry out the national transport of goods or persons
         by inland waterway for hire or reward in a Member State in which he is not established, a practice known as ‘cabotage’, provided
         that he is established in a Member State in accordance with its legislation and, where appropriate, he is entitled there to
         carry out the international transport of goods or persons by inland waterway. The second paragraph of Article provides that
         if he fulfils those conditions, the carrier may temporarily carry on cabotage in the Member State concerned without having
         to set up a registered office or other establishment there.
      
Furthermore, Article 2(1) of Regulation No 3921/provides that, for a carrier to be permitted to carry out cabotage, he
         may use for this purpose only vessels the owner or owners of which are natural persons domiciled in a Member State and are
         Member State nationals, or legal persons which have their registered place of business in a Member State and the majority
         holding in which or majority of which belongs to Member State nationals.
      
Finally, according to Article of Regulation No 3921/91, its provisions do not affect the rights existing under the Revised
         Convention for the navigation of the Rhine, signed in Mannheim on October (‘Mannheim Convention’).
      
 Regulation No 1356/As is clear from its title and the second recital in its preamble, Regulation No 1356/has as its purpose to establish freedom
         to provide services in the sphere of the transport of goods or passengers by inland waterway between Member States by eliminating
         all restrictions on the provider of services on the grounds of his nationality or the fact that he is established in a Member
         State other than that in which the service is to be provided.
      
Articles and of Regulation No 1356/provide that any operator transporting goods or passengers by inland waterway is
         to be allowed to carry out transport operations between Member States and in transit through them, without discrimination
         on grounds of his nationality or place of establishment. Article also sets out the conditions for that authorisation. 
      
Article of Regulation No 1356/states that its provisions ‘shall not affect the rights of third-country operators under
         the Revised Convention for the Navigation of the Rhine (Mannheim Convention), the Convention on Navigation on the Danube (Belgrade
         Convention) or the rights arising from the European Community’s international obligations’.
      
 The bilateral agreements concluded by the Federal Republic of Germany
The agreements mentioned in paragraph of this judgment (‘the bilateral agreements’) contain provisions on the transport
         of passengers and goods by inland waterway between the contracting parties and the reciprocal use of their inland waterways.
      
Those agreements provide, inter alia, that the transport of passengers and/or goods by vessels of one contracting party between
         ports of the other party (cabotage), and the carriage of passengers and/or goods by vessels of one contracting party between
         ports of the other party and those in a non-member country (transport operations with non-member countries) are subject to
         special authorisation by the competent authorities of the contracting parties concerned.
      
The agreements concluded with Hungary and Czechoslovakia were ratified by two laws of December and entered into force
         on January and May respectively. The agreements concluded with Romania and Poland were ratified by two laws of April and entered into force on July and November respectively. The agreement concluded with Ukraine was ratified
         by a law of February and entered into force on July 1994.
      
 Background to the dispute and the pre-litigation procedure
On June 1991, the Commission submitted a recommendation for a decision to the Council on the opening of negotiations for
         the conclusion of a multilateral agreement between the Community and third countries in the field of transport of passengers
         and goods by inland waterway.
      
By decision of December 1992, the Council ‘authorised the Commission to negotiate a multilateral agreement on the rules
         applicable to the transport of passengers and goods by inland waterway between the European Economic Community and Poland
         and the Contracting States of the Danube Convention (Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Romania, Bulgaria, the ex-USSR, ex-Yugoslavia
         and Austria)’ (‘Council Decision of December 1992’).
      
Following that decision of the Council, the Commission, by letter of April 1993, called on several Member States, including
         the Federal Republic of Germany, ‘to abstain from any initiative likely to compromise the proper conduct of the negotiations
         initiated at Community level and, in particular, to abandon ratification of agreements already initialled or signed, and to
         forgo the opening of further negotiations with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe relating to inland waterway transport’.
      
On April the Council decided that priority was to be given to the conduct of negotiations with the Czech Republic,
         the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Poland and the Slovak Republic.
      
The multilateral negotiations conducted by the Commission led, on August 1996, to the initialling of a draft multilateral
         agreement on the basis of which the Commission presented to the Council, on December 1996, a proposal for a decision on
         the conclusion of the agreement laying down the conditions governing the transport by inland waterway of goods and passengers
         between the European Community and the Czech Republic, the Republic of Poland and the Slovak Republic.
      
To date, however, no multilateral agreement has been concluded by the European Community with the countries concerned.
By letter of formal notice of April and a supplementary letter of formal notice of November 1998, the Commission
         initiated the procedure for failure to fulfil obligations laid down by Article EC and called on the Federal Republic of
         Germany to denounce the bilateral agreements.
      
Since the German Government, in its responses of June and February 1999, denied that the conclusion of the bilateral
         agreements constituted an infringement of Community law, the Commission issued a reasoned opinion on February calling
         on the Federal Republic of Germany to take the measures necessary to comply with that opinion within two months of its notification.
      
Taking the view that the situation remained unsatisfactory, the Commission decided to bring the present proceedings.
 Admissibility
The German Government submits, first of all, that the action is inadmissible as regards the agreements concluded with Hungary
         and Czechoslovakia. Those agreements, it argues, were not examined in the reasoned opinion.
      
It is sufficient to observe that, as regards the complaint relating to the incompatibility of the bilateral agreements with
         Regulation No 1356/96, the reasoned opinion refers, unequivocally and on several occasions, to the agreements concluded with
         Hungary and Czechoslovakia and that, in paragraph of its response to the reasoned opinion, the Federal Republic of Germany
         expressly stated its views on that matter.
      
Second, the German Government contests the admissibility of the action in so far as the Commission makes reference in it to
         the ‘Open Skies’ judgments in Case C‑466/Commission v United Kingdom [2002] ECR I-9427, Case C-467/Commission v Denmark [2002] ECR I‑9519, Case C-468/Commission v Sweden [2002] ECR I-9575, Case C-469/Commission v Finland [2002] ECR I‑9627, Case C-471/Commission v Belgium [2002] ECR I-9681, Case C‑472/Commission v Luxembourg [2002] ECR I-9741, Case C-475/Commission v Austria [2002] ECR I-9797, and Case C-476/Commission v Germany [2002] ECR I-9855, even though they were delivered after the pre-litigation procedure had been concluded. The German Government
         argues that before bringing the action for failure to fulfil obligations the Commission ought to have sent the Federal Republic
         of Germany a further reasoned opinion setting out the recent changes in the case-law.
      
Although it is true that the subject-matter of the proceedings brought under Article EC is circumscribed by the pre-litigation
         procedure provided for by that provision and that, consequently, both the Commission’s reasoned opinion and the application
         must be based on the same complaints, that requirement cannot be stretched so far as to mean that in every case the statement
         of the subject-matter of the proceedings in the reasoned opinion must be exactly the same as the form of order sought in the
         originating application if the subject-matter of the proceedings has not been extended or altered but simply limited (see,
         in particular, Case C-279/Commission v Italy [1997] ECR I-4743, paragraphs and 25, Case C-52/Commission v France [2002] ECR I-3827, paragraph 44, and Case C-139/Commission v Spain [2002] ECR I-6407, paragraphs and 19).
      
By referring to the Open Skies judgments in its originating application the Commission merely intended to set out the most recent case-law relating to the
         principles governing the exclusive external competence of the Community, without extending, modifying or even limiting the
         subject-matter of the dispute, as defined in the reasoned opinion of February 2000.
      
It follows that the action is admissible.
 The action
As a preliminary point the German Government asks the Court to declare that the action has become devoid of purpose as regards
         the agreements concluded with Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland on account of the accession to the European Union on May
         of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Poland and the Slovak Republic.
      
Suffice it in this regard to point out that, according to settled case-law, the question whether a Member State has failed
         to fulfil its obligations must be determined by reference to the situation prevailing in the Member State at the end of the
         period laid down in the reasoned opinion and that the Court cannot take account of any subsequent changes (see, inter alia,
         Case C-110/Commission v Austria [2001] ECR I-7545, paragraph 13, and Case C-310/Commission v Luxembourg [2004] ECR I-1969, paragraph 7).
      
In the present case, the period prescribed in the reasoned opinion expired on April 2000, with the result that the accession
         of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Poland and the Slovak Republic to the European Union is irrelevant
         to the present dispute.
      
The Commission raises three complaints in support of its action. First, it complains that the Federal Republic of Germany
         has infringed the exclusive external competence of the Community within the meaning of the ‘AETR’  judgment in Case 22/Commission v Council [1971] ECR 263. Second, it relies on an infringement of Article EC. Third, it submits that the bilateral agreements are
         incompatible with Regulation No 1356/96.
      
 The first complaint: infringement of the exclusive external competence of the Community
 Arguments of the parties
By its first complaint, the Commission submits that, by negotiating, concluding, ratifying and implementing the agreements
         concluded with Poland, Romania and Ukraine, the Federal Republic of Germany has infringed the exclusive external competence
         of the Community to negotiate international agreements within the meaning of the AETR  judgment. Those agreements affect the common rules adopted by the Community in Regulation No 3921/91.
      
In particular, the Commission takes the view that by permitting, subject to special authorisation, access to cabotage in Germany
         by transporters from the non-member countries concerned, those agreements affect the common rules contained in Regulation
         No 3921/in so far as those rules harmonise completely, from January 1993, the conditions for cabotage in the Member States
         of the Community.
      
The Commission submits, in that connection, that Regulation No 3921/covers not only Community carriers, but also carriers
         from non-member countries, because Article recognises the rights of access of Swiss carriers under the Mannheim Convention.
      
The German Government maintains that the provisions laid down by the agreements concluded with Poland, Romania and Ukraine
         are not covered by Regulation No 3921/and do not fall within an area already largely covered by it, with the result that
         those agreements do not affect the common rules adopted by the Community in that regulation.
      
The German Government takes the view that Regulation No 3921/has a purely internal character. It organises only cabotage
         on the inland waterways of a Member State by carriers established in other Member States, and it does not contain any clause
         concerning the conditions under which carriers from non-member countries may be authorised to provide cabotage on Community
         inland waterways.
      
In that connection, the German Government argues that the reference to the Mannheim Convention, in Article of Regulation
         No 3921/91, cannot be interpreted as a clause relating to the treatment of non-member-country nationals. That provision concerns
         only Switzerland and simply confirms the rights derived by the latter from that convention.
      
 Findings of the Court
It must be observed that, although the Treaty does not explicitly attribute external competence to the Community in the sphere
         of inland waterway transport, Articles 71(1) EC and 80(1) EC provide nevertheless for a Community power to act in that field.
      
In paragraphs to and of the AETR judgment, the Court held that the competence of the Community to conclude international agreements arises not only from an
         express conferment by the Treaty but may equally flow from other provisions of the Treaty and from measures adopted, within
         the framework of those provisions, by the Community institutions; that in particular, each time the Community, with a view
         to implementing a common policy envisaged by the Treaty, adopts provisions laying down common rules, whatever form these may
         take, Member States no longer have the right, acting individually or even collectively, to undertake obligations with non-member
         countries which affect those rules; that, as and when such common rules come into being, the Community alone is in a position
         to assume and carry out contractual obligations towards non-member countries affecting the whole sphere of application of
         the Community legal order; and that, to the extent to which Community rules are adopted for the attainment of the objectives
         of the Treaty, Member States cannot, outside the framework of the Community institutions, assume obligations which might affect
         those rules or alter their scope.
      
If Member States were free to conclude international agreements affecting the common rules, that would compromise the attainment
         of the objective pursued by those rules as well as the Community’s tasks and the objectives of the Treaty (Case C-266/Commission v Luxembourg [2005] ECR I-0000, paragraph 41).
      
The circumstances in which the scope of the common rules may be affected or distorted by international commitments entered
         into by Member States and, therefore, the circumstances in which the Community acquires exclusive external competence by reason
         of the exercise of its internal competence have been set out by the Court in, inter alia, its Open Skies judgments.
      
That is the case where the international commitments fall within the scope of the common rules or, in any event, within an
         area which is already largely covered by such rules, even if there is no contradiction between those rules and the commitments
         (Commission v Germany, paragraph 108).
      
Thus it is that, whenever the Community has included in its internal legislative acts provisions relating to the treatment
         of nationals of non-member countries or expressly conferred on its institutions powers to negotiate with non-member countries,
         it acquires an exclusive external competence in the spheres covered by those acts (Commission v Germany, paragraph 109).
      
The same applies, even in the absence of any express provision authorising its institutions to negotiate with non-member countries,
         where the Community has achieved complete harmonisation in a given area, because the common rules thus adopted could be affected,
         within the meaning of the AETR judgment, if the Member States retained freedom to negotiate with non-member countries (Commission v Germany, paragraph 110).
      
As is clear from its title and from Articles and 2, Regulation No 3921/lays down the conditions for access to the national
         transport of goods or passengers by inland waterway in Member States only in respect of Community carriers. Those provisions
         cover only carriers of goods or passengers by inland waterway established in a Member State, which use vessels whose owner
         or owners are natural persons domiciled in a Member State and are Member State nationals, or legal persons which have their
         registered place of business in a Member State and the majority holding in which or majority of which belongs to Member State
         nationals (Case C-266/Commission v Luxembourg, paragraph 46).
      
The reference in Article of Regulation No 3921/to rights existing on the basis of the Mannheim Convention cannot alter
         that conclusion since by that provision the Community is merely taking formal note of Switzerland’s rights under that convention
         (Case C-266/Commission v Luxembourg, paragraph 47).
      
It follows that Regulation No 3921/does not govern the conditions for access by non-Community carriers to the national
         transport of goods or passengers by inland waterway in a Member State (Case C-266/Commission v Luxembourg, paragraph 48).
      
Since the agreements concluded with Poland, Romania and Ukraine do not fall within an area already covered by Regulation No
         3921/91, they cannot, therefore, be regarded as affecting it on the ground relied on by the Commission.
      
Furthermore, the very fact that Regulation No 3921/does not govern the situation of carriers established in non-member
         countries operating within the Community demonstrates that the harmonisation achieved by that regulation is not complete.
      
The Commission’s claim that the Community has acquired exclusive external competence, as defined by the AETR judgment, in the area governed by the agreements concluded with Poland, Romania and Ukraine is therefore unfounded.
      
In those circumstances the first complaint must be dismissed.
 The second complaint: infringement of Article EC
 Arguments of the parties
By its second complaint the Commission submits that, by ratifying and implementing the agreements with Poland, Romania and
         Ukraine after the Council had decided, on December 1992, to authorise the Commission to negotiate a multilateral agreement
         on behalf of the Community, and in view of the fact that in its letter of April it had requested the German Government
         to forgo ratification of those agreements, the Federal Republic of Germany has jeopardised the implementation of that decision
         and has thus failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC. The negotiation by the Commission of a multilateral agreement
         on behalf of the Community and its subsequent conclusion by the Council are, it argues, made more difficult by interference
         from a Member State’s own initiatives.
      
In its reply the Commission adds that the maintenance in force of the agreement concluded with Czechoslovakia, by a notice
         of March published on April in the Bundesgesetzblatt (BGBl. II, p. 762), also constitutes an infringement of Article EC.
      
The German Government submits that Member States cannot, by virtue of the principle of loyal cooperation, be obliged to denounce
         bilateral agreements already concluded with non-member countries by reason of the fact that negotiations have been initiated
         by the Commission in the same area as that governed by those agreements. In so far as the outcome of such negotiations and
         the conclusion of a multilateral agreement on behalf of the Community are by nature uncertain, a denunciation would create
         a legal vacuum until the entry into force of such a multilateral agreement.
      
In any event the German Government takes the view that it has complied with the requirements of Article EC since, having
         consulted the Commission during the negotiation of the bilateral agreements, it undertook to denounce them as soon as a Community
         agreement was signed and reduced the period within which they were to be denounced to six months.
      
It further submits that the bilateral agreements were signed before the adoption of the Council Decision of December 1992.
 Findings of the Court
First, as regards the admissibility of the complaint relating to the maintenance in force of the agreement concluded with
         Czechoslovakia, it must be held that this was raised by the Commission in its reply and therefore cannot be examined by the
         Court. Such a complaint is not mentioned by the Commission in its originating application (see, to that effect, Case 298/Commission v Belgium [1988] ECR 4343, paragraph 8).
      
According to settled case-law, a party may not alter the actual subject-matter of the dispute during the proceedings, so that
         the substance of the application must be examined solely with reference to the conclusions contained in the application instituting
         the proceedings (see, in particular, Case 232/Commission v France [1979] ECR 2729, paragraph 3, and Case C-256/Commission v France [2000] ECR I-2487, paragraph 31).
      
Accordingly, in so far as it concerns the maintenance in force of the agreement concluded with Czechoslovakia, the Commission’s
         complaint must be dismissed as inadmissible.
      
Second, as regards the substance of the complaint, it must be recalled that Article EC requires Member States to facilitate
         the achievement of the Community’s tasks and to abstain from any measure which could jeopardise the attainment of the objectives
         of the Treaty.
      
It should also be recalled that this duty of genuine cooperation is of general application and does not depend either on whether
         the Community competence concerned is exclusive or on any right of the Member States to enter into obligations towards non-member
         countries (Case C-266/Commission v Luxembourg, paragraph 58).
      
In that connection, the Court has already held that Member States are subject to special duties of action and abstention in
         a situation in which the Commission has submitted to the Council proposals which, although they have not been adopted by the
         Council, represent the point of departure for concerted Community action (Case 804/Commission  v United Kingdom [1981] ECR I-1045, paragraph 28, and Case C-266/Commission v Luxembourg, paragraph 59).
      
The adoption of a decision authorising the Commission to negotiate a multilateral agreement on behalf of the Community marks
         the start of a concerted Community action at international level and requires for that purpose, if not a duty of abstention
         on the part of the Member States, at the very least a duty of close cooperation between the latter and the Community institutions
         in order to facilitate the achievement of the Community tasks and to ensure the coherence and consistency of the action and
         its international representation (Case C-266/Commission  v Luxembourg, paragraph 60).
      
In this case, as the Advocate General has noted in point of his Opinion, the adoption of the Council Decision of December
         led to a substantial change in the legal framework in which the agreements with Poland, Romania and Ukraine were concluded,
         and required closer cooperation and concerted action with the Commission before those agreements could be ratified and implemented.
      
As the Advocate General has further stated, in points and of his Opinion, although the consultations between the German
         Government and the Commission did in fact take place at the time of the negotiation and signature of the agreements concluded
         with Poland, Romania and Ukraine, that is to say, before the adoption of the Council Decision of December 1992, it is common
         ground that after that date the Federal Republic of Germany proceeded to ratify and implement those agreements without cooperating
         or consulting with the Commission.
      
By acting in that manner, that Member State jeopardised the implementation of the Council Decision of December and,
         consequently, the accomplishment of the Community’s task and the attainment of the objectives of the Treaty.
      
Consultation with the Commission was all the more necessary because the Council and the Commission had agreed, as regards
         the negotiation procedure for the multilateral agreement on behalf of the Community, to apply the rules of conduct set out
         in a gentleman’s agreement annexed to the mandate for negotiation of December 1992, providing for close coordination between
         the Commission and the Member States. In that respect, Title II, paragraph 3(d), of the Gentleman’s Agreement provides that
         ‘the Commission shall be the spokesman during the negotiations, and the representatives of the Member States shall speak only
         if requested to do so by the Commission’ and that ‘the representatives of the Member States must take no action which is likely
         to handicap the Commission in its work’.
      
Although it is true, as the German Government stresses, that the bilateral agreements were signed before the adoption of the
         Council Decision of December 1992, the fact remains that the agreements concluded with Poland, Romania and Ukraine were
         ratified and implemented after that date.
      
Finally, the fact that the German Government has undertaken to denounce the bilateral agreements as soon as a multilateral
         agreement has been concluded on behalf of the Community does not establish that the obligation of loyal cooperation laid down
         in Article EC has been complied with. As it was to take place after the negotiation and conclusion of that agreement, such
         a denunciation would have had no practical effect since it would not have facilitated the multilateral negotiations conducted
         by the Commission.
      
It follows that, by ratifying and implementing the agreements concluded with Poland, Romania and Ukraine without cooperating
         or consulting with the Commission, the Federal Republic of Germany has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC.
      
Therefore, the second complaint is well founded to the extent set out in the previous paragraph.
 The third complaint: incompatibility of the bilateral agreements with Regulation No 1356/Arguments of the parties
By its third complaint the Commission submits that the maintenance in force of the provisions of the bilateral agreements,
         after the adoption of Regulation No 1356/96, which provide that vessels registered in the non-member countries concerned may
         provide transport services by inland waterway between the Federal Republic of Germany and other Member States of the Community
         subject to special authorisation from the competent authority, is incompatible with Articles and of that regulation and
         with its general objectives. 
      
By permitting the unilateral grant of rights of access by the Federal Republic of Germany, or at least by reserving to that
         Member State the right to grant unilaterally rights of access on routes within the Community to carriers who do not satisfy
         the conditions laid down by Regulation No 1356/96, the bilateral agreements modify, unilaterally and beyond the Commission’s
         control, the nature and scope of the rules defined by Community law concerning the freedom to provide inland waterway transport
         services between Member States. According to the Commission, it is common ground that the Czech, Hungarian, Polish, Romanian,
         Slovak and Ukrainian transport carriers and undertakings likely to be authorised, in accordance with the contested bilateral
         agreements, to provide transport services between the Federal Republic of Germany and the other Member States of the Community
         do not satisfy any of those conditions.
      
The German Government argues that the bilateral agreements do not fall within the scope of Regulation No 1356/or of an
         area largely covered by it.
      
The German Government argues that the sole objective of Regulation No 1356/is to establish the internal market by defining
         the common rules applicable to the transport of goods or persons by inland waterway between Member States, and that it does
         not contain any provision governing the access by undertakings from non-member countries to the transport of persons or goods
         by inland waterway on Community territory.
      
 Findings of the Court
It must be recalled that the main objective of Regulation No 1356/is to establish freedom to provide services in the field
         of the transport of goods or passengers by inland waterway between the Member States by eliminating all restrictions or discrimination
         as regards the provider of services on the grounds of his nationality or the place of establishment.
      
According to Article of Regulation No 1356/96, the benefit of the arrangements involving the freedom to provide inland waterway
         transport services for goods or passengers is for carriers who:
      
–       are established in a Member State in accordance with the laws of that Member State,
–       are entitled in that Member State to carry out the international transport of goods or passengers by inland waterway,
–       use for such transport operations inland waterways vessels which are registered in a Member State or, in the absence of registration,
         possess a certificate of membership of a fleet of a Member State, and
      
–       satisfy the conditions laid down in Article of Regulation No 3921/91, that is to say, they use vessels whose owner or owners
         are natural persons domiciled in a Member State and are Member State nationals, or legal persons which have their registered
         place of business in a Member State and the majority of which belongs to Member State nationals.
      
Whilst Regulation No 1356/organises the freedom to provide inland waterway transport services between the Member States
         of the Community to the benefit of carriers established in one of those Member States, it is clear that the system established
         by Regulation No 1356/does not have as its purpose or effect to prevent operators established in non-member countries or
         vessels registered in the latter from carrying out services between Member States of the Community (see Case C-266/Commission v Luxembourg, paragraph 73).
      
Furthermore, the bilateral agreements do not establish the freedom to provide services for the transport by inland waterway
         of goods or passengers between Member States by Czech, Hungarian, Polish, Romanian, Slovak or Ukrainian carriers, but merely
         provide that, in strictly defined circumstances and subject to authorisation by the competent authorities of the parties to
         those agreements, vessels registered in the non-member countries concerned may operate such services between the Federal Republic
         of Germany and other Member States of the Community.
      
It follows that, contrary to the Commission’s submissions, the provisions of the bilateral agreements have not modified either
         the nature or the scope of the provisions of Regulation No 1356/96.
      
In those circumstances the third complaint must be dismissed.
Having regard to all of the foregoing considerations it must be held that, by ratifying and implementing the bilateral agreements
         without cooperating or consulting with the Commission, the Federal Republic of Germany has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under Article EC and that the remainder of the action should be dismissed.
      
 Costs
Under the first subparagraph of Article 69(3) of the Rules of Procedure, the Court may order that the costs be shared or that
         the parties bear their own costs if each party succeeds on some and fails on other heads. Since the Commission’s application
         has been upheld only in part, each party must be ordered to bear its own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by ratifying and implementing:
–       the agreement between the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Government of Romania on inland waterway transport,
            signed in Bonn on October 1991, 
–       the agreement between the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Government of the Republic of Poland on inland
            waterway transport, signed in Warsaw on November 1991, and
–       the agreement between the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Government of Ukraine on inland waterway transport,
            signed in Bonn on July 1992, 
without consulting or cooperating with the Commission of the European Communities, the Federal Republic of Germany has failed
            to fulfil its obligations under Article EC;
2.      Dismisses the remainder of the action;
3.      Orders the Commission of the European Communities and the Federal Republic of Germany to bear their own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 