
Case C-419/Council général de la Vienne
v
Directeur général des douanes et droits indirects
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Cour d’appel de Poitiers)
(Post-clearance recovery of import duties – Remission of import duties – Conditions – Article of the regulation implementing the Community Customs Code – Scope of the obligation to submit the case to the Commission – Failure on the part of a person liable for payment acting in good faith to declare additional royalties which should have
         been incorporated in the customs value of imported goods)
      
Summary of the Judgment
European Communities’ own resources – Post-clearance recovery or remission of import or export duties
(Council Regulation No 2913/92, Art. 220(2)(b); Commission Regulation No 2454/93, Art. 871)
Article of Regulation No 2454/laying down provisions for the implementation of Regulation No 2913/establishing the
         Community Customs Code, as amended by Regulation No 1677/98, must be interpreted as meaning that, in the context of a recovery
         procedure or a procedure for remission of uncollected customs duties, the national customs authorities are not required to
         submit the case to the Commission for a decision where the doubts which they had had as regards the precise scope of the criteria
         laid down in Article 220(2)(b) of the Community Customs Code with regard to a particular case have dissipated, even after
         those authorities have expressed their intention to refer the matter to the Commission, or where the doubts relate to the
         subsequent entry in the accounts of customs duties which were not collected due to an omission on the part of an importer
         acting in good faith to declare royalties which should have been incorporated in the customs value of the imported goods.
      
(see para. 46, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
June (*)
      
(Post-clearance recovery of import duties – Remission of import duties – Conditions – Article of the regulation implementing the Community Customs Code – Scope of the obligation to submit the case to the Commission – Failure on the part of a person liable for payment acting in good faith to declare additional royalties which should have
         been incorporated in the customs value of imported goods)
      
In Case C-419/04,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Cour d’appel de Poitiers (France), made by decision of September 2004, received at the Court on September 2004, in the proceedings
      
Conseil général de la Vienne
v
Directeur général des douanes et droits indirects,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of A. Rosas, President of the Chamber, J.-P. Puissochet, S. von Bahr, U. Lõhmus (Rapporteur) and A. Ó Caoimh, Judges,
Advocate General: A. Tizzano,
Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2005,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Conseil général de la Vienne, by J.-M. Salva and R. Barazza, avocats,
–        the French Government, by G. de Bergues and A. Colomb, acting as Agents,
–        the Slovak Government, by R. Procházka, acting as Agent,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by J. Hottiaux and X. Lewis, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on November 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2454/of July laying down provisions for the implementation of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/establishing the Community
         Customs Code (OJ L 253, p. 1), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1677/of July (OJ L 212, p.
         18) (‘the implementing regulation’).
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between the Conseil général de la Vienne (Local Council of the Vienne
         Department) and the Directeur général des douanes et droits indirects (Director-General of Customs and Indirect Taxes) regarding
         payment of a sum of EUR corresponding to import duties which the latter regarded as having been eluded.
      
 Legal context
Article 220(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/of October establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L 302, p. 1) (‘the Community Customs Code’) is worded as follows:
      
‘Except in the cases referred to in the second and third subparagraphs of Article 217(1), subsequent entry in the accounts
         [of duty resulting from a customs debt] shall not occur where:
      
…
(b)       the amount of duty legally owed failed to be entered in the accounts as a result of an error on the part of the customs authorities
         which could not reasonably have been detected by the person liable for payment, the latter for his part having acted in good
         faith and complied with all the provisions laid down by the legislation in force as regards the customs declaration;
      
…’
As set out in Article of the Community Customs Code:
      
‘The following definitions shall apply:
…
(b)      “remission” means either a decision to waive all or part of the amount of a customs debt or a decision to render void an entry
         in the accounts of all or part of an amount of import or export duty which has not been paid.’
      
The second and third subparagraphs of Article 236(1) of the Community Customs Code provide:
      
‘Import duties or export duties shall be remitted in so far as it is established that when they were entered in the accounts
         the amount of such duties was not legally owed or that the amount has been entered in the accounts contrary to Article 220(2).
      
No repayment or remission shall be granted when the facts which led to the payment or entry in the accounts of an amount which
         was not legally owed are the result of deliberate action by the person concerned.’
      
Article of the implementing regulation states:
      
‘The customs authorities shall themselves decide not to enter uncollected duties in the accounts:
…
(b)       in cases in which they consider that the conditions laid down in Article 220(2)(b) of the [Community Customs] Code are fulfilled,
         provided that the amount not collected from the operator concerned in respect of one or more import or export operations but
         in consequence of a single error is less than [EUR] 000;
      
…’
Article of the implementing regulation is worded as follows:
      
‘In cases other than those referred to in Article 869, where the customs authorities either consider that the conditions laid
         down in Article 220(2)(b) of the [Community Customs] Code are fulfilled or are in doubt as to the precise scope of the criteria
         of that provision with regard to a particular case, those authorities shall submit the case to the Commission, so that a decision
         may be taken in accordance with the procedure laid down in Articles to 876. The case submitted to the Commission shall
         contain all the information required for a full examination. It must also contain a signed statement from the person concerned
         with the case to be brought before the Commission certifying that he has read the case and stating either that he has nothing
         to add or listing all the additional information which he considers should be included.
      
As soon as it receives the case the Commission shall inform the Member State concerned accordingly.
Should it be found that the information supplied by the Member State is not sufficient to enable a decision to be taken on
         the case concerned in full knowledge of the facts, the Commission may request that additional information be supplied.’
      
 The main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
The Conseil général de la Vienne, in its capacity as member of the supervisory board of the local semi-public company which
         operates the Parc du Futuroscope (‘Futuroscope’), on several occasions acquired audiovisual equipment from a Canadian supplier,
         IMAX Corporation (‘IMAX’). The Conseil général de la Vienne remains owner of that equipment, the operation of which was entrusted
         to Futuroscope.
      
During March and April 1993, the Conseil général de la Vienne imported a projection system called ‘Solido’ under a contract
         which it concluded, on behalf of Futuroscope, with IMAX. Under that contract, the purchase price of the equipment at issue
         amounted to USD 650. Furthermore, an additional royalty of FRF 1.(EUR 0.27) was to be paid to IMAX in respect of the
         purchase of each entry ticket to Futuroscope.
      
The Conseil général de la Vienne declared the sum of USD as the value of the imported equipment. During an audit
         carried out by the French customs authorities (‘the customs authorities’) following customs clearance, it was found that the
         additional royalties levied on the entry tickets from to had not been declared as forming part of the customs value
         of that equipment. In July 1997, the inquiry was brought to an end with a formal infringement report which concluded that
         there had been a false declaration of the customs value of the equipment.
      
The Conseil général de la Vienne brought the matter before the Commission de conciliation et d’expertise douanière (Customs
         Assessment and Arbitration Board) which, in April 1999, found that the customs value of the imported equipment had been reduced
         by the amount of the additional royalties, in the sum of FRF 281. In September 1999, the Conseil applied to the Directorate-General
         of Customs and Indirect Taxes, on the basis of Articles and of the Community Customs Code, for remission of the customs
         debt claimed. The application was rejected in June 2000.
      
Subsequently, the Conseil général de la Vienne brought an administrative appeal before the Minister for the Economy, Finance
         and Industry. After re-examination of the file and on the instructions of that minister, the Directeur general des douanes
         et droits indirects informed the Conseil général de la Vienne on July of his decision to refer the matter to the Commission.
         By note of September 2001, the customs authorities sent to the Commission a letter in which they explained the reasons
         which had led to their incorporation of the amount of the additional royalties in the customs value of the imported equipment
         and asked whether the Commission shared that approach. That request has remained unanswered.
      
On July 2001, the customs authorities brought an action against the Conseil général de la Vienne before the Tribunal d’instance
         de Poitiers (District Court, Poitiers) and sought an order against it for payment of the import duties regarded as having
         been eluded. By judgment of December 2002, that court ordered the Conseil général de la Vienne to pay the sum claimed.
      
The Conseil général de la Vienne appealed against that judgment before the referring court. As it considered that the case
         before it requires an interpretation of Article of the Community Customs Code (sic), the Cour d’appel de Poitiers (Court
         of Appeal, Poitiers) decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following question to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Is Article of the Community Customs Code (sic) relating to the recovery of the amount of the customs debt to be interpreted
         as establishing an essential and obligatory procedure, non-compliance with which will result in nullity, if the national customs
         authorities have expressed doubts, at any time during the recovery procedure concerning a person liable for payment acting
         in good faith, as regards the precise scope of the criteria relating to the recovery or the remission of duties resulting
         from a customs debt which has been eluded because it was not entered in the accounts on the date when that debt should have
         given rise to recovery (debt relating to the possible incorporation into the purchase price of audiovisual equipment supplied
         by a Canadian supplier of a flat-rate royalty compulsorily included in the entry price to the amusement park in which the
         equipment is operated, whether or not the visitor who paid the royalty made use of the equipment)?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
 Admissibility
The French Government submits that the reference for a preliminary ruling must be declared inadmissible.
      
First, it submits that recourse to Article of the implementing regulation by the customs authorities of a Member State
         presupposes that they consider that the conditions laid down in Article 220(2)(b) of the Community Customs Code are fulfilled
         or that they are in doubt as to the precise scope of the criteria under that provision with regard to a particular case.
      
According to the French Government, the main proceedings do not relate to a request for remission of customs duties submitted
         in respect of the second situation provided for in the second subparagraph of Article 236(1) of the Community Customs Code,
         which applies when the amount of import duties has been entered in the accounts contrary to Article 220(2) of the Code, but
         concerns a dispute as to whether a customs debt was justified. The Conseil général de la Vienne applied for remission of import
         duties in respect of the first situation mentioned in the second subparagraph of Article 236(1) according to which remission
         of those duties is granted where, when they were entered in the accounts, the amount of such duties was not legally owed.
         The French Government adds that an operator cannot at the same time dispute the amount of a customs debt and request that
         a part of the amount not be subsequently entered in the accounts on the basis of an alleged error which was made by the customs
         authorities.
      
Secondly, the French Government observes that the request for an opinion sent to the Commission on September by the
         customs authorities related to the customs value of the equipment imported in and sought to obtain confirmation of their
         analysis as regards the amount legally owed in the circumstances. If, on the other hand, the customs authorities had intended
         to refer the matter to the Commission on the basis of Article of the implementing regulation, which would have entailed
         the matter’s being removed from the competence of the Member State concerned, they would not have done so by means of a mere
         note, but should have sent the file to that institution.
      
In that regard, it must be recalled that, in proceedings under Article EC, which are based on a clear separation of functions
         between the national courts and the Court of Justice, any assessment of the facts in the case is a matter for the national
         court. Similarly, it is solely for the national court before which the dispute has been brought, and which must assume responsibility
         for the subsequent judicial decision, to determine in the light of the particular circumstances of the case both the need
         for a preliminary ruling in order to enable it to deliver judgment and the relevance of the questions which it submits to
         the Court. Consequently, where the questions submitted concern the interpretation of Community law, the Court is in principle
         bound to give a ruling (see, inter alia, Case C-326/IKA [2003] ECR I-1703, paragraph 27, and Case C-145/Keller [2005] ECR I-2529, paragraph 33).
      
Nevertheless, the Court has also held that, in exceptional circumstances, it can examine the conditions in which the case
         was referred to it by the national court, in order to confirm its own jurisdiction (see, to that effect, Case 244/Foglia [1981] ECR 3045, paragraph 21). The Court may refuse to rule on a question referred for a preliminary ruling by a national
         court only where it is quite obvious that the interpretation of Community law that is sought bears no relation to the facts
         of the main action or its purpose, where the problem is hypothetical, or where the Court does not have before it the factual
         or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions submitted to it (see, inter alia, Case C-379/PreussenElektra [2001] ECR I-2099, paragraph 39, and Case C-390/Canal Satélite Digital [2002] ECR I-607, paragraph 19). 
      
That is not true of the case in the main proceedings.
      
In this case, it is true that an examination of the documents submitted to the Court in these proceedings, including the note
         of September which the customs authorities sent to the Commission, seems to show that the main proceedings relate
         to a request for the remission of customs import duties in respect of the first situation provided for in the second subparagraph
         of Article 236(1) of the Community Customs Code, namely that in which the amount of customs duties was not legally owed, and
         not in respect of the second situation provided for in that provision which justifies recourse to Article of the implementing
         regulation by the national customs authorities.
      
However, it is important to note that it is in the light of, inter alia, those same documents that the Cour d’appel de Poitiers
         considered, first, that those authorities had been in doubt as to the precise scope of the conditions permitting the person
         liable for payment to benefit from the absence of subsequent entry in the accounts of customs duties which, according to those
         authorities, should have been declared by that person in the course of a number of consecutive years, but were not on the
         ground that it considered, without any allegation of bad faith on its part, that it was not liable for the duties claimed
         and, second, that the main proceedings could not be regarded unambiguously as a procedure for the remission of a customs debt
         because they could just as easily be regarded as a recovery procedure.
      
Furthermore, it must be borne in mind that the Court must take account, under the division of jurisdiction between the Community
         judicature and the national courts, of the factual and legislative context, as described in the order for reference, in which
         the questions put to it are set (see, inter alia, Case C-475/Ambulanz Glöckner [2001] ECR I‑8089, paragraph 10, and Case C-136/Dörr and Ünal [2005] ECR I‑4759, paragraph 46).
      
Therefore, it appears that the question referred for a preliminary ruling concerns the purpose of the case in the main proceedings,
         as set out by the national court, and that the answer to the question referred is likely to be of use to that court in deciding
         whether or not the customs authorities should have submitted the case to the Commission, under Article of the implementing
         regulation, so that a decision might be taken by it.
      
It follows that the reference for a preliminary ruling is admissible.
      
 Substance
Having regard to the facts of the main proceedings and to the wording of the question referred, its examination must relate
         only to the interpretation of Article of the implementing regulation and not to whether the additional royalties paid
         to IMAX have to be incorporated in the customs value of the imported equipment.
      
The national court expressed no uncertainty in that regard and confined itself to asking the Court about the scope of the
         obligation imposed on the national customs authorities by Article of the implementing regulation where they have expressed
         doubts, at any time during the recovery procedure or the procedure for remission of a customs debt, as regards the absence
         of subsequent entry in the accounts of uncollected customs duties in well-defined circumstances.
      
Therefore, it must be concluded that, by its question, the national court is essentially asking whether Article of the
         implementing regulation is to be interpreted as meaning that it obliges the national customs authorities to submit a case
         to the Commission so that a decision may be taken by it where, at any time during the recovery procedure or the procedure
         for remission of a customs debt, those authorities have expressed doubts as regards the absence of entry in the accounts of
         customs duties which were not collected due to an omission on the part of an importer acting in good faith to declare royalties
         which should have been incorporated in the customs value of the imported goods, and given notice of their intention to refer
         the matter to the Commission.
      
Before answering the question thus reformulated, the version of Article of the implementing regulation which is applicable
         ratione temporis to the facts of the main proceedings must be identified. In its observations, the French Government submits that it is the
         version of Article stemming from Commission Regulation (EC) No 1335/of July amending Regulation (EEC) No
         2454/(OJ L 187, p. 16) which must form the subject-matter of the Court’s interpretation and not that referred to by
         the national court, on the ground that the provision lays down a procedural rule and, therefore, is deemed to apply to all
         proceedings pending at the time when it entered into force.
      
The French Government submits, in that regard, that under the second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 1335/the
         amendments it makes to the implementing regulation are to be applied to all cases which had not been submitted to the Commission
         for a decision prior to August 2003. Since the conditions laid down in Articles and of the implementing regulation
         for submitting cases to the Commission have been amended and, in particular, the threshold of the amount not collected from
         an operator has been raised to EUR 000, it follows that the customs authorities are not entitled to submit the case to
         the Commission because the sum claimed in the main proceedings is EUR 286.
      
Such an argument cannot be upheld.
      
While it is true that, according to well-established case-law, procedural rules are generally held to apply to all proceedings
         pending at the time when they enter into force, whereas substantive rules are usually interpreted as not applying to situations
         existing before their entry into force (see, inter alia, Joined Cases C‑121/and C-122/CT Control (Rotterdam) and JCT Benelux v Commission [1993] ECR I-3873, paragraph 22; Case C-61/De Haan [1999] ECR I-5003, paragraph 13; and Case C-251/Ilumitrónica [2002] ECR I-10433, paragraph 29), the fact remains that, as the Advocate General observed in points and of his Opinion,
         the new law applies immediately only in relation to situations which, although they arose at the time when the earlier legislation
         was in force, continue to produce effects when the new legislation becomes applicable.
      
Clearly, on August when the amendments made to the implementing regulation by Regulation No 1335/entered into
         force, the legal situation relevant in the present case no longer produced any effects. In that regard, it is apparent from
         the documents in the file that on July the Directeur général des douanes et droits indirects informed the Conseil
         général de la Vienne of his decision to refer the matter to the Commission, that the Conseil général de la Vienne had proceedings
         brought against it before the Tribunal d’instance de Poitiers in July and that the customs authorities sent a request
         for an opinion to the Commission on September 2001.
      
Consequently, in order to give the national court an answer enabling it to decide whether, as a result of having expressed,
         at any time during a recovery procedure or a procedure for remission, doubts concerning the absence of subsequent entry in
         the accounts of uncollected customs duties, the customs authorities should have submitted the case to the Commission so that
         a decision might be taken by it under Article of the implementing regulation, the Court must interpret the provisions
         of the implementing regulation in the version thereof stemming from Regulation No 1677/which inter alia set, in respect
         of referrals to the Commission, the threshold of uncollected duties at EUR 000.
      
Article 220(2)(b) of the Community Customs Code sets out the conditions which must be satisfied if the national customs authorities
         are to be able not to make a subsequent entry in the accounts of the amount of a customs debt. As regards the procedure for
         remission of duties, Article of the Code refers to the same conditions to the extent that it envisages, as one of the
         situations enabling the customs authorities to decide not to collect a customs debt, the fact that the amount thereof has
         been entered in the accounts contrary to Article 220(2).
      
Those conditions are threefold, namely, an error on the part of the customs authorities which could not reasonably have been
         detected by the person liable for payment, the good faith of the latter and compliance on the part of the person liable for
         payment with all the provisions laid down by the legislation in force as regards the customs declaration.
      
Those three conditions were already set out as such in Article 5(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 1697/of July on the post-clearance recovery of import duties or export duties which have not been required of the person liable for payment
         on goods entered for a customs procedure involving the obligation to pay such duties (OJ L 197, p. 1), a regulation which
         was repealed by the Community Customs Code. According to the settled case-law of the Court, those three conditions must be
         satisfied cumulatively (see, inter alia, Joined Cases C‑153/and C-204/Faroe Seafood and Others [1996] ECR I‑2465, paragraph 83; Case C-370/Covita [1998] ECR I-7711, paragraph 24; Case C-15/Sommer [2000] ECR I-8989, paragraph 35; and Ilumitrónica, paragraph 37). 
      
It follows from the wording of Article of the implementing regulation read in conjunction with Article thereof that,
         in a procedure for recovery of uncollected duties the amount of which reaches the threshold of EUR 000, if the national
         customs authorities are convinced that those conditions are not met they must proceed directly to recovery.
      
It is also apparent from those provisions that where the threshold of EUR is reached the customs authorities may not
         act alone, but are required to bring the matter before the Commission and act in concert with it in two situations, namely,
         if they consider that in the circumstances of the case those conditions are fulfilled or if they are in doubt as to the precise
         scope of the criteria laid down in Article 220(2)(b) of the Community Customs Code with regard to a particular case. The same
         is true as regards a procedure for remission of customs duties initiated by the person concerned under Article of that
         code in conjunction with Article 220(2)(b) thereof.
      
In the event of a case being brought before the Commission, the procedure laid down by the implementing regulation ends with
         a decision determining whether the circumstances examined make it possible not to effect subsequent entry in the accounts
         of the duties at issue or grant remission thereof. In the context of that procedure, the right to a hearing on the part of
         the persons concerned is in fact guaranteed and, under Article of the implementing regulation, the Commission takes a
         decision after consulting a group of experts composed of representatives of all the Member States.
      
As the Court has stated with regard to Article of Regulation No 1697/79, the objective of conferring on the Commission a
         power of decision in regard to the post-clearance recovery of customs duties is to ensure the uniform application of Community
         law. That is likely to be jeopardised in cases where an application to waive post-clearance recovery is allowed, since the
         assessment which a Member State may make in taking a favourable decision is likely, in actual fact, owing to the probable
         absence of any appeal, to escape any review by means of which the uniform application of the conditions laid down in the Community
         legislation may be ensured. On the other hand, that is not the case where the national authorities proceed to effect recovery,
         whatever the amount in issue. It is then open to the person concerned to challenge such a decision before the national courts.
         As a result, it will then be possible for the uniformity of Community law to be ensured by the Court of Justice through the
         preliminary ruling procedure (Case C‑64/Deutsche Fernsprecher [1990] ECR I-2535, paragraph 13; Case C-348/Mecanarte [1991] ECR I-3277, paragraph 33; and Faroe Seafood and Others, paragraph 34).
      
Therefore, as regards the second situation, namely a case where the customs authorities are in doubt, they are required to
         submit the case to the Commission only where that doubt relates to the precise scope of the criteria laid down in Article
         220(2)(b) of the Community Customs Code with regard to a particular case and solely on the basis of the existence of such
         doubt. On the other hand, if subsequently such doubt disappeared, even after the national customs authorities had expressed
         their intention to refer the matter to the Commission, they would no longer be required to submit the case to the Commission,
         and should, acting alone, proceed to effect recovery or refuse remission.
      
In any event, where the doubts on the part of the national customs authorities relate to a matter other than that of the precise
         scope of the criteria laid down in Article 220(2)(b) of the Code with regard to a particular case, such as the possibility
         of not subsequently entering in the accounts customs duties not collected due to an omission on the part of an importer to
         declare royalties which should have been incorporated in the customs value of the imported goods, even though that importer
         is acting in good faith, Article of the implementing regulation does not apply and therefore those authorities are not
         required to submit the case to the Commission so that a decision may be taken by it.
      
Since good faith on the part of the person liable for payment is only one of the conditions which must necessarily be met
         before absence of subsequent entry in the accounts of customs duties may be contemplated, it cannot, on its own, oblige the
         national customs authorities to refer the matter to the Commission under Article of the implementing regulation.
      
Consequently, the answer to the question referred for a preliminary ruling must be that Article of the implementing regulation
         must be interpreted as meaning that, in the context of a recovery procedure or a procedure for remission of uncollected customs
         duties, the national customs authorities are not required to submit the case to the Commission for a decision where the doubts
         which they had had as regards the precise scope of the criteria laid down in Article 220(2)(b) of the Community Customs Code
         with regard to a particular case have dissipated, even after those authorities have expressed their intention to refer the
         matter to the Commission, or where the doubts relate to the subsequent entry in the accounts of customs duties which were
         not collected due to an omission on the part of an importer acting in good faith to declare royalties which should have been
         incorporated in the customs value of the imported goods.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
Article of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2454/of July laying down provisions for the implementation of Council
            Regulation (EEC) No 2913/establishing the Community Customs Code, as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1677/of
            July 1998, must be interpreted as meaning that, in the context of a recovery procedure or a procedure for remission of
            uncollected customs duties, the national customs authorities are not required to submit the case to the Commission for a decision
            where the doubts which they had had as regards the precise scope of the criteria laid down in Article 220(2)(b) of Council
            Regulation (EEC) No 2913/of October establishing the Community Customs Code with regard to a particular case have
            dissipated, even after those authorities have expressed their intention to refer the matter to the Commission, or where the
            doubts relate to the subsequent entry in the accounts of customs duties which were not collected due to an omission on the
            part of an importer acting in good faith to declare royalties which should have been incorporated in the customs value of
            the imported goods.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 