
Case C-4/Gesellschaft für Antriebstechnik mbH & Co. KG
v
Lamellen und Kupplungsbau Beteiligungs KG
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Oberlandesgericht Düsseldorf)
(Brussels Convention – Article 16(4) – Proceedings concerned with the registration or validity of patents – Exclusive jurisdiction of the court of the place of deposit or registration – Declaratory action to establish no infringement – Question of the patent’s validity raised indirectly)
Opinion of Advocate General Geelhoed delivered on September Judgment of the Court (First Chamber), July Summary of the Judgment
Convention on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments – Exclusive jurisdiction – Proceedings concerned with the registration
            or validity of patents 
(Convention of September 1968, Art. 16(4))
Article 16(4) of the Convention of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial
         Matters, as last amended by the Convention of November on the Accession of the Republic of Austria, the Republic of
         Finland and the Kingdom of Sweden, is to be interpreted as meaning that the rule of exclusive jurisdiction laid down therein
         concerns all proceedings relating to the registration or validity of a patent, irrespective of whether the issue is raised
         by way of an action or a plea in objection. First, to allow a court seised of the main action relating to a patent, such as
         an action for infringement or for a declaration that there has been no infringement, to establish, indirectly, the invalidity
         of the patent at issue would undermine the binding nature of the rule of jurisdiction laid down in that article and would
         circumvent its mandatory nature. Second, the possibility which this offers would have the effect of multiplying the heads
         of jurisdiction and would be liable to undermine the predictability of the rules of jurisdiction laid down by the Convention,
         and consequently to undermine the principle of legal certainty, which is the basis of the Convention. Finally, to allow, within
         the scheme of the Convention, decisions in which courts other than those of a State in which a particular patent is issued
         rule indirectly on the validity of that patent would also multiply the risk of conflicting decisions which the Convention
         seeks specifically to avoid. 
      
(see paras 26-29, 31, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Brussels Convention – Article 16(4) – Proceedings concerned with the registration or validity of patents – Exclusive jurisdiction of the court of the place of deposit or registration – Declaratory action to establish no infringement – Question of the patent’s validity raised indirectly)
In Case C-4/03,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling, pursuant to the Protocol of June on the interpretation by the Court of Justice
         of the Convention of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters, from
         the Oberlandesgericht Düsseldorf (Germany), made by decision of December 2002, received at the Court on January 2003,
         in the proceedings
      
Gesellschaft für Antriebstechnik mbH & Co. KG
v
Lamellen und Kupplungsbau Beteiligungs KG,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, N. Colneric, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, M. Ilešič and E. Levits, Judges,
Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed,
Registrar: F. Contet, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on July 2004,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Gesellschaft für Antriebstechnik mbH & Co. KG, by T. Musmann, Rechtsanwalt,
–       Lamellen und Kupplungsbau Beteiligungs KG, by T. Reimann, Rechtsanwalt,
–       the German Government, by R. Wagner, acting as Agent,
–       the French Government, by G. de Bergues and A. Bodard-Hermant, acting as Agents,
–       the United Kingdom Government, by K. Manji, acting as Agent, assisted by  D. Alexander, Barrister,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by A.‑M. Rouchaud and S. Grünheid, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 16(4) of the Convention of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters (OJ L 304, p. 36), as amended by the
         Convention of October on the Accession of the Kingdom of Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
         Northern Ireland (OJ L 304, p. 1, and – amended version – p. 77), by the Convention of October on the Accession
         of the Hellenic Republic (OJ L 388, p. 1), by the Convention of May on the Accession of the Kingdom of Spain
         and the Portuguese Republic (OJ L 285, p. 1), and by the Convention of November on the Accession of the Republic
         of Austria, the Republic of Finland and the Kingdom of Sweden (OJ C 15, p. 1) (‘the Convention’).
      
The reference has been made in the course of proceedings between Gesellschaft für Antriebstechnik mbH & Co. KG (‘GAT’) and
         Lamellen und Kupplungsbau Beteiligungs KG (‘LuK’) concerning the marketing of products by the first of those companies which,
         according to the second, amounts to an infringement of two French patents of which it is the proprietor.
      
 Legal context
Article of the Brussels Convention, which constitutes Section (‘Exclusive jurisdiction’) of Title II, concerning the
         rules of jurisdiction, states:
      
‘The following courts shall have exclusive jurisdiction, regardless of domicile:
…
4.      in proceedings concerned with the registration or validity of patents, trade marks, designs, or other similar rights required
         to be deposited or registered, the courts of the Contracting State in which the deposit or registration has been applied for,
         has taken place or is under the terms of an international convention deemed to have taken place;
      
…’
The fourth paragraph of Article of the Convention, which, together with Article 18, makes up Section (‘Prorogation of
         jurisdiction’) of Title II, provides that ‘[a]greements … conferring jurisdiction shall have no legal force … if the courts
         whose jurisdiction they purport to exclude have exclusive jurisdiction by virtue of Article 16.’
      
Article of the Convention states:
‘Apart from jurisdiction derived from other provisions of this Convention, a court of a Contracting State before whom a defendant
         enters an appearance shall have jurisdiction. This rule shall not apply … where another court has exclusive jurisdiction by
         virtue of Article 16.’
      
Article of the Convention, which features in Section (‘Examination as to jurisdiction and admissibility’) of Title II,
         provides:
      
‘Where a court of a Contracting State is seised of a claim which is principally concerned with a matter over which the courts
         of another Contracting State have exclusive jurisdiction by virtue of Article 16, it shall declare of its own motion that
         it has no jurisdiction.’
      
According to the first paragraph of Article of the Convention, which is in Section (‘Recognition’) of Title III, concerning
         the rules of recognition and enforcement, ‘a judgment shall not be recognised if it conflicts with the provisions of Sections
         3, or of Title II’. The second paragraph of Article of the Convention, which is in Section (‘Enforcement’) of Title
         III, refers, in regard to the possible grounds for refusing enforcement of a decision, to the first paragraph of Article 28,
         cited above.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
GAT and LuK, companies established in Germany, are economic operators competing in the field of motor vehicle technology.
GAT made an offer to a motor vehicle manufacturer, also established in Germany, with a view to winning a contract to supply
         mechanical damper springs. LuK alleged that the spring which was the subject of GAT’s proposal infringed two French patents
         of which LuK was the proprietor.
      
GAT brought a declaratory action before the Landgericht (Regional Court), Düsseldorf to establish that it was not in breach
         of the patents, maintaining that its products did not infringe the rights under the French patents owned by LuK and, further,
         that those patents were either void or invalid.
      
The Landgericht Düsseldorf considered that it had international jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the action relating to the
         alleged infringement of the rights deriving from the French patents. It considered that it also had jurisdiction to adjudicate
         upon the plea as to the alleged nullity of those patents. The Landgericht dismissed the action brought by GAT, holding that
         the patents at issue satisfied the requirements of patentability.
      
On appeal by GAT, the Oberlandesgericht (Higher Regional Court) Düsseldorf  decided to stay the proceedings and refer the
         following question to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Should Article 16(4) of the Convention … be interpreted as meaning that the exclusive jurisdiction conferred by that provision
         on the courts of the Contracting State in which the deposit or registration of a patent has been applied for, has taken place
         or is deemed to have taken place under the terms of an international convention only applies if proceedings (with erga omnes effect) are brought to declare the patent invalid or are proceedings concerned with the validity of patents within the meaning of the aforementioned provision where the defendant
         in a patent infringement action or the claimant in a declaratory action to establish that a patent is not infringed pleads
         that the patent is invalid or void and that there is also no patent infringement for that reason, irrespective of whether
         the court seised of the proceedings considers the plea in objection to be substantiated or unsubstantiated and of when the
         plea in objection is raised in the course of proceedings?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
By that question, the referring court seeks in essence to ascertain the scope of the exclusive jurisdiction provided for in
         Article 16(4) of the Convention in relation to patents. It asks whether that rule concerns all proceedings concerned with
         the registration or validity of a patent, irrespective of whether the question is raised by way of an action or a plea in
         objection, or whether its application is limited solely to those cases in which the question of a patent’s registration or
         validity is raised by way of an action.
      
It should be recalled, in this connection, that the notion of proceedings ‘concerned with the registration or validity of
         patents’ contained in Article 16(4) of the Convention must be regarded as an independent concept intended to have uniform
         application in all the Contracting States (Case 288/Duijnstee [1983] ECR 3663, paragraph 19).
      
The Court has thus held that proceedings relating to the validity, existence or lapse of a patent or an alleged right of priority
         by reason of an earlier deposit are to be regarded as proceedings ‘concerned with the registration or validity of patents’
         (Duijnstee, cited above, paragraph 24)
      
If, on the other hand, the dispute does not concern the validity of the patent or the existence of the deposit or registration
         and these matters are not disputed by the parties, the dispute will not be covered by Article 16(4) of the Convention (Duijnstee, paragraphs and 26). Such would be the case, for example, with an infringement action, in which the question of the validity
         of the patent allegedly infringed is not called into question.
      
In practice, however, the issue of a patent’s validity is frequently raised as a plea in objection in an infringement action,
         the defendant seeking to have the claimant retroactively denied the right on which the claimant relies and thus have the action
         brought against him dismissed. The issue can also be invoked, as in the case in the main proceedings, in support of a declaratory
         action seeking to establish that there has been no infringement, whereby the claimant seeks to establish that the defendant
         has no enforceable right in regard to the invention in question.
      
As the Commission has observed, it cannot be established from the wording of Article 16(4) of the Convention whether the rule
         of jurisdiction set out therein applies only to cases in which the question of a patent’s validity is raised by way of an
         action or whether it extends to cases in which the question is raised as a plea in objection.
      
Article of the Convention, which, in certain language versions, refers to a claim being brought ‘principally’, does not
         provide further clarity. Apart from the fact that the degree of clarity of the wording of that provision varies according
         to the particular language version, that provision, as the Commission has observed, does not confer jurisdiction but merely
         requires the court seised to examine whether it has jurisdiction and in certain cases to declare of its own motion that it
         has none.
      
In those circumstances, Article 16(4) of the Convention must be interpreted by reference to its objective and its position
         in the scheme of the Convention.
      
In relation to the objective pursued, it should be noted that the rules of exclusive jurisdiction laid down in Article of the Convention seek to ensure that jurisdiction rests with courts closely linked to the proceedings in fact and law.
      
Thus, the exclusive jurisdiction in proceedings concerned with the registration or validity of patents conferred upon the
         courts of the Contracting State in which the deposit or registration has been applied for or made is justified by the fact
         that those courts are best placed to adjudicate upon cases in which the dispute itself concerns the validity of the patent
         or the existence of the deposit or registration (Duijnstee, paragraph 22). The courts of the Contracting State on whose territory the registers are kept may rule, applying their own
         national law, on the validity and effects of the patents which have been issued in that State. This concern for the sound
         administration of justice becomes all the more important in the field of patents since, given the specialised nature of this
         area, a number of Contracting States have set up a system of specific judicial protection, to ensure that these types of cases
         are dealt with by specialised courts.
      
That exclusive jurisdiction is also justified by the fact that the issue of patents necessitates the involvement of the national
         administrative authorities (see, to that effect, the Report on the Convention by Mr Jenard, OJ C 59, p. 1, at p. 36).
      
In relation to the position of Article within the scheme of the Convention, it should be pointed out that the rules of
         jurisdiction provided for in that article are of an exclusive and mandatory nature, the application of which is specifically
         binding on both litigants and courts. Parties may not derogate from them by an agreement conferring jurisdiction (fourth paragraph
         of Article of the Convention) or by the defendant’s voluntary appearance (Article of the Convention). Where a court
         of a Contracting State is seised of a claim which is principally concerned with a matter over which the courts of another
         Contracting State have jurisdiction by virtue of Article 16, it must declare of its own motion that it has no jurisdiction
         (Article of the Convention). A judgment given which falls foul of the provisions of Article does not benefit from the
         system of recognition and enforcement under the Convention (first paragraph of Article and second paragraph of Article
         thereof).
      
In the light of the position of Article 16(4) within the scheme of the Convention and the objective pursued, the view must
         be taken that the exclusive jurisdiction provided for by that provision should apply whatever the form of proceedings in which
         the issue of a patent’s validity is raised, be it by way of an action or a plea in objection, at the time the case is brought
         or at a later stage in the proceedings.
      
First, to allow a court seised of an action for infringement or for a declaration that there has been no infringement to establish,
         indirectly, the invalidity of the patent at issue would undermine the binding nature of the rule of jurisdiction laid down
         in Article 16(4) of the Convention.
      
While the parties cannot rely on Article 16(4) of the Convention, the claimant would be able, simply by the way it formulates
         its claims, to circumvent the mandatory nature of the rule of jurisdiction laid down in that article. 
      
Second, the possibility which this offers of circumventing Article 16(4) of the Convention would have the effect of multiplying
         the heads of jurisdiction and would be liable to undermine the predictability of the rules of jurisdiction laid down by the
         Convention, and consequently to undermine the principle of legal certainty, which is the basis of the Convention (see Case
         C-256/Besix [2002] ECR I-1699, paragraphs to 26, Case C-281/Owusu [2005] ECR I-1383, paragraph 41, and Case C-539/Roche Nederlandand Others [2006] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 37).
      
Third, to allow, within the scheme of the Convention, decisions in which courts other than those of a State in which a particular
         patent is issued rule indirectly on the validity of that patent would also multiply the risk of conflicting decisions which
         the Convention seeks specifically to avoid (see, to that effect, Case C‑406/Tatry [1994] ECR I-5439, paragraph 52, and Besix, cited above, paragraph 27).
      
The argument, advanced by LuK and the German Government, that under German law the effects of a judgment indirectly ruling
         on the validity of a patent are limited to the parties to the proceedings, is not an appropriate response to that risk. The
         effects flowing from such a decision are in fact determined by national law. In several Contracting States, however, a decision
         to annul a patent has erga omnes effect. In order to avoid the risk of contradictory decisions, it is therefore necessary to limit the jurisdiction of the
         courts of a State other than that in which the patent is issued to rule indirectly on the validity of a foreign patent to
         only those cases in which, under the applicable national law, the effects of the decision to be given are limited to the parties
         to the proceedings. Such a limitation would, however, lead to distortions, thereby undermining the equality and uniformity
         of rights and obligations arising from the Convention for the Contracting States and the persons concerned (Duijnstee, paragraph 13).
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the question referred must be that Article 16(4) of the Convention is to be interpreted
         as meaning that the rule of exclusive jurisdiction laid down therein concerns all proceedings relating to the registration
         or validity of a patent, irrespective of whether the issue is raised by way of an action or a plea in objection.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
Article 16(4) of the Convention of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial
            Matters, as last amended by the Convention of November on the Accession of the Republic of Austria, the Republic of
            Finland and the Kingdom of Sweden, is to be interpreted as meaning that the rule of exclusive jurisdiction laid down therein
            concerns all proceedings relating to the registration or validity of a patent, irrespective of whether the issue is raised
            by way of an action or a plea in objection. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 