
Case C-70/Scarlet Extended SA
v
Société belge des auteurs, compositeurs et éditeurs SCRL (SABAM)
(Request for a preliminary ruling from the cour d’appel de Bruxelles)
(Information society – Copyright – Internet – ‘Peer-to-peer’ software – Internet service providers – Installation of a system for filtering electronic communications in order to prevent file sharing which infringes copyright
         – No general obligation to monitor information transmitted)
      
Summary of the Judgment
Approximation of laws – Information society – Copyright and related rights – Protection of personal data in the electronic
            communications sector – Injunction ordering an internet service provider to install a system for filtering all electronic
            communications, indiscriminately applicable to all its customers as a preventive measure, exclusively at its expense, and
            for an unlimited period, to prevent intellectual property infringements – Unlawful
(Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, Arts and 11; European Parliament and Council Directives 95/46, 2000/31,
            Art. 15(1), 2001/29, 2002/and 2004/48, Art. 3(1))
Directives 2000/31, on certain legal aspects of information society services, in particular electronic commerce, in the Internal
         Market, 2001/29, on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related rights in the information society, 2004/on the enforcement of intellectual property rights, 95/46, on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing
         of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and 2002/58, concerning the processing of personal data and the protection
         of privacy in the electronic communications sector, read together and construed in the light of the requirements stemming
         from the protection of the applicable fundamental rights, must be interpreted as precluding an injunction addressed to an
         internet service provider ordering it to introduce a system for filtering 
      
– all electronic communications passing via its services, in particular those involving the use of ‘peer-to-peer’ software;
– which applies indiscriminately to all its customers;
– as a preventative measure;
– exclusively at its expense; and
– for an unlimited period,
capable of identifying on that provider’s network the movement of electronic files containing a musical, cinematographic or
         audio-visual work in respect of which the applicant claims to hold intellectual property rights, with a view to blocking the
         transfer of files the sharing of which infringes copyright.
      
Such an injunction addressed to that internet service provider would oblige it actively to monitor all the data relating to
         each of its customers in order to prevent any future infringement of intellectual-property right, thus requiring general monitoring
         prohibited by Article 15(1) of Directive 2000/31. It would, moreover, result in a serious infringement of the freedom of the
         internet service provider concerned to conduct its business since it would require that provider to install a complicated,
         costly, permanent computer system at its own expense, which would also be contrary to the conditions laid down in Article
         3(1) of Directive 2004/48, which requires measures to ensure the respect of intellectual-property rights not to be unnecessarily
         complicated or costly. Therefore such an injunction would not meet the requirement that a fair balance be struck between,
         on the one hand, the protection of the intellectual-property right enjoyed by copyright holders, and, on the other hand, that
         of the freedom to conduct business enjoyed by operators such as internet service providers. The effects of such an injunction
         would not be limited, moreover, to those internet service providers, as the filtering system may also infringe the fundamental
         rights of their customers, namely, their right to protection of their personal data and their freedom to receive or impart
         information, those rights being safeguarded by Articles and of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union,
         respectively. First, the injunction would involve a systematic analysis of all content and the collection and identification
         of users’ IP addresses from which unlawful content on the network is sent. Those addresses are protected personal data, for
         they allow those users to be precisely identified. Second, the injunction would be likely to prejudice freedom of information
         since that system would be unlikely to distinguish adequately between unlawful content and lawful content, with the result
         that its introduction could lead to the blocking of lawful communications.
      
(see paras 40, 48-52, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Information society – Copyright – Internet – ‘Peer-to-peer’ software – Internet service providers – Installation of a system for filtering electronic communications in order to prevent file sharing which infringes copyright
         – No general obligation to monitor information transmitted)
      
In Case C‑70/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the cour d’appel de Bruxelles (Belgium), made by decision of
         January 2010, received at the Court on February 2010, in the proceedings
      
Scarlet Extended SA
v
Société belge des auteurs, compositeurs et éditeurs SCRL (SABAM),
intervening parties:
Belgian Entertainment Association Video ASBL (BEA Video),
Belgian Entertainment Association Music ASBL (BEA Music),
Internet Service Provider Association ASBL (ISPA),
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, J. Malenovský (Rapporteur), R. Silva de Lapuerta, E. Juhász and G. Arestis,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Cruz Villalón,
Registrar: C. Strömholm, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on January 2011,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Scarlet Extended SA, by T. De Meese and B. Van Asbroeck, avocats,
–        Société belge des auteurs, compositeurs et éditeurs SCRL (SABAM), Belgian Entertainment Association Video ASBL (BEA Video)
         and Belgian Entertainment Association Music ASBL (BEA Music), by F. de Visscher, B. Michaux and F. Brison, avocats,
      
–        Internet Service Provider Association ASBL (ISPA), by G. Somers, avocat,
–        the Belgian Government, by T. Materne, J.-C. Halleux and C. Pochet, acting as Agents,
–        the Czech Government, by M. Smolek and K. Havlíčková, acting as Agents,
–        the Italian Government, by G. Palmieri, acting as Agent, assisted by S. Fiorentino, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Netherlands Government, by C. Wissels and B. Koopman, acting as Agents,
–        the Polish Government, by M. Szpunar, M. Drwięcki and J. Goliński, acting as Agents,
–        the Finnish Government, by M. Pere, acting as Agent,
–        the European Commission, by J. Samnadda and C. Vrignon, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 2011,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Directives:
      
–        2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of June on certain legal aspects of information society services,
         in particular electronic commerce, in the Internal Market (‘Directive on electronic commerce’) (OJ L 178, p. 1); 
      
–        2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of May on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright
         and related rights in the information society (OJ L 167, p. 10);
      
–        2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of April on the enforcement of intellectual property rights
         (OJ L 157, p. 45, and corrigendum OJ L 195, p. 16); 
      
–        95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of October on the protection of individuals with regard to
         the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data (OJ L 281, p. 31); and 
      
–        2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of July concerning the processing of personal data and the
         protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector (Directive on privacy and electronic communications) (OJ L 201, p. 37).
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between Scarlet Extended SA (‘Scarlet’) and the Société belge des auteurs, compositeurs
         et éditeurs SCRL (SABAM) (‘SABAM’) concerning Scarlet’s refusal to install a system for filtering electronic communications
         which use file-sharing software (‘peer-to-peer’), with a view to preventing file sharing which infringes copyright.
      
 Legal context
 European Union law
 Directive 2000/Recitals and in the preamble to Directive 2000/state:
      
‘(45)      The limitations of the liability of intermediary service providers established in this Directive do not affect the possibility
         of injunctions of different kinds; such injunctions can in particular consist of orders by courts or administrative authorities
         requiring the termination or prevention of any infringement, including the removal of illegal information or the disabling
         of access to it.
      
…
(47)      Member States are prevented from imposing a monitoring obligation on service providers only with respect to obligations of
         a general nature; this does not concern monitoring obligations in a specific case and, in particular, does not affect orders
         by national authorities in accordance with national legislation.’ 
      
Article of Directive 2000/states:
      
‘1.      This Directive seeks to contribute to the proper functioning of the internal market by ensuring the free movement of information
         society services between the Member States.
      
2.      This Directive approximates, to the extent necessary for the achievement of the objective set out in paragraph 1, certain
         national provisions on information society services relating to the internal market, the establishment of service providers,
         commercial communications, electronic contracts, the liability of intermediaries, codes of conduct, out-of-court dispute settlements,
         court actions and cooperation between Member States.
      
…’
Article of that directive, which features in Section 4, entitled ‘Liability of intermediary service providers’, of Chapter
         II thereof, provides:
      
‘1.      Where an information society service is provided that consists of the transmission in a communication network of information
         provided by a recipient of the service, or the provision of access to a communication network, Member States shall ensure
         that the service provider is not liable for the information transmitted, on condition that the provider:
      
(a)      does not initiate the transmission;
(b)      does not select the receiver of the transmission; and
(c)      does not select or modify the information contained in the transmission.
…
3.      This Article shall not affect the possibility for a court or administrative authority, in accordance with Member States’ legal
         systems, of requiring the service provider to terminate or prevent an infringement.’
      
Article of Directive 2000/31, which also features in Section of Chapter II, states:
      
‘1.      Member States shall not impose a general obligation on providers, when providing the services covered by Articles 12, and
         14, to monitor the information which they transmit or store, nor a general obligation actively to seek facts or circumstances
         indicating unlawful activity.
      
2.      Member States may establish obligations for information society service providers promptly to inform the competent public
         authorities of alleged unlawful activities undertaken or information provided by recipients of their service or obligations
         to communicate to the competent authorities, at their request, information enabling the identification of recipients of their
         service with whom they have storage agreements.’
      
 Directive 2001/Recitals and in the preamble to Directive 2001/state:
      
‘(16)      … This Directive should be implemented within a timescale similar to that for the implementation of [Directive 2000/31], since
         that Directive provides a harmonised framework of principles and provisions relevant, inter alia, to important parts of this
         Directive. This Directive is without prejudice to provisions relating to liability in that Directive.
      
...
(59)      In the digital environment, in particular, the services of intermediaries may increasingly be used by third parties for infringing
         activities. In many cases such intermediaries are best placed to bring such infringing activities to an end. Therefore, without
         prejudice to any other sanctions and remedies available, rightholders should have the possibility of applying for an injunction
         against an intermediary who carries a third party’s infringement of a protected work or other subject-matter in a network.
         This possibility should be available even where the acts carried out by the intermediary are exempted under Article 5. The
         conditions and modalities relating to such injunctions should be left to the national law of the Member States.’ 
      
Article of Directive 2001/states:
      
‘1.      Member States shall provide appropriate sanctions and remedies in respect of infringements of the rights and obligations set
         out in this Directive and shall take all the measures necessary to ensure that those sanctions and remedies are applied. The
         sanctions thus provided for shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive.
      
…
3.      Member States shall ensure that rightholders are in a position to apply for an injunction against intermediaries whose services
         are used by a third party to infringe a copyright or related right.’
      
 Directive 2004/Recital in the preamble to Directive 2004/provides:
      
‘Without prejudice to any other measures, procedures and remedies available, rightholders should have the possibility of applying
         for an injunction against an intermediary whose services are being used by a third party to infringe the rightholder’s industrial
         property right. The conditions and procedures relating to such injunctions should be left to the national law of the Member
         States. As far as infringements of copyright and related rights are concerned, a comprehensive level of harmonisation is already
         provided for in Directive [2001/29]. Article 8(3) of Directive [2001/29] should therefore not be affected by this Directive.’
      
Article 2(3) of Directive 2004/provides as follows:
      
‘This Directive shall not affect:
(a)       the Community provisions governing the substantive law on intellectual property … or Directive [2000/31], in general, and
         Articles to of Directive [2000/31] in particular;
      
…’
Article of Directive 2004/provides:
      
‘1.      Member States shall provide for the measures, procedures and remedies necessary to ensure the enforcement of the intellectual
         property rights covered by this Directive. Those measures, procedures and remedies shall be fair and equitable and shall not
         be unnecessarily complicated or costly, or entail unreasonable time-limits or unwarranted delays.
      
2.      Those measures, procedures and remedies shall also be effective, proportionate and dissuasive and shall be applied in such
         a manner as to avoid the creation of barriers to legitimate trade and to provide for safeguards against their abuse.’
      
Article of Directive 2004/states:
      
‘Member States shall ensure that, where a judicial decision is taken finding an infringement of an intellectual property right,
         the judicial authorities may issue against the infringer an injunction aimed at prohibiting the continuation of the infringement.
         Where provided for by national law, non-compliance with an injunction shall, where appropriate, be subject to a recurring
         penalty payment, with a view to ensuring compliance. Member States shall also ensure that rightholders are in a position to
         apply for an injunction against intermediaries whose services are used by a third party to infringe an intellectual property
         right, without prejudice to Article 8(3) of Directive [2001/29].’
      
 National law
Article 87(1), first and second subparagraphs, of the Law of June on copyright and related rights (Moniteur belge of July 1994, p. 19297) states: 
      
‘The President of the Tribunal de première instance (Court of First Instance) … shall determine the existence of any infringement
         of a copyright or related right and shall order that it be brought to an end.
      
He may also issue an injunction against intermediaries whose services are used by a third party to infringe a copyright or
         related right.’ 
      
Articles and of the Law of March on certain legal aspects of information society services (Moniteur belge of March 2003, p. 12962) transpose Articles and of Directive 2000/into national law. 
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling 
SABAM is a management company which represents authors, composers and editors of musical works in authorising the use of their
         copyright-protected works by third parties. 
      
Scarlet is an internet service provider (‘ISP’) which provides its customers with access to the internet without offering
         other services such as downloading or file sharing.  
      
In the course of 2004, SABAM concluded that internet users using Scarlet’s services were downloading works in SABAM’s catalogue
         from the internet, without authorisation and without paying royalties, by means of peer-to-peer networks, which constitute
         a transparent method of file sharing which is independent, decentralised and features advanced search and download functions.
         
      
On June 2004, SABAM accordingly brought interlocutory proceedings against Scarlet before the President of the Tribunal
         de première instance, Brussels, claiming that that company was the best placed, as an ISP, to take measures to bring to an
         end copyright infringements committed by its customers. 
      
SABAM sought, first, a declaration that the copyright in musical works contained in its repertoire had been infringed, in
         particular the right of reproduction and the right of communication to the public, because of the unauthorised sharing of
         electronic music files by means of peer-to-peer software, those infringements being committed through the use of Scarlet’s
         services.
      
SABAM also sought an order requiring Scarlet to bring such infringements to an end by blocking, or making it impossible for
         its customers to send or receive in any way, files containing a musical work using peer-to-peer software without the permission
         of the rightholders, on pain of a periodic penalty. Lastly, SABAM requested that Scarlet provide it with details of the measures
         that it would be applying in order to comply with the judgment to be given, on pain of a periodic penalty.
      
By judgment of November 2004, the President of the Tribunal de première instance, Brussels, found that copyright had been
         infringed, as claimed by SABAM, but, prior to ruling on the application for cessation, appointed an expert to investigate
         whether the technical solutions proposed by SABAM were technically feasible, whether they would make it possible to filter
         out only unlawful file sharing, and whether there were other ways of monitoring the use of peer-to-peer software, and to determine
         the cost of the measures envisaged.
      
In his report, the appointed expert concluded that, despite numerous technical obstacles, the feasibility of filtering and
         blocking the unlawful sharing of electronic files could not be entirely ruled out. 
      
By judgment of June 2007, the President of the Tribunal de première instance, Brussels, accordingly ordered Scarlet to
         bring to an end the copyright infringements established in the judgment of November by making it impossible for its
         customers to send or receive in any way files containing a musical work in SABAM’s repertoire by means of peer-to-peer software,
         on pain of a periodic penalty. 
      
Scarlet appealed against that decision to the referring court, claiming, first, that it was impossible for it to comply with
         that injunction since the effectiveness and permanence of filtering and blocking systems had not been proved and that the
         installation of the equipment for so doing was faced with numerous practical obstacles, such as problems with the network
         capacity and the impact on the network. Moreover, any attempt to block the files concerned was, it argued, doomed to fail
         in the very short term because there were at that time several peer-to-peer software products which made it impossible for
         third parties to check their content.
      
Scarlet also claimed that that injunction was contrary to Article of the Law of March on certain legal aspects
         of information society services, which transposes Article of Directive 2000/into national law, because it would impose
         on Scarlet, de facto, a general obligation to monitor communications on its network, inasmuch as any system for blocking or filtering peer-to-peer
         traffic would necessarily require general surveillance of all the communications passing through its network.
      
Lastly, Scarlet considered that the installation of a filtering system would be in breach of the provisions of European Union
         law on the protection of personal data and the secrecy of communications, since such filtering involves the processing of
         IP addresses, which are personal data. 
      
In that context, the referring court took the view that, before ascertaining whether a mechanism for filtering and blocking
         peer-to-peer files existed and could be effective, it had to be satisfied that the obligations liable to be imposed on Scarlet
         were in accordance with European Union law. 
      
In those circumstances, the cour d’appel de Bruxelles decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Do Directives 2001/and 2004/48, in conjunction with Directives 95/46, 2000/and 2002/58, construed in particular in the
         light of Articles and of the European Convention on the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, permit Member
         States to authorise a national court, before which substantive proceedings have been brought and on the basis merely of a
         statutory provision stating that: ‘They [the national courts] may also issue an injunction against intermediaries whose services
         are used by a third party to infringe a copyright or related right’, to order an [ISP] to install, for all its customers,
         in abstracto and as a preventive measure, exclusively at the cost of that ISP and for an unlimited period, a system for filtering
         all electronic communications, both incoming and outgoing, passing via its services, in particular those involving the use
         of peer-to-peer software, in order to identify on its network the movement of electronic files containing a musical, cinematographic
         or audio-visual work in respect of which the applicant claims to hold rights, and subsequently to block the transfer of such
         files, either at the point at which they are requested or at which they are sent?
      
(2)      If the answer to the [first] question … is in the affirmative, do those directives require a national court, called upon to
         give a ruling on an application for an injunction against an intermediary whose services are used by a third party to infringe
         a copyright, to apply the principle of proportionality when deciding on the effectiveness and dissuasive effect of the measure
         sought?’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred
By its questions, the referring court asks, in essence, whether Directives 2000/31, 2001/29, 2004/48, 95/and 2002/58, read
         together and construed in the light of the requirements stemming from the protection of the applicable fundamental rights,
         must be interpreted as precluding an injunction imposed on an ISP to introduce a system for filtering
      
–        all electronic communications passing via its services, in particular those involving the use of peer-to-peer software; 
–        which applies indiscriminately to all its customers; 
–        as a preventive measure; 
–        exclusively at its expense; and
–        for an unlimited period, 
which is capable of identifying on that provider’s network the movement of electronic files containing a musical, cinematographic
         or audio-visual work in respect of which the applicant claims to hold intellectual property rights, with a view to blocking
         the transfer of files the sharing of which infringes copyright (‘the contested filtering system’).
      
In that regard, it should first be recalled that, under Article 8(3) of Directive 2001/and the third sentence of Article
         of Directive 2004/48, holders of intellectual property rights may apply for an injunction against intermediaries, such
         as ISPs, whose services are being used by a third party to infringe their rights.
      
Next, it follows from the Court’s case-law that the jurisdiction conferred on national courts, in accordance with those provisions,
         must allow them to order those intermediaries to take measures aimed not only at bringing to an end infringements already
         committed against intellectual-property rights using their information-society services, but also at preventing further infringements
         (see, to that effect, Case C‑324/L’Oréal and Others [2011] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 131).
      
Lastly, it follows from that same case-law that the rules for the operation of the injunctions for which the Member States
         must provide under Article 8(3) of Directive 2001/and the third sentence of Article of Directive 2004/48, such as those
         relating to the conditions to be met and to the procedure to be followed, are a matter for national law (see, mutatis mutandis, L’Oréal and Others, paragraph 135). 
      
That being so, those national rules, and likewise their application by the national courts, must observe the limitations arising
         from Directives 2001/and 2004/and from the sources of law to which those directives refer (see, to that effect, L’Oréal and Others, paragraph 138). 
      
Thus, in accordance with recital in the preamble to Directive 2001/and Article 2(3)(a) of Directive 2004/48, those rules
         laid down by the Member States may not affect the provisions of Directive 2000/and, more specifically, Articles to thereof. 
      
Consequently, those rules must, in particular, respect Article 15(1) of Directive 2000/31, which prohibits national authorities
         from adopting measures which would require an ISP to carry out general monitoring of the information that it transmits on
         its network. 
      
In that regard, the Court has already ruled that that prohibition applies in particular to national measures which would require
         an intermediary provider, such as an ISP, to actively monitor all the data of each of its customers in order to prevent any
         future infringement of intellectual-property rights. Furthermore, such a general monitoring obligation would be incompatible
         with Article of Directive 2004/48, which states that the measures referred to by the directive must be fair and proportionate
         and must not be excessively costly (see L’Oréal and Others, paragraph 139). 
      
In those circumstances, it is necessary to examine whether the injunction at issue in the main proceedings, which would require
         the ISP to install the contested filtering system, would oblige it, as part of that system, to actively monitor all the data
         of each of its customers in order to prevent any future infringement of intellectual-property rights. 
      
In that regard, it is common ground that implementation of that filtering system would require
      
–        first, that the ISP identify, within all of the electronic communications of all its customers, the files relating to peer-to-peer
         traffic;
      
–        secondly, that it identify, within that traffic, the files containing works in respect of which holders of intellectual-property
         rights claim to hold rights;
      
–        thirdly, that it determine which of those files are being shared unlawfully; and 
–        fourthly, that it block file sharing that it considers to be unlawful. 
Preventive monitoring of this kind would thus require active observation of all electronic communications conducted on the
         network of the ISP concerned and, consequently, would encompass all information to be transmitted and all customers using
         that network. 
      
In the light of the foregoing, it must be held that the injunction imposed on the ISP concerned requiring it to install the
         contested filtering system would oblige it to actively monitor all the data relating to each of its customers in order to
         prevent any future infringement of intellectual-property rights. It follows that that injunction would require the ISP to
         carry out general monitoring, something which is prohibited by Article 15(1) of Directive 2000/31. 
      
In order to assess whether that injunction is consistent with European Union law, account must also be taken of the requirements
         that stem from the protection of the applicable fundamental rights, such as those mentioned by the referring court. 
      
In that regard, it should be recalled that the injunction at issue in the main proceedings pursues the aim of ensuring the
         protection of copyright, which is an intellectual-property right, which may be infringed by the nature and content of certain
         electronic communications conducted through the network of the ISP concerned. 
      
The protection of the right to intellectual property is indeed enshrined in Article 17(2) of the Charter of Fundamental Rights
         of the European Union (‘the Charter’). There is, however, nothing whatsoever in the wording of that provision or in the Court’s
         case-law to suggest that that right is inviolable and must for that reason be absolutely protected. 
      
As paragraphs to of the judgment in Case C‑275/Promusicae [2008] ECR I‑make clear, the protection of the fundamental right to property, which includes the rights linked to intellectual
         property, must be balanced against the protection of other fundamental rights. 
      
More specifically, it follows from paragraph of that judgment that, in the context of measures adopted to protect copyright
         holders, national authorities and courts must strike a fair balance between the protection of copyright and the protection
         of the fundamental rights of individuals who are affected by such measures. 
      
Accordingly, in circumstances such as those in the main proceedings, national authorities and courts must, in particular,
         strike a fair balance between the protection of the intellectual property right enjoyed by copyright holders and that of the
         freedom to conduct a business enjoyed by operators such as ISPs pursuant to Article of the Charter.
      
In the present case, the injunction requiring the installation of the contested filtering system involves monitoring all the
         electronic communications made through the network of the ISP concerned in the interests of those rightholders. Moreover,
         that monitoring has no limitation in time, is directed at all future infringements and is intended to protect not only existing
         works, but also future works that have not yet been created at the time when the system is introduced.  
      
Accordingly, such an injunction would result in a serious infringement of the freedom of the ISP concerned to conduct its
         business   since it would require that ISP to install a complicated, costly, permanent computer system at its own expense,
         which would also be contrary to the conditions laid down in Article 3(1) of Directive 2004/48, which requires that measures
         to ensure the respect of intellectual-property rights should not be unnecessarily complicated or costly. 
      
In those circumstances, it must be held that the injunction to install the contested filtering system is to be regarded as
         not respecting the requirement that a fair balance be struck between, on the one hand, the protection of the intellectual-property
         right enjoyed by copyright holders, and, on the other hand, that of the freedom to conduct business enjoyed by operators such
         as ISPs. 
      
Moreover, the effects of that injunction would not be limited to the ISP concerned, as the contested filtering system may
         also infringe the fundamental rights of that ISP’s customers, namely their right to protection of their personal data and
         their freedom to receive or impart information, which are rights safeguarded by Articles and of the Charter respectively.
         
      
It is common ground, first, that the injunction requiring installation of the contested filtering system would involve a systematic
         analysis of all content and the collection and identification of users’ IP addresses from which unlawful content on the network
         is sent. Those addresses are protected personal data because they allow those users to be precisely identified. 
      
Secondly, that injunction could potentially undermine freedom of information since that system might not distinguish adequately
         between unlawful content and lawful content, with the result that its introduction could lead to the blocking of lawful communications.
         Indeed, it is not contested that the reply to the question whether a transmission is lawful also depends on the application
         of statutory exceptions to copyright which vary from one Member State to another. Moreover, in some Member States certain
         works fall within the public domain or can be posted online free of charge by the authors concerned. 
      
Consequently, it must be held that, in adopting the injunction requiring the ISP to install the contested filtering system,
         the national court concerned would not be respecting the requirement that a fair balance be struck between the right to intellectual
         property, on the one hand, and the freedom to conduct business, the right to protection of personal data and the freedom to
         receive or impart information, on the other. 
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the questions submitted is that Directives 2000/31, 2001/29, 2004/48, 95/and
         2002/58, read together and construed in the light of the requirements stemming from the protection of the applicable fundamental
         rights, must be interpreted as precluding an injunction made against an ISP which requires it to install the contested filtering
         system. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
Directives:
–        2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of June on certain legal aspects of information society services,
            in particular electronic commerce, in the Internal Market (‘Directive on electronic commerce’);
–        2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of May on the harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright
            and related rights in the information society;
–        2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of April on the enforcement of intellectual property rights
            ; 
–        95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of October on the protection of individuals with regard to
            the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data; and 
–        2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of July concerning the processing of personal data and the
            protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector (Directive on privacy and electronic communications), 
read together and construed in the light of the requirements stemming from the protection of the applicable fundamental rights,
            must be interpreted as precluding an injunction made against an internet service provider which requires it to install a system
            for filtering
–        all electronic communications passing via its services, in particular those involving the use of peer-to-peer software; 
–        which applies indiscriminately to all its customers; 
–        as a preventive measure; 
–        exclusively at its expense; and
–        for an unlimited period, 
which is capable of identifying on that provider’s network the movement of electronic files containing a musical, cinematographic
            or audio-visual work in respect of which the applicant claims to hold intellectual-property rights, with a view to blocking
            the transfer of files the sharing of which infringes copyright. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 