
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-30/Commission of the European CommunitiesvUnited Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
«(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Failure to implement, in respect of Gibraltar, Directives 67/548/EEC and 87/18/EEC (concerning dangerous chemical substances);
               93/12/EEC (concerning liquid fuels); 79/113/EEC, 84/533/EEC, 84/534/EEC, 84/535/EEC, 84/536/EEC, 84/537/EEC, 84/538/EEC, 86/594/EEC
               and 86/662/EEC (concerning noise emission); 94/62/EC (concerning packaging waste) and 97/35/EC (concerning the deliberate
               release into the environment of genetically modified organisms))»
            
Opinion of Advocate General Tizzano delivered on January Judgment of the Court, September Summary of the Judgment
Customs union – Customs territory of the Community – Gibraltar – Not included – Consequence – Inapplicability of the Treaty provisions and secondary legislation on free movements of goods – Damage to the consistency of other Community policies –   Not relevant(Arts EC and EC; Act of Accession) The exclusion of Gibraltar from the customs territory of the Community by virtue of the Act of Accession of the Kingdom of
         Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland implies that neither the Treaty rules on free
         movement of goods nor the rules of secondary Community legislation intended, as regards free circulation of goods, to ensure
         approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States pursuant to Articles EC and EC are applicable to it.That interpretation is not called into question by the rules applicable to Ceuta and Melilla, which contain an express provision
         that goods originating in those territories are exempt from customs duties following their release into free circulation in
         the customs territory of the Community. Rather, those rules confirm the soundness of that interpretation, to the effect that
         exclusion from the customs territory of the Community entails the inapplicability of the Treaty provisions and secondary legislation
         on trade in goods, unless otherwise expressly provided.Of course, failure to apply the directives adopted under Articles EC or EC to Gibraltar may endanger the consistency
         of other Community policies, such as environmental protection, where the objectives of those policies are pursued as an ancillary
         aim by those directives. However, that fact cannot lead to the extension of the territorial scope of those directives beyond
         the limits imposed by the Treaty and by the Act of Accession of Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
         Northern Ireland.see paras 59-60, JUDGMENT OF THE COURTSeptember (1)
((Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations – Failure to implement, in respect of Gibraltar, Directives 67/548/EEC and 87/18/EEC (concerning dangerous chemical substances);
                  93/12/EEC (concerning liquid fuels); 79/113/EEC, 84/533/EEC, 84/534/EEC, 84/535/EEC, 84/536/EEC, 84/537/EEC, 84/538/EEC, 86/594/EEC
                  and 86/662/EEC (concerning noise emission); 94/62/EC (concerning packaging waste) and 97/35/EC (concerning the deliberate
                  release into the environment of genetically modified organisms)))
               
 In Case C-30/01, 
            
Commission of the European Communities,   represented by R.B. Wainwright, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant,  supported byKingdom of Spain,   represented by R. Silva de Lapuerta, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
intervener, 
v
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,   represented by R. Magrill, acting as Agent, and D. Wyatt QC, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
defendant, 
 APPLICATION for a declaration that by failing, in respect of Gibraltar, to adopt the laws, regulations or administrative provisions
            necessary to comply with
            
─
 Council Directive 67/548/EEC of June on the approximation of laws, regulations and administrative provisions in relation
            to the classification, packaging and labelling of dangerous substances (OJ L 196, p. 1), as amended by Commission Directive
            97/69/EC of December (OJ L 343. p. 19); 
            
─
 Council Directive 87/18/EEC of December on the harmonisation of laws, regulations and administrative practice relating
            to the application of good laboratory practice and the verification of their application for tests on chemical substances
            (OJ L 15, p. 29); 
            
─
 Council Directive 93/12/EEC of March relating to the sulphur content of certain liquid fuels (OJ L 74, p. 81),
            as amended by Directive 98/70/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of October (OJ L 350, p. 58);
            
            
─
 Council Directive 79/113/EEC of December on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the determination
            of the noise emission of construction plant and equipment (OJ L 33, p. 15), as amended by Commission Directive 85/405/EEC
            of July (OJ L 233, p. 9); 
            
─
 Council Directive 84/533/EEC of September on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the permissible
            sound power level of compressors (OJ L 300, p. 123), as amended by Commission Directive 85/406/EEC of July (OJ
            L 233, p. 11); 
            
─
 Council Directive 84/534/EEC of September on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the permissible
            sound power level of tower cranes (OJ L 300, p. 130), as amended by Council Directive 87/405/EEC of June (OJ
            L 220, p. 60); 
            
─
 Council Directive 84/535/EEC of September on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the permissible
            sound power level of welding generators (OJ L 300, p. 142), as amended by Commission Directive 85/407/EEC of July
            (OJ L 233, p. 16); 
            
─
 Council Directive 84/536/EEC of September on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the permissible
            sound power level of power generators (OJ L 300, p. 149), as amended by Commission Directive 85/408/EEC of July (OJ L 233, p. 18); 
            
─
 Council Directive 84/537/EEC of September on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the permissible
            sound power level of powered hand-held concrete breakers and picks (OJ L 300, p. 156), as amended by Commission Directive
            85/409/EEC of July (OJ L 233, p. 20); 
            
─
 Council Directive 84/538/EEC of September on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the permissible
            sound power level of lawnmowers (OJ L 300, p. 171), as amended by Council Directive 88/181/EEC of March (OJ L 81, p. 71); 
            
─
 Council Directive 86/594/EEC of December on airborne noise emitted by household appliances (OJ L 344, p. 24);
            
            
─
 Council Directive 86/662/EEC of December on the limitation of noise emitted by hydraulic excavators, rope-operated
            excavators, dozers, loaders and excavator-loaders (OJ L 384, p. 1), as amended by Directive 95/27/EC of the European
            Parliament and of the Council of June (OJ L 168, p. 14); 
            
─
 European Parliament and Council Directive 94/62/EC of December on packaging and packaging waste (OJ L 365, p.
            10) and 
            
─
 Commission Directive 97/35/EC of June adapting to technical progress for the second time Council Directive 90/220/EEC
            on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms (OJ L 169, p. 72), 
            
 or, in any event, by failing to inform the Commission of the adoption of such provisions, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
            and Northern Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under those directives,
            
THE COURT,,
 composed of: G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias, President, J.-P. Puissochet, M. Wathelet and R. Schintgen (Presidents of Chambers), C. Gulmann, D.A.O. Edward, A. La Pergola, P. Jann, V. Skouris, F. Macken, N. Colneric (Rapporteur), S. von Bahr and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: A. Tizzano, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2003, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By application lodged at the Court Registry on January 2001, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         under Article EC for a declaration that, by failing, in respect of Gibraltar, to adopt the laws, regulations or administrative
         provisions necessary to comply with: 
         
─
 Council Directive 67/548/EEC of June on the approximation of laws, regulations and administrative provisions in relation
         to the classification, packaging and labelling of dangerous substances (OJ L 196, p. 1), as amended by Commission Directive
         97/69/EC of December (OJ L 343, p. 19); 
         
─
 Council Directive 87/18/EEC of December on the harmonisation of laws, regulations and administrative practice relating
         to the application of good laboratory practice and the verification of their application for tests on chemical substances
         (OJ L 15, p. 29); 
         
─
 Council Directive 93/12/EEC of March relating to the sulphur content of certain liquid fuels (OJ L 74, p. 81),
         as amended by Directive 98/70/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of October (OJ L 350, p. 58);
         
         
─
 Council Directive 79/113/EEC of December on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the determination
         of the noise emission of construction plant and equipment (OJ L 33, p. 15), as amended by Commission Directive 85/405/EEC
         of July (OJ L 233, p. 9); 
         
─
 Council Directive 84/533/EEC of September on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the permissible
         sound power level of compressors (OJ L 300, p. 123), as amended by Commission Directive 85/406/EEC of July (OJ
         L 233, p. 11); 
         
─
 Council Directive 84/534/EEC of September on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the permissible
         sound power level of tower cranes (OJ L 300, p. 130), as amended by Council Directive 87/405/EEC of June (OJ
         L 220, p. 60); 
         
─
 Council Directive 84/535/EEC of September on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the permissible
         sound power level of welding generators (OJ L 300, p. 142), as amended by Commission Directive 85/407/EEC of July
         (OJ L 233, p. 16); 
         
─
 Council Directive 84/536/EEC of September on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the permissible
         sound power level of power generators (OJ L 300, p. 149), as amended by Commission Directive 85/408/EEC of July (OJ L 233, p. 18); 
         
─
 Council Directive 84/537/EEC of September on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the permissible
         sound power level of powered hand-held concrete breakers and picks (OJ L 300, p. 156), as amended by Commission Directive
         85/409/EEC of July (OJ L 233, p. 20); 
         
─
 Council Directive 84/538/EEC of September on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the permissible
         sound power level of lawnmowers (OJ L 300, p. 171), as amended by Council Directive 88/181/EEC of March (OJ L 81, p. 71); 
         
─
 Council Directive 86/594/EEC of December on airborne noise emitted by household appliances (OJ L 344, p. 24);
         
         
─
 Council Directive 86/662/EEC of December on the limitation of noise emitted by hydraulic excavators, rope-operated
         excavators, dozers, loaders and excavator-loaders (OJ L 384, p. 1), as amended by Directive 95/27/EC of the European
         Parliament and of the Council of June (OJ L 168, p. 14); 
         
─
 European Parliament and Council Directive 94/62/EC of December on packaging and packaging waste (OJ L 365, p.
         10) and 
         
─
 Commission Directive 97/35/EC of June adapting to technical progress for the second time Council Directive 90/220/EEC
         on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms (OJ L 169, p. 72), 
         
 or, in any event, by failing to inform the Commission of the adoption of such provisions, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
         and Northern Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under those directives.
         
            
 By order of the President of the Court of June 2001, the Kingdom of Spain was granted leave to intervene in support of
         the forms of order sought by the Commission. 
         
Legal background
 Community legislation of a general nature
         
            
 Articles EC and 3(1) EC provide: Article The Community shall have as its task, by establishing a common market and an economic and monetary union and by implementing
         common policies or activities referred to in Articles and 4, to promote throughout the Community a harmonious, balanced
         and sustainable development of economic activities, a high level of employment and of social protection, equality between
         men and women, sustainable and non-inflationary growth, a high degree of competitiveness and convergence of economic performance,
         a high level of protection and improvement of the quality of the environment, the raising of the standard of living and quality
         of life, and economic and social cohesion and solidarity among Member States. Article 1. For the purposes set out in Article 2, the activities of the Community shall include, as provided in this Treaty and in
         accordance with the timetable set out therein:
         
(a)
 the prohibition, as between Member States, of customs duties and quantitative restrictions on the import and export of goods,
         and of all other measures having equivalent effect; 
         
(b)
 a common commercial policy; 
         
(c)
 an internal market characterised by the abolition, as between Member States, of obstacles to the free movement of goods, persons,
         services and capital; 
         ...
         
            
 Article 14(2) EC provides: The internal market shall comprise an area without internal frontiers in which the free movement of goods, persons, services
         and capital is ensured in accordance with the provisions of this Treaty.
         
            
 Part Three of the EC Treaty contains a Title I headed  
         Free movement of goods.  That title opens with the general provisions of Articles EC and EC and contains two chapters on  
         The customs union (Articles EC to EC) and the  
         Prohibition of quantitative restrictions between Member States (Articles EC to EC). 
         
            
 Under Article EC: 1. The Community shall be based upon a customs union which shall cover all trade in goods and which shall involve the prohibition
         between Member States of customs duties on imports and exports and of all charges having equivalent effect, and the adoption
         of a common customs tariff in their relations with third countries.2. The provisions of Article and of Chapter of this Title shall apply to products originating in Member States and to
         products coming from third countries which are in free circulation in Member States.
         
            
 Article EC provides: Products coming from a third country shall be considered to be in free circulation in a Member State if the import formalities
         have been complied with and any customs duties or charges having equivalent effect which are payable have been levied in that
         Member State, and if they have not benefited from a total or partial drawback of such duties or charges.
         
            
 Article EC, to which Article 23(2) EC refers, prohibits customs duties on imports and exports and charges having equivalent
         effect between Member States.  
         
            
 Articles EC and 95(1) EC are worded as follows: Article The Council shall, acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission and after consulting the European Parliament and the
         Economic and Social Committee, issue directives for the approximation of such laws, regulations or administrative provisions
         of the Member States as directly affect the establishment or functioning of the common market. Article By way of derogation from Article and save where otherwise provided in this Treaty, the following provisions shall apply
         for the achievement of the objectives set out in Article 14.  The Council shall, acting in accordance with the procedure referred
         to in Article and after consulting the Economic and Social Committee, adopt the measures for the approximation of the
         provisions laid down by law, regulation or administrative action in Member States which have as their object the establishment
         and functioning of the internal market.
         
            
 Under Article 299(4) EC: The provisions of this Treaty shall apply to the European territories for whose external relations a Member State is responsible.
          The provisions of the Act of Accession of the Kingdom of Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
         Ireland concerning Gibraltar
         
            
 The act concerning the conditions of accession for the Kingdom of Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
         and Northern Ireland and the adjustments to the Treaties (OJ L 73, p. 14,  
         the UK Act of Accession) provides in its Articles 28, and 30: Article Acts of the institutions of the Community relating to the products in Annex II to the EEC Treaty and the products subject,
         on importation into the Community, to specific rules as a result of the implementation of the common agricultural policy,
         as well as the acts on the harmonisation of legislation of Member States concerning turnover taxes, shall not apply to Gibraltar
         unless the Council, acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission, provides otherwise.Article The acts listed in Annex I to this Act shall be adapted as specified in that Annex.Article The adaptations to the acts listed in Annex II to this Act made necessary by accession shall be drawn up in conformity with
         the guidelines set out in that Annex and in accordance with the procedure and under the conditions laid down in Article 153.
         
            
 Annex I, Section I (Customs legislation), point 4, to the UK Act of Accession provides: Council Regulation (EEC) No 1496/of September [on the definition of the customs territory of the Community] OJ
         L 238/1, September 1968Article is replaced by the following:The customs territory of the Community shall comprise the following territories:
         
─
 ... 
         
─
 The territory of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man.
         
            
 Regulation No 1496/was repealed by Council Regulation (EEC) No 2151/of July on the customs territory of the
         Community (OJ L 197, p. 1), which was, in turn, repealed by Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/of October establishing
         the Community Customs Code (OJ L 302, p. 1).  Article of that regulation defines the customs territory of the Community
         and contains an identical provision to that cited in the previous paragraph of this judgment. 
         
            
 Annex I, Section VIII (Commercial policy) to the UK Act of Accession replaced the list of countries in Annex II to Council
         Regulation (EEC) No 1025/of May establishing common rules for imports from third countries (OJ, English Special
         Edition 1970(II), p. 309), as amended by Council Regulations (EEC) Nos 1984/of September (OJ, English Special Edition
         1970(II), p. 66), 724/of March (OJ, English Special Edition 1971(I), p. 202), 1080/of May (OJ, English
         Special Edition 1971(I), p. 287), 1429/of July (OJ, English Special Edition 1971(II), p. 469) and 2384/of November
         (OJ, English Special Edition 1971(III), p. 901) (
         Regulation No 1025/70) by a new list excluding Gibraltar.  
         
            
 Annex II, Section VI (Commercial policy) to the UK Act of Accession provides as follows with regard to Regulation No 1025/70:
         The problem created by the deletion of the reference to Gibraltar in Annex II is to be solved in such a way as to ensure that
         Gibraltar is in the same position with regard to the Community's import liberalisation system as it was before accession.
          The provisions of the Act of Accession of the Kingdom of Spain and the Portuguese Republic
         
            
 Article of the act concerning the conditions of accession of the Kingdom of Spain and the Republic of Portugal and the
         adjustments to the Treaties of June (OJ L 302, p. 23, hereinafter  
         the Act of Accession of Spain and Portugal) provides: 
         
1.
 The Treaties and the acts of the institutions of the European Communities shall apply to the Canary Islands and to Ceuta and
         Melilla, subject to the derogations referred to in paragraphs and and to the other provisions of this Act.
         
2.
 The conditions under which the provisions of the EEC and ECSC Treaties concerning the free movement of goods, and the acts
         of the institutions of the Community concerning customs legislation and commercial policy, shall apply to the Canary Islands
         and to Ceuta and Melilla are set out in Protocol [No] 2.
         
3.
 Without prejudice to the specific provisions of Article 155, the acts of the institutions of the European Communities concerning
         the common agricultural policy and the common fisheries policy shall not apply to the Canary Islands and to Ceuta and Melilla.
         ...
         
            
 Protocol No concerning the Canary Islands and Ceuta and Melilla, which is annexed to the Act of Accession of Spain and Portugal
         (
         Protocol No 2), provides: Article 1.
 Products originating in the Canary Islands or in Ceuta and Melilla and products coming from third countries imported into
         the Canary Islands or into Ceuta and Melilla under the arrangements which are applicable there to them shall not be deemed,
         when released for free circulation in the customs territory of the Community, to be goods fulfilling the conditions of Articles
         and of the EEC Treaty, nor goods in free circulation under the ECSC Treaty.
         
2.
 The customs territory of the Community shall not include the Canary Islands and Ceuta and Melilla.
         
3.
 Except where otherwise provided for in this Protocol, the acts of the institutions of the Community regarding customs legislation
         for foreign trade shall apply under the same conditions to trade between the customs territory of the Community, on the one
         hand, and the Canary Islands and Ceuta and Melilla, on the other. 
         
4.
 Except where otherwise provided for in this Protocol, the acts of the institutions of the Community regarding the common commercial
         policy, be they autonomous or enacted by agreement, directly linked to the import or export of goods, shall be applicable
         to the Canary Islands or to Ceuta and Melilla.
         
5.
 Except where otherwise provided for in the Act of Accession, including this Protocol, the Community shall apply in its trade
         with the Canary Islands and with Ceuta and Melilla, for products falling within Annex II of the EEC Treaty, the general arrangements
         which it applies in its foreign trade.
         Article 1.
 Subject to Articles and of this Protocol, products originating in the Canary islands and in Ceuta and Melilla, shall,
         when released for free circulation in the customs territory of the Community, qualify for exemption from customs duties under
         the conditions defined in paragraphs and 3.
         ...Article 1.
 On import into the Canary Islands or into Ceuta and Melilla, products originating in the customs territory of the Community
         shall qualify for exemption from the customs duties and charges having equivalent effect under the conditions defined in paragraphs
         and 3.
         ...
          The directives at issue
         
            
 This case concerns the Council directives adopted under Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC) or Article 100a of
         the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) and the Commission directives enacted under the executive power granted
         to it by a basic directive based on those articles (
         the directives at issue).  Those directives cover various subjects: chemical substances, fuel standards, noise emissions, packaging waste and genetically
         modified organisms.  None of the directives at issue contains an express provision excluding Gibraltar from its scope. 
         Pre-litigation procedure
            
 As it considered that the United Kingdom had not implemented the directives at issue in respect of Gibraltar, the Commission
         initiated the infringement procedure under Article EC.  Having given the United Kingdom formal notice that it should submit
         its observations, the Commission issued a reasoned opinion on July calling on that Member State to take the measures
         necessary to comply with it within two months of its notification. 
         
            
 The United Kingdom contended that, as the directives at issue were intended to remove barriers to trade in goods on the internal
         market, it was not necessary to implement them in Gibraltar. 
         
            
 Against that background, the Commission decided to bring this action. 
         The proceedings Arguments of the parties
         
            
 The Commission, supported by the Kingdom of Spain, argues, on the basis of the fact that Gibraltar is a Crown Colony for whose
         external relations the United Kingdom is responsible, that the Treaty provisions apply to that territory pursuant to Article
         299(4) EC.  It argues, as does the Spanish Government, that an exception to the rule that Community law applies to Gibraltar
         can be provided for only by way of an express exclusion or derogation from that rule. 
         
            
 The Commission recalls that, under the UK Act of Accession, certain Treaty provisions do not apply to Gibraltar.  Those derogations,
         laid down in Articles 28, and of that Act, do not cover the legislation adopted by the Communities under Articles EC or EC on the approximation of laws. 
         
            
 According to the Commission, supported by the Kingdom of Spain, the UK Act of Accession provides for the following derogations
         only: 
         
─
 Acts concerning agricultural products and acts of harmonisation of legislation concerning turnover taxes are not applicable
            to Gibraltar by virtue of Article of that Act of Accession in so far as that Act constitutes an adjustment to the Treaties;
            
          Acts concerning agricultural products and acts of harmonisation of legislation concerning turnover taxes are not applicable
         to Gibraltar by virtue of Article of that Act of Accession in so far as that Act constitutes an adjustment to the Treaties;
         
         
─
 Gibraltar is excluded from the customs territory provision under Regulation No 1496/by virtue of Article of and Annex
            I, Section I, point 4, to the Act of Accession; 
          Gibraltar is excluded from the customs territory provision under Regulation No 1496/by virtue of Article of and Annex
         I, Section I, point 4, to the Act of Accession; 
         
─
 The commercial policy provisions under Regulation No 1025/are not applicable to Gibraltar by virtue of Article of and
            Annex II, Section VI to the Act of Accession, which is listed as an adaptation to acts adopted by the institutions. 
          The commercial policy provisions under Regulation No 1025/are not applicable to Gibraltar by virtue of Article of and
         Annex II, Section VI to the Act of Accession, which is listed as an adaptation to acts adopted by the institutions. 
         
            
 The Commission also points out that the directives at issue do not contain derogations as regards their applicability to Gibraltar.
         
         
            
 According to general principles, exceptions to Community law must be interpreted strictly.  As a rule, the exclusion of a
         territory from the scope of Community law is effected by means of an express exclusion included either in the Treaty or in
         secondary legislation. 
         
            
 If the United Kingdom intended to rule out the application of instruments adopted under Articles EC or EC, the UK Act
         of Accession should have made express provision for that. 
         
            
 The Commission, supported by the Kingdom of Spain, also argues that using the legal basis as the sole criterion to determine
         whether a directive must be implemented in Gibraltar is not always logical in terms of environmental protection. 
         
            
 It points out  
         inter alia that if the distinction made by the United Kingdom were upheld by the Court, most of the legislation on waste would apply
         to Gibraltar, while the specific legislation on packaging waste, set out in Directive 94/62, and on used batteries, set out
         in Council Directive 91/157/EEC of March on batteries and accumulators containing certain dangerous substances (OJ
         L 78, p. 38), would not apply to it as those two directives are based on Article 100a of the Treaty. 
         
            
 According to the Spanish Government, the fact that the legislation on the common customs territory does not apply to Gibraltar
         cannot entail that the principle of the free movement of goods is inapplicable to it.  That government argues that inclusion
         within that territory is only a small part of the principle of the free movement of goods, which includes, as well as a common
         customs tariff (Article EC), the prohibition of customs duties on imports and exports between Member States (Articles 23(1)
         EC and EC) and the prohibition, between those States, of quantitative restrictions on imports and exports and all measures
         having equivalent effect (Articles EC and EC). 
         
            
 Thus it is entirely possible for a part of the territory of the Community to be excluded from the common customs territory
         and yet be subject in its trade exchanges with the rest of the Community to the prohibition of customs duties and charges
         having equivalent effect and quantitative restrictions on imports and exports and measures having equivalent effect. 
         
            
 The Spanish Government mentions, by way of example, the Spanish territories of Ceuta and Melilla.  It points out that, in
         accordance with Article of the Act of Accession of Spain and Portugal, the Treaties apply to those territories subject
         to the exceptions contained in that Act.  It points out that Article of Protocol No provides that Ceuta and Melilla are
         not included within the customs territory of the Community.  However, while goods from non-member countries brought into those
         territories and subsequently imported into the customs territory of the Community are subject to the general arrangements
         for foreign trade (Article 1(5) of Protocol No 2), there is, in respect of goods originating in those territories and brought
         into the customs territory of the Community and goods originating in the customs territory of the Community and brought into
         those territories, complete exemption from customs duties and charges having equivalent effect (Articles 2(1) and 6(1) of
         Protocol No 2). 
         
            
 Furthermore, the Spanish Government argues that the objective of the regime established by Articles EC, EC and EC
         is the approximation of the laws of the Member States for the establishment and functioning of the internal market and that
         it has a much broader aim and scope than simply the free movement of goods, as it deals also with the free movement of persons,
         services and capital.  If the United Kingdom's interpretation equating the internal market with the free movement of goods
         were upheld, it would be mistakenly concluded that Gibraltar is excluded from the internal market and that, consequently,
         not only the provisions on free movement of goods but also the rules on free movement of persons, services and capital do
         not apply to it. 
         
            
 The United Kingdom Government contends that the provisions of the Treaty on the free movement of goods do not apply to Gibraltar
         and that, therefore, the same is true of directives based on Articles EC or EC which are intended to remove barriers
         to trade in goods between the Member States. 
         
            
 According to that government, the exclusion of Gibraltar from the customs territory of the Community entails the inapplicability
         of the Treaty provisions on the free movement of goods (Articles EC to EC).  That necessarily implies that harmonisation
         measures legally dependent on those provisions are also inapplicable to Gibraltar.  Accordingly, it is not necessary to provide
         specifically in the directives at issue for the exclusion of Gibraltar. 
         
            
 However, the United Kingdom Government accepts that the other directives on the internal market, which are not excluded by
         specific provisions concerning Gibraltar, and in particular those concerning the removal of barriers to the freedom to provide
         services, are applicable to it. 
         
            
 More specifically, the United Kingdom Government outlines various arguments which, it contends, preclude the application of
         the directives at issue to Gibraltar. 
         
            
 At the time of the negotiations over the provisions of the UK Act of Accession concerning Gibraltar, the maintenance of that
         possession's status as a free port and, consequently, its exclusion from the common market in goods, both as regards the Treaty
         provisions on the free movement of goods and in the light of those governing the common commercial policy, were not considered
         controversial.  The maintenance of Gibraltar's status was considered, in that respect, as a technical question rather than
         a divisive policy issue in those negotiations.  The technical solution adopted was a series of derogations from the  
         acquis communautaire as regards the application of the Treaty provisions and secondary legislation on the operation of the common market in goods.
         
         
            
 Although Gibraltar was no longer to have the status of third country as a result of the accession of the United Kingdom to
         the EEC Treaty, which from then on applied to Gibraltar subject to the special provisions of the UK Act of Accession, its
         position remained comparable to that of a third country in respect of trade in goods both with Member States and with third
         countries. 
         
            
 At the time of those negotiations, Annex II to Regulation No 1025/contained a list of third countries and territories to
         which that regulation applied.  Gibraltar was on that list.  The UK Act of Accession deleted Gibraltar from that list, thus
         confirming that its status was no longer that of a third country or territory (Annex I, Section VIII (Commercial policy) to
         that Act). 
         
            
 According to the United Kingdom Government, as Gibraltar no longer enjoyed the status of third country, exports from it to
         the Member States no longer qualified for access under the Community's import liberalisation system.  The draughtsmen of the
         accession instruments were aware that this could place Gibraltar in a worse position as regards exports of goods to the Member
         States after the accession of the United Kingdom than it had been in before.  That is why Annex II, Section VIII (Commercial
         policy) to the UK Act of Accession includes a guideline which states that  
         the problem created by the deletion of the reference to Gibraltar in Annex II is to be solved in such a way as to ensure that
         Gibraltar is in the same position with regard to the Community's import liberalisation system as it was before accession. 
         
            
 It is clear from those provisions that, although Gibraltar is no longer included on the list of third countries in Annex II
         to Regulation No 1025/70, its position as regards access to the markets of the Member States remains the same as it was before
         accession. 
         
            
 The United Kingdom Government recalls that Article EC provides that products coming from a third country are to be considered
         to be in free circulation in a Member State if the import formalities have been complied with and any customs duties or charges
         having equivalent effect which are payable have been levied in that Member State.  Since Articles EC and EC on the removal
         of quantitative restrictions and measures having equivalent effect apply to goods from third countries, on which duty has
         been paid, and such duties are payable under the common external tariff where those goods enter the customs territory of the
         Community, the scope of those articles, like that of the Treaty provisions concerning the abolition of customs duties and
         charges having equivalent effect, is limited to that territory. 
         
            
 That government points out, by way of example, that the application to Gibraltar of a directive adopted under Article EC
         or EC, on the packaging and labelling of products, could hinder the importation into Gibraltar of goods from third countries
         and undermine the liberty of Gibraltar as a free port to import goods from third countries on terms and conditions to be determined
         by the authorities of Gibraltar. 
         
            
 The United Kingdom Government accepts that acts of the institutions under Article EC or EC to remove hindrances to trade
         in goods may also pursue other objectives, for example, the protection of consumers, public health or the environment.  However,
         it submits that, in the case of measures properly adopted under one or the other of those articles, such other objectives
         are harmonised to the extent necessary to remove hindrances to the free movement of goods, and it is the latter aim which
         justifies recourse to those articles as a legal basis for the measures in question.  
         
            
 As regards the arguments concerning the legal position of Ceuta and Melilla, the United Kingdom Government submits that the
         exclusion of Ceuta and Melilla from the common customs territory does have the effect of excluding the application of the
         Treaty provisions on the free movement of goods and that Protocol No applies special provisions, in lieu of those provisions,
         to trade in goods between Ceuta and Melilla and Member States, and those provisions derive their force and effect from Protocol
         No itself. 
          Findings of the Court
         
            
 Under Article 299(4) EC, the Treaty applies to Gibraltar as it is a Crown Colony for whose external relations the United Kingdom
         is responsible.  However, under the UK Act of Accession, certain Treaty provisions do not apply to Gibraltar.  The territory
         is  
         inter alia excluded from the customs territory of the Community, as defined in Article of Regulation No 1496/and Article of
         that Act and in Annex I, Section I, point 4, thereto. 
         
            
 In order to assess the merits of the Commission's action, it must be considered whether the directives at issue, which are
         intended to remove barriers to trade in goods between the Member States and which are based on Articles EC or EC, are
         applicable to Gibraltar. 
         
            
 According to Article 23(1) EC, the Community is to be based upon a customs union which is to cover all trade in goods and
         which is to involve the prohibition between Member States of customs duties on imports and exports and of all charges having
         equivalent effect, and the adoption of a common customs tariff in their relations with third countries. 
         
            
 Under Article 23(2) EC, the measures laid down for the liberalisation of intra-Community trade apply in the same way both
         to products originating in Member States and to products coming from third countries which are in free circulation in the
         Community (see Case 41/Donckerwolcke and Schou [1976] ECR 1921, paragraph 15). 
         
            
 The customs union incorporates a common customs tariff intended to bring about equalisation of the charges borne at the external
         frontiers of the Community by products imported from non-member countries, in order to ensure that trade with such countries
         is not diverted and that the free movement of products between Member States and the conditions of competition between economic
         agents are not distorted (see Case C-125/Aprile [1995] ECR I-2919, paragraph 32). 
         
            
 The Treaty sought to give general scope and effect to the rule on the elimination of customs duties and charges having equivalent
         effect in order to ensure the free movement of goods (Joined Cases 2/and 3/Brachfeld and Chougol [1969] ECR 211, paragraph 12). 
         
            
 The customs union necessarily implies that the free movement of goods should be ensured between Member States (Case 266/SIOT [1983] ECR 731, paragraph 16) and, in more general terms, within the customs union (see Joined Cases C-363/and C-407/to C-411/Lancry and Others [1994] ECR I-3957, paragraph 29). 
         
            
 It is clear from Article EC that, as regards free circulation of goods within the Community, products entitled to  
         free circulation are definitively and wholly assimilated to products originating in Member States.  The result of this assimilation is that
         the provisions of Article EC concerning the elimination of quantitative restrictions and all measures having equivalent
         effect are applicable without distinction to products originating in the Community and to those which were put into free circulation
         in any one of the Member States, irrespective of the actual origin of these products (see  
         Donckerwolcke and Schou, cited above, paragraphs and 18). 
         
            
 However, products originating in Gibraltar are not products originating in the Community. 
         
            
 According to Annex II, Section VI to the UK Act of Accession it was agreed that it would be ensured  
         that Gibraltar is in the same position with regard to the Community's import liberalisation system as it was before accession. That provision would not have been necessary if goods originating in Gibraltar had to be considered as originating in the
         Community and if, as a result, the Community rules on free movement had to be applied to them. 
         
            
 Similarly, goods imported into Gibraltar are not considered to be in free circulation in a Member State within the meaning
         of Article EC because they are not subject to the customs duties of the common customs tariff. 
         
            
 Under Title I of the third part of the Treaty, concerning free movement of goods, Article 23(2) EC provides that Article 25,
         which prohibits customs duties and charges having equivalent effect, and the whole of Chapter of that title, which concerns
         the prohibition on quantitative restrictions between Member States, apply to products originating in Member States and to
         products coming from third countries which are in free circulation in Member States.  As products originating in Gibraltar
         fall within neither of those categories, they are not covered by the Treaty rules on free movement of goods and, in particular,
         those prohibiting quantitative restrictions between Member States. 
         
            
 It is clear from all the foregoing that the exclusion of Gibraltar from the customs territory of the Community implies that
         neither the Treaty rules on free movement of goods nor the rules of secondary Community legislation intended, as regards free
         circulation of goods, to ensure approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States
         pursuant to Articles EC and EC are applicable to it. 
         
            
 That interpretation is not called into question by the rules applicable to Ceuta and Melilla, which contain an express provision
         that goods originating in those territories are exempt from customs duties following their release into free circulation in
         the customs territory of the Community.  Rather, those rules confirm the soundness of that interpretation, to the effect that
         exclusion from the customs territory of the Community entails the inapplicability of the Treaty provisions and secondary legislation
         on trade in goods, unless otherwise expressly provided. 
         
            
 Nor can that interpretation be called into question by the Commission's submission that it is paradoxical that, while most
         of the rules of Community law on the environment are applicable to Gibraltar, that is not the case where such provisions are
         contained in directives based on Articles EC and EC. 
         
            
 It is not disputed that the principal objective of the directives at issue is to remove barriers to trade in goods between
         Member States.  They are therefore inextricably tied to the free movement of goods from which Gibraltar is excluded for the
         reasons set out in paragraph of this judgment. 
         
            
 Of course, failure to apply the directives at issue to Gibraltar may endanger the consistency of other Community policies,
         such as environmental protection, where the objectives of those policies are pursued as an ancillary aim by those directives.
          However, that fact cannot lead to the extension of the territorial scope of those directives beyond the limits imposed by
         the Treaty and by the UK Act of Accession. 
         
            
 Accordingly, the Commission's action must be considered unfounded. 
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs, if they have been
         applied for in the successful party's pleadings.  Since the United Kingdom has applied for costs and the Commission has been
         unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs.  Under the first subparagraph of Article 69(4) of those Rules,
         the Kingdom of Spain, which intervened in these proceedings, is to bear its own costs.  
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT
 hereby:  
         
1.
 Dismisses the application; 
            
2.
 Orders the Commission of the European Communities to pay the costs; 
            
3.
 Orders the Kingdom of Spain to bear its own costs. 
            
Rodríguez Iglesias
Puissochet 
Wathelet 
Schintgen
Gulmann 
Edward 
La Pergola
Jann 
Skouris 
Macken
Colneric 
von Bahr 
Cunha Rodrigues 
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on September 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: English.
Top  
 