
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-406/Commission of the European CommunitiesvKingdom of Belgium
«(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Failure to communicate reports required under Directives 76/464/EEC, 78/659/EEC and 80/68/EEC – Standardising and rationalising reports on the implementation of certain directives relating to the environment)»
Judgment of the Court (Third Chamber), February Summary of the Judgment
Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Examination of the merits by the Court – Situation to be taken into consideration – Situation on expiry of the period laid down by the reasoned opinion(Art. EC)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)February (1)
((Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations – Failure to communicate reports required under Directives 76/464/EEC, 78/659/EEC and 80/68/EEC – Standardising and rationalising reports on the implementation of certain directives relating to the environment))
 In Case C-406/02, 
            
Commission of the European Communities, represented by B. Stromsky, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, 
v
Kingdom of Belgium, represented by E. Dominkovitz, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
defendant, 
 APPLICATION for a declaration that, by failing to communicate to it, within the prescribed period, the reports in respect
            of the Bruxelles-Capitale Region required under Council Directive 76/464/EEC of May on pollution caused by certain
            dangerous substances discharged into the aquatic environment of the Community (OJ L 129, p. 23), Council Directive 78/659/EEC
            of July on the quality of fresh waters needing protection or improvement in order to support fish life (OJ L 222, p. 1)
            and Council Directive 80/68/EEC of December on the protection of groundwater against pollution caused by certain dangerous
            substances (OJ L 20, p. 43) as amended by Council Directive 91/692/EEC of December standardising and rationalising
            reports on the implementation of certain Directives relating to the environment (OJ L 377, p. 48), the Kingdom of Belgium
            has failed to fulfil its obligations under the said directives,
            
THE COURT (Third Chamber),,
 composed of: C. Gulmann, acting for the President of the Third Chamber, J.-P. Puissochet (Rapporteur) and F. Macken, Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: C. Stix-Hackl, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By application lodged at the Court Registry on November 2002, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         under Article EC for a declaration that, by failing to communicate to it, within the prescribed period, the reports in
         respect of the Bruxelles-Capitale Region required under Council Directive 76/464/EEC of May on pollution caused by
         certain dangerous substances discharged into the aquatic environment of the Community (OJ L 129, p. 23), Council Directive
         78/659/EEC of July on the quality of fresh waters needing protection or improvement in order to support fish life
         (OJ L 222, p. 1) and Council Directive 80/68/EEC of December on the protection of groundwater against pollution
         caused by certain dangerous substances (OJ L 20, p. 43) as amended by Council Directive 91/692/EEC of December standardising and rationalising reports on the implementation of certain Directives relating to the environment (OJ L 377,
         p. 48), the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under the said directives. 
         
Legal framework
            
 Council Directive 91/seeks to achieve the standardisation and rationalisation of reports on the implementation of certain
         directives relating to the environment. Its purpose is to harmonise and to supplement the provisions relating to the reports
         under these directives to make them more consistent and more complete on a sectoral basis. It provides for a single report.
         
         
            
 Article 2(1) of Directive 91/provides that the provisions listed in Annex I are to be replaced by the following: At intervals of three years the Member States shall send information to the Commission on the implementation of this Directive,
         in the form of a sectoral report which shall also cover other pertinent Community Directives. This report shall be drawn up
         on the basis of a questionnaire or outline drafted by the Commission in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article
         of Directive 91/692/EEC. ... The questionnaire or outline shall be sent to the Member States six months before the start
         of the period covered by the report. The report shall be sent to the Commission within nine months of the end of the three-year
         period covered by it.The first report shall cover the period from to inclusive.The Commission shall publish a Community report on the implementation of the Directive within nine months of receiving the
         reports from the Member States.
         
            
 The directives covered by these new provisions are, inter alia: 
         
─
 Directive 76/464;
          Directive 76/464;
         
─
 Directive 78/659;
          Directive 78/659;
         
─
 Directive 80/68.
          Directive 80/68.
         
            
 The questionnaires, on the basis of which the report was to be drawn up, were prepared by the Commission with the assistance
         of a committee and were addressed to the Member States by Commission Decision 92/446/EEC of July concerning questionnaires
         relating to Directives in the water sector (OJ L 247, p. 10), six months before the opening of the period covered by
         the aforementioned report. 
         Pre-litigation procedure
            
 As by September 1996, being the time-limit under the prescribed obligations, it had not received the report provided for
         by Article 2(1) of Directive 91/for the years to in respect of the Bruxelles-Capitale and Wallonia Regions,
         the Commission held the Kingdom of Belgium to be in breach of its obligations. 
         
            
 Accordingly, on June 1998, the Commission sent the Kingdom of Belgium a letter of formal notice. 
         
            
 By letters of July and September 1998, the Belgian Permanent Representative sent to the Commission the observations
         of the Wallonia Region and those of the Bruxelles-Capitale Region. 
         
            
 In the light of those observations, the Commission maintained its complaint against the Bruxelles-Capitale Region only. 
         
            
 On December 1998, the Commission issued a reasoned opinion to the Kingdom of Belgium calling on it to take the measures
         necessary to comply with the obligations arising under Directives 76/464, 78/and 80/68, as amended by Directive 91/(hereinafter  
         Directive 76/464,  
         Directive 78/and  
         Directive 80/68) within two months of its notification, and, in that regard, to communicate to it the information required by the said directives
         in respect of the Bruxelles-Capitale Region. 
         
            
 By fax of May 2000, confirmed by letter of June 2000, the Kingdom of Belgium sent to the Commission a reply to the reasoned
         opinion, stating that the measures intended to ensure the collecting of the data required for the preparation of the report
         which was to be sent, would be in place from 2001. 
         
            
 By letter of July 2000, the Commission, which took the view that that period was too long, requested the Belgian authorities
         to take all appropriate measures to ensure that the infrastructure required for the collecting of the requisite data was set
         up as soon as possible. 
         
            
 By fax of June 2001, confirmed by letter of June 2001, the Belgian authorities submitted additional observations to
         the Commission in reply to the reasoned opinion. 
         
            
 However, since the Commission did not regard this information as satisfactory, it decided to bring the present action. 
         The infringement
            
 The Commission has withdrawn its application in so far as it relates to the information to be communicated under Directive
         80/68. It accepts that, despite the fact that it was sent late, the Kingdom of Belgium had provided adequate information.
         
         
            
 It considers none the less that the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to communicate, within the prescribed period, the information
         required under Directives 76/and 78/659. 
         
            
 In its defence, the Kingdom of Belgium maintains, first, that it has proceeded to implement, in its legislation, the various
         directives providing for the reports sought by the Commission, and, secondly, that on January it sent to the Commission
         the reports referred to in Directives 76/and 78/for the periods to 1995, to and to 2001. 
         
            
 The Kingdom of Belgium argues that, contrary to what the Commission claims, the report issued for the period to 1995,
         that is to say the report whose late delivery is the basis of the alleged infringement, contains detailed information for
         each year concerned, as Directive 91/requires. 
         
            
 That Government also claims that the abovementioned report includes all the data that are available, and that the questions
         to which it has not provided an answer for the year could not be answered, given the recent nature of the questionnaire.
         It notes in that regard that Commission Decision 95/337/EC of July amending Decision 92/(OJ L 200, p. 1)
         anticipates that it may be impossible to answer the questionnaire as regards investments made in relation to water purification
         infrastructure. 
         
            
 Nevertheless, the fact, assuming it to be the case, that the report sent should be held to be satisfactory, does not affect
         the infringement, which relates only to the Belgian Government's delay in communicating it to the Commission. 
         
            
 That Member State does not deny that it did not communicate the information prior to September 1996, which was the time-limit
         under Directive 91/962, and, moreover, that it did not provide the information within the period laid down in the reasoned
         opinion. 
         
            
 The question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations must be determined by reference to the situation
         prevailing in the Member State at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion (see, among others,  Case C-83/Commission v  
         Greece [2003] ECR I-5639, paragraph 10). 
         
            
 Therefore, by failing to communicate to the Commission, within the prescribed period, the report in respect of the Bruxelles-Capitale
         Region required under Article 2(1) of Directive 91/692, the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fuflfil its obligations under
         that directive. 
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party's pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Kingdom of Belgium has
         been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
 hereby: 
         
1.
 Declares that, by failing to communicate to the Commission, within the prescribed period, the report in respect of the Bruxelles-Capitale
               Region required under Article 2(1) of Council Directive 91/692/EEC of December standardising and rationalising reports
               on the implementation of certain Directives relating to the environment,  the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive;
2.
 Orders the Kingdom of Belgium to pay the costs. 
Gulmann
Puissochet 
Macken 
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on February 2004. 
         
R. Grass 
V. Skouris  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: French.
Top  
 