
Avis juridique important
|
61994JJudgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber) of August 1995.  -  Groupement National des Négociants en Pommes de Terre de Belgique v ITM Belgium SA and Vocarex SA.  -  Reference for a preliminary ruling: Tribunal de commerce de Mons - Belgium.  -  Free movement of goods - Prohibition of sales yielding very low profit margins.  -  Case C-63/94.  
European Court reports Page I-Summary
Parties
Grounds
Decision on costs
Operative part
Keywords
++++Free movement of goods ° Quantitative restrictions ° Measures having equivalent effect ° Definition ° Obstacles resulting from national provisions regulating selling arrangements in a non-discriminatory way ° Non-applicability of Article of the Treaty ° Legislation prohibiting sales yielding very low profit margins  (EEC Treaty, Art. 30)  
Summary
Trade between Member States is not likely to be impeded, directly or indirectly, actually or potentially, by the application to products from other Member States of national provisions restricting or prohibiting certain selling arrangements so long as those provisions apply to all relevant traders operating within the national territory and so long as they affect in the same manner, in law and in fact, the marketing of domestic products and of those from other Member States. Where those conditions are satisfied, the application of such rules to the sale of products from another Member State meeting the rules laid down by that State is not by nature such as to prevent their access to the market or to impede access any more than it impedes the access of domestic products. Such rules therefore fall outside the scope of Article of the Treaty.  It follows that Article of the Treaty is to be interpreted as not applying where a Member State prohibits by legislation any sale which yields only a very low profit margin.  
Parties
In Case C-63/94,  REFERENCE to the Court under Article of the EC Treaty by the Tribunal de Commerce, Mons, for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending before that court between  Groupement National des Négociants en Pommes de Terre de Belgique (Belgapom)  and  ITM Belgium SA and Vocarex SA,  on the interpretation of Article of the EC Treaty,  THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),  composed of: F.A. Schockweiler, President of the Chamber, G.F. Mancini (Rapporteur), C.N. Kakouris, J.L. Murray and G. Hirsch, Judges,  Advocate General: G. Cosmas,  Registrar: H.A. Ruehl, Principal Administrator,  after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:  ° ITM Belgium SA and Vocarex SA, by E. Van Daele, of the Tournai Bar and L. Van Bunnen, of the Brussels Bar,  ° the Commission of the European Communities, by H. Van Lier, Legal Adviser, acting as Agent, assisted by D. Waelbroeck, of the Brussels Bar,  having regard to the Report for the Hearing,  after hearing the oral observations of ITM Belgium SA and Vocarex SA and the Commission at the hearing on January 1995,  after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 1995,  gives the following  Judgment  
Grounds
By judgment of January 1994, received at the Court on February 1994, the Tribunal de Commerce (Commercial Court), Mons, referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article of the EC Treaty a question on the interpretation of Article of the EEC Treaty, now the EC Treaty.  That question was raised in proceedings between the Groupement National des Négociants en Pommes de Terre de Belgique (National Association of Belgian Potato Dealers, hereafter "Belgapom") and ITM Belgium SA ("ITM") and Vocarex concerning a sale of potatoes by Vocarex with a low profit margin.  In Belgium the first and third paragraphs of Article of the Law of July on Commercial Practices provides:  "Traders shall be prohibited from offering a product for sale or selling a product at a loss.  A sale shall be considered to have been made at a loss if the price is not at least equal to the price at which the product was invoiced at the time of supply or at which it would be invoiced if it were resupplied.  Any sale which, taking account of those prices and of overheads, yields only a very low profit margin is to be treated as a sale at a loss."  Vocarex is an independent commercial establishment bound by a franchise agreement to the Intermarché group and managed in Belgium by ITM. Acting on information received from ITM, Vocarex during September bought at the price of Francs each kilogramme bags of "Bintjes" potatoes which it resold at the price of Francs. At the material time the price generally charged by traders was Francs.  Belgapom applied to the Commercial Court of Mons for a sales restraint order against ITM and Vocarex. The latter parties contended that the application should be dismissed on the ground that Article of the abovementioned Law infringed Article of the EC Treaty.  Taking the view that the outcome of the proceedings depended upon an interpretation of Community law, the Mons Commercial Court stayed the proceedings and referred the following question to the Court for a preliminary ruling:  "To what extent is Article of the Law of July and more particularly the third and fourth paragraphs thereof, having regard to the general nature of the terms in which they couched, compatible with Article of the EEC Treaty, where those paragraphs lay down that a sale at a price higher than the price invoiced at the time of supply but with a very low profit margin is to be treated as equivalent to a sale at a loss?"  In view of the wording of the preliminary question it is necessary to recall that the Court has consistently held that it does not have jurisdiction to rule on the compatibility of a national measure with Community law. However, the Court is competent to provide the national court with all criteria for the interpretation of Community law which may enable it to determine the issue of compatibility for the purposes of the decision in the case before it (see, most recently, the judgment in Case C-438/Rustica Semences v Finanzamt [1994] ECR I-3519, paragraph 10).  In order to reply to the question submitted by the national court it must first be ascertained whether Article of the Treaty applies where a Member State prohibits by legislation any sale which yields only a very low profit margin.  It is settled case-law that any measure likely to impede, directly or indirectly, actually or potentially, trade between Member States constitutes a measure having an effect equivalent to a quantitative restriction on imports (judgment in Case 8/Dassonville [1974] ECR 837, paragraph 5).  A legislative measure such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which prohibits sales yielding only a very low profit margin, is not intended to govern trade in goods between Member States.  It is true that such a prohibition is capable of restricting the volume of sales and, consequently, the volume of sales of products from other Member States, inasmuch as it deprives traders of a method of sales promotion. The question is, however, whether that is sufficient for the prohibition at issue to be classified as a measure having an effect equivalent to a quantitative restriction on imports within the meaning of Article of the Treaty.  It should be recalled here that trade between Member States is not likely to be impeded, directly or indirectly, actually or potentially, within the meaning of the Dassonville judgment, cited above, by the application to products from other Member States of national provisions restricting or prohibiting certain selling arrangements, so long as those provisions apply to all relevant traders operating within the national territory and so long as they affect in the same manner, in law and in fact, the marketing of domestic products and of those from other Member States. Where those conditions are satisfied, the application of such rules to the sale of products from another Member State meeting the rules laid down by that State is not by nature such as to prevent their access to the market or to impede access any more than it impedes the access of domestic products. Such rules therefore fall outside the scope of Article of the Treaty (see the judgments in Joined Cases C-267/and C-268/Keck and Mithouard [1993] ECR I-6097, paragraphs and 17, in Case C-292/Huenermund and Others [1993] ECR I-6787, paragraph 21, and in Case C-412/Leclerc [1995] ECR I-719, paragraph 21).  A provision like that in issue in the main proceedings concerns selling arrangements inasmuch as it prohibits any sale which yields only a very low profit margin.  Moreover, that provision applicable, without distinction as to products, to all traders in the relevant sector does not affect the marketing of products from other Member States differently than the marketing of domestic products.  In those circumstances, the reply to be given to the national court is that Article of the Treaty is to be interpreted as not applying where a Member State prohibits by legislation any sale which yields only a very low profit margin.  
Decision on costs
Costs  The costs incurred by the Commission of the European, which has submitted observations to the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court.  
Operative part
On those grounds,  THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),  in answer to the question submitted to it by the Tribunal de Commerce, Mons, by judgment of January 1994, hereby rules:  Article of the EC Treaty is to be interpreted as not applying where a Member State prohibits by legislation any sale which yields only a very low profit margin.  
Top  
 