
Case C-476/projektart Errichtungsgesellschaft mbH and Others
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Unabhängiger Verwaltungssenat des Landes Vorarlberg)
(First subparagraph of Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure − Free movement of capital – Article of the EEA Agreement and Annex XII thereto − Purchase by nationals of the Principality of Liechtenstein of a secondary
         residence in the Land of Vorarlberg (Austria) – Procedure of prior authorisation − Admissibility)
      
Summary of the Order
International agreements – Agreement on the European Economic Area – Free movement of capital – Restrictions
(Article of the EEA Agreement and Annex XII thereto; Council Directive 88/361, Art 6(4))
Article of the Agreement on the European Economic Area (EEA), of May 1992, must be interpreted as precluding national
         legislation which, on the basis of Article 6(4) of Directive 88/for the implementation of Article (repealed by the
         Treaty of Amsterdam) of the Treaty, prohibits a national of the Principality of Liechtenstein from purchasing a secondary
         residence situated in a Member State of the European Union, and, therefore, a national authority must disregard that national
         legislation. 
      
Since May 1995, the date of the entry into force of the EEA Agreement in respect of the Principality of Liechtenstein, and
         in the areas covered by that agreement, Member States may claim and rely on legislation restricting the freedom of movement
         of capital in respect of the Principality of Liechtenstein only if, pursuant to European Union law, that legislation can be
         applied in respect of other Member States of the European Union. 
      
(see paras 39, 51, operative part) 
  
  
ORDER OF THE COURT (Eighth Chamber)
June (*)
      
(First subparagraph of Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure − Free movement of capital – Article of and Annex XII to the EEA Agreement − Purchase by nationals of the Principality of Liechtenstein of a secondary
         residence in the Province of Vorarlberg (Austria) – Procedure of prior authorisation − Admissibility)
      
In Case C‑476/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Unabhängiger Verwaltungssenat des Landes Vorarlberg (Austria),
         made by decision of September 2010, received at the Court on October 2010, in the proceedings brought by
      
projektart Errichtungsgesellschaft mbH,
Eva Maria Pepic
and
Herbert Hilbe,
THE COURT (Eighth Chamber),
composed of K. Schiemann, President of the Chamber, L. Bay Larsen and A. Prechal (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
the Court, proposing to give its decision by reasoned order in accordance with the first subparagraph of Article 104(3) of
         its Rules of Procedure,
      
after hearing the Advocate General,
makes the following
Order
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article of the Agreement on the European Economic
         Area of May (OJ L 1, p. 3, ‘the EEA Agreement’).
      
The reference has been made in the course of proceedings between (i) projektart Errichtungsgesellschaft mbH (‘projektart’),
         Ms Pepic and Mr Hilbe and (ii) the Grundverkehrslandeskommission des Landes Vorarlberg (Austria) (the Commission for Land
         Transfers of the Province of Vorarlberg) concerning the latter's refusal to grant Ms Pepic and Mr Hilbe authorisation to purchase
         an apartment from projektart, on the ground that the conditions imposed on foreigners in respect of the purchase of a secondary
         residence by the legislation of the Province of Vorarlberg were not fulfilled. 
      
 Legal context
 The EEA Agreement 
Article of the EEA Agreement provides:
      
‘Within the framework of the provisions of this Agreement, there shall be no restrictions between the Contracting Parties
         on the movement of capital belonging to persons resident in EC Member States or EFTA States and no discrimination based on
         the nationality or on the place of residence of the parties or on the place where such capital is invested. Annex XII contains
         the provisions necessary to implement this Article.’
      
Annex XII to the EEA Agreement, entitled ‘Free movement of capital’, refers to Council Directive 88/361/EEC of June for the implementation of Article of the Treaty [article repealed by the Treaty of Amsterdam] (OJ L 178, p. 5).
      
Under Annex XII:
      
‘…
The provisions of Directive [88/361] shall, for the purpose of the present Agreement, be read with the following adaptations:
…
(e)      during transition periods, EFTA States shall not treat new and existing investments by companies or nationals of EC Member
         States or other EFTA States less favourably than under the legislation existing at the date of signature of the Agreement,
         without prejudice to the right of EFTA States to introduce legislation which is in conformity with the Agreement and in particular
         provisions concerning the purchase of secondary residences which correspond in their effect to legislation that has been upheld
         within the Community in accordance with Article 6(4) of the Directive;
      
…’
 Directive 88/Under Article 1(1) of Directive 88/361, capital movements are classified in accordance with the nomenclature in Annex I thereto.
      
It is apparent from that annex that the concept of movement of capital covers, inter alia, investments in real estate on the
         territory of a Member State by non-residents.
      
Article 6(4) of Directive 88/provides that:
      
‘Existing national legislation regulating purchases of secondary residences may be upheld until the Council [of the European
         Union] adopts further provisions in this area in accordance with Article of the [EEC] Treaty [now Article of the EC
         treaty, itself repealed by the Treaty of Amsterdam]. This provision does not affect the applicability of other provisions
         of Community law.’
      
 National legislation
Paragraph 2(7) of the Province of Voralberg’s Law on Land Transfer (Grundverkehrsgesetz, LGBl. 42/2004), in the version resulting
         from the LGBl. 19/(the ‘GVG’), provides: 
      
‘Purchases for the purpose of the construction or use of holiday properties …, or for transfer to third parties for those
         purposes, are classified as purchases for holiday purposes.’
      
Paragraph of the GVG provides:
      
‘(1)      To the extent that such is provided for under European Union law, and subject to subparagraph 2, the rules on land purchase
         by foreign nationals shall not apply to:
      
(a)      persons exercising the freedom of movement for workers;
(b)      persons and companies exercising the freedom of establishment;
(c)      persons and companies exercising the freedom to provide services;
(d)      persons exercising the right to reside;
(e)      persons and companies exercising the free movement of capital, in so far as they are resident in the territory of a Member
         State of the European Union or otherwise within the area of application of the EEA Agreement.
      
(2)      With regard to purchases for holiday purposes, free movement of capital under the EEA Agreement shall not give rise to any
         exception to the rules concerning land transfer.
      
(3)      If it appears from international commitments that certain persons are to be treated as Austrian nationals, the rules relating
         to the purchase of immovable property applicable to foreign nationals do not apply.
      
…’
Paragraph 7(1) of the GVG reads as follows:
      
‘Authorisation from the land transfer authorities is necessary for the purchase of the following rights by foreign nationals:
         
      
(a)      property rights over land or buildings within the meaning of Paragraph ABGB (Allgemeines Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch, General
         Civil Code); 
      
…’
Paragraph of the GVG reads as follows:
      
‘(1)      The acquisition of title may only be authorised where:
...
(b)      the political interests of the State are not affected, and 
(c)      there is a cultural, economic or social interest in the acquisition of the title by a foreign national.
(2)      Paragraph 8(1) is not applicable where precluded by international commitments.’
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Ms Pepic and Mr Hilbe, nationals of the Principality of Liechtenstein and resident in that State, intend to purchase from
         projektart an apartment which is part of a housing construction project in Lochau, in the Province of Vorarlberg. 
      
The interested parties have the intention of first using that apartment as a secondary residence and then making it their
         principal place of residence following their retirement in approximately years time. 
      
On March 2010, the Grundverkehrslandeskommission des Landes Vorarlberg refused to grant Ms Pepic and Mr Hilbe the authorisation
         required pursuant to Paragraph 7(1) of the GVG for the purchase of that apartment.
      
Ms Pepic, Mr Hilbe and projektart contested that decision before the Unabhängiger Verwaltungssenat des Landes Vorarlberg (Independent
         Administrative Tribunal of the Province of Vorarlberg).
      
The referring court notes that Paragraph 3(2) of the GVG applies in the present case since it concerns the purchase by foreign
         nationals of a holiday home. Consequently, according to that court, such a purchase is subject to prior authorisation pursuant
         to Paragraph 7(1)(a) of the GVG. 
      
The case in the main proceedings therefore essentially turns on the question whether Paragraph 3(2) of the GVG, which is based
         on Article 6(4) of Directive 88/361, is compatible with the EEA Agreement.
      
In that respect, the question is whether it is still necessary to apply Article 6(4) of Directive 88/361, a provision aimed
         at the implementation of Article of the EEC Treaty, to the purchase, by a national of an EFTA State party to the EEA Agreement,
         in this instance the Principality of Liechtenstein, of a secondary residence situated in a Member State of the European Union.
      
The referring court considers, firstly, that, although, as regards the situation within the European Union, the subsequently
         adopted Article B(1) of the EC Treaty (now Article 56(1) EC) substantively derogated from Article of the EEC Treaty,
         by contrast, as regards the European Economic Area (‘the EEA’), Directive 88/has not been formally repealed and, moreover,
         has not undergone any substantive amendment, so that it continues to be part of the EEA Agreement. It follows that, in respect
         of the EEA, the legal situation continues to be governed by Article of the EEC Treaty.
      
Secondly, that court recalls that, at paragraph of the judgment in Case C‑452/Ospelt and Schlössle Weissenberg [2003] ECR I‑9743, the Court held that, since May 1995, the date of the entry into force of the EEA Agreement in respect
         of the Principality of Liechtenstein, and in the areas covered by that agreement, Member States can no longer rely on Article C
         of the EC Treaty (now Article EC) in respect of that EFTA State.
      
However, since that judgment concerned only the transfer of agricultural land, the question whether that case-law concerns
         only that subject area or whether, on the contrary, it is comprehensive in scope has not been decisively answered.
      
In those circumstances, the Unabhängiger Verwaltungssenat des Landes Vorarlberg decided to stay the proceedings and to refer
         the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Is Article 6(4) of Directive 88/361/EEC …, according to which existing national legislation regulating purchases of secondary
         residences may be upheld, still applicable to the purchase of secondary residences situated in a Member State of the EU by
         a national of the Principality of Liechtenstein, which forms part of the EEA? 
      
2.      Does national legislation which, on the basis of Article 6(4) of Council Directive 88/361/EEC, prohibits a national of the
         Principality of Liechtenstein from purchasing a secondary residence situated in a Member State of the European Union conflict
         with the provisions of the EEA Agreement concerning the free movement of capital, so that a national authority must disregard
         such national legislation?’
      
 The questions referred 
In accordance with the first subparagraph of Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice of the European
         Union, where the answer to a question referred for a preliminary ruling may be clearly deduced from existing case-law the
         Court may, after hearing the Advocate General, give its decision by reasoned order in which reference is made to the relevant
         case-law.
      
The Court considers that that is so in the present case.
      
By its two questions, which should be considered together, the referring court asks, in essence, whether Article of the
         EEA Agreement must be interpreted as precluding national legislation such as that in issue in the main proceedings which,
         on the basis of Article 6(4) of Directive 88/361, prohibits the purchase of a secondary residence situated in Member State
         of the European Union by a national of the Principality of Liechtenstein, so that a national authority must disregard it.
      
Article of the EEA Agreement provides that the provisions necessary for the application of that article are listed in Annex
         XII to that agreement. Annex XII states that Directive 88/and Annex I to that directive are applicable to the EEA.
      
It is settled case-law that, in the absence of a definition of ‘movement of capital’ in the FEU Treaty, as referred to in
         Article 63(1) TFEU, the nomenclature which makes up Annex I to Directive 88/retains an indicative value, even though that
         directive was adopted on the basis of Articles and 70(1) of the EEC Treaty (Articles to of the EEC Treaty were replaced
         by Articles 73B to 73G of the EC Treaty, which themselves became Articles EC to EC), it being understood that, according
         to the third paragraph of the introduction to that annex, the nomenclature which it contains is not exhaustive as regards
         the concept of movement of capital (see, inter alia, Case C‑450/Schröder [2011] ECR I‑2497, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
It is apparent from that nomenclature that capital movements include investments in real estate on the national territory
         of a Member State by non-residents (see, inter alia, Case C‑386/Centro di Musicologia Walter Stauffer [2006] ECR I‑8203, paragraph 23).
      
It is not disputed that Ms Pepic and Mr Hilbe, nationals of the Principality of Liechtenstein and resident in that State,
         wish to invest in real estate in Austria, namely through the purchase of an apartment. 
      
Such a cross-border investment constitutes a movement of capital within the meaning of that nomenclature (see, to that effect,
         Case C‑72/Établissements Rimbaud [2010] ECR I‑10659, paragraph 18).
      
Consequently, Article of the EEA Agreement and Annex XII thereto are applicable to a dispute such as that before the referring
         court, which relates to a transaction between nationals of States which are party to that Agreement. According to settled
         case-law, the Court may give an interpretation of those provisions where a reference is made by a court of a Member State
         of the European Union with regard to the scope within that Member State of an agreement which forms an integral part of the
         EU legal system (see, inter alia, Établissements Rimbaud, paragraph and the case-law cited). 
      
One of the principal aims of the EEA Agreement is to provide for the fullest possible realisation of the free movement of
         goods, persons, services and capital within the whole EEA, so that the internal market established within the European Union
         is extended to the EFTA States. From that angle, a number of provisions in the EEA Agreement are intended to ensure that the
         interpretation of that Agreement is as uniform as possible throughout the EEA. It is for the Court, in that context, to ensure
         that the rules of the EEA Agreement which are identical in substance to those of the FEU Treaty are interpreted uniformly
         within the Member States (see, inter alia, Établissements Rimbaud, paragraph 20).
      
It is apparent from Article of the EEA Agreement that the rules laid down therein prohibiting restrictions on the movement
         of capital and discrimination are identical, so far as concerns relations between the States party to the EEA Agreement, irrespective
         of whether they are members of the European Union or members of EFTA, to the rules under EU law regarding relations between
         the Member States (see, inter alia, Établissements Rimbaud, paragraph 21).
      
It follows that, although restrictions on the free movement of capital between nationals of States party to the EEA Agreement
         must be assessed in the light of Article of that Agreement and Annex XII thereto, those provisions have the same legal
         scope as Article TFEU (see inter alia, Établissements Rimbaud, paragraph 22). 
      
Moreover, the Court has already held that it would run counter to the objective of uniformity of application of the rules
         relating to free movement of capital within the EEA, recalled at paragraph of the present order, for a State such as the
         Republic of Austria, which is a party to that Agreement, which entered into force on January 1994, to be able, after its
         accession to the European Union on January 1995, to maintain legislation which restricts that freedom vis-à-vis another
         State party to that Agreement by basing itself on Article TFEU (see Ospelt and Schlössle Weissenberg, paragraph 30).
      
In that respect, the EFTA States party to the EEA Agreement must, in fact, be distinguished from other States, such as the
         Swiss Confederation, which have not subscribed to the project of an economically integrated entity with a single market, based
         on common rules between its members, but chose the route of bilateral arrangements between the European Union and its Member
         States in specific areas (see case C‑541/Fokus Invest [2010] ECR I‑1025, paragraph 27). 
      
Accordingly, since May 1995, the date of the entry into force of the EEA Agreement in respect of the Principality of Liechtenstein,
         and in the areas covered by that agreement, the Member States can no longer rely on Article TFEU in respect of the Principality
         of Liechtenstein (see Ospelt and Schlössle Weissenberg, paragraph 31).
      
It also follows that, since that same date and in those areas, the Member States can maintain and rely on legislation restricting
         the freedom of movement of capital in respect of the Principality of Liechtenstein only if, pursuant to European Union law,
         that legislation can be applied in respect of other Member States of the European Union.
      
This is the case for the national legislation on secondary residences that may be maintained under the Union’s rules of primary
         law regarding those residences, such as the transitional provisions contained in the Treaties of Accession to the European
         Union of some Member States.
      
However, it must be held that, in the absence of such rules of primary law that could apply in the present case, national
         legislation such as that in issue in the main proceedings, if applied to prohibit the purchase of a secondary residence in
         a Member State by nationals of another Member State, would constitute discrimination on the grounds of nationality which is
         manifestly contrary to Article TFEU.
      
Moreover, in relations between EU Member States, such legislation cannot be based on Article 6(4) of Directive 88/361.
      
Indeed, as was recalled at paragraph above, the nomenclature of the movements of capital referred to in Annex I to Directive
         88/retains the same indicative value for the purpose of defining the notion of capital movements.
      
Article 6(4) of Directive 88/now has no normative value in the legal order of the European Union since that provision
         constitutes a transitional provision allowing the maintenance of existing provisions in national law governing the purchase
         of secondary residences pending the adoption by the Council of other provisions in that field, in accordance with Article of the EEC Treaty. 
      
However, since the entry into force of the Treaty of Maastricht, the latter provision has been repealed and the liberalisation
         of capital movements between Member States had been progressively achieved in that area through provisions of primary Union
         law.
      
Consequently, in the light of the considerations referred to in paragraph above, Article 6(4) of Directive 88/cannot
         be invoked as justification for national legislation restricting the free of movement of capital, such as that in issue in
         the main proceedings, in respect of nationals of the Principality of Liechtenstein. 
      
It follows that Article of the EEA Agreement must be interpreted as precluding such national legislation.
      
Moreover, it is settled case-law that any national court, hearing a case within its jurisdiction, has, as an organ of a Member
         State, the obligation pursuant to the principle of cooperation set out in Article 4(3) TEU fully to apply the directly applicable
         law of the Union and to protect the rights which the latter confers upon individuals, disregarding any provision of national
         law which may be to the contrary, whether the latter is prior to or subsequent to the legal rule of the Union (see, inter
         alia, Case C‑409/Winner Wetten [2010] ECR I‑8015, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In that regard, it must be recalled, as already stated at paragraph above, that the EEA Agreement forms an integral part
         of the EU legal system.
      
The Court has also repeatedly held that all administrative bodies are subject to the obligation to respect the primacy of
         Union law, referred to in paragraph above, (see, inter alia, Case C‑341/Petersen [2010] ECR I‑47, paragraph and the case-law cited). That obligation applies to an administrative body such as the Grundverkehrslandeskommission
         des Landes Vorarlberg.
      
It follows from the above that the answer to the questions referred is that Article EEA must be interpreted as precluding
         national legislation such as that in issue in the main proceedings which, on the basis of Article 6(4) of Directive 88/361,
         prohibits a national of the Principality of Liechtenstein from purchasing a secondary residence situated in a Member State
         of the European Union, and, therefore, a national authority must disregard such national legislation
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Eighth Chamber) hereby rules:
Article of the European Economic Area Agreement of May must be interpreted as precluding national legislation such
            as that in issue in the main proceedings which, on the basis of Article 6(4) of Council Directive 88/361/EEC of June for the implementation of Article of the Treaty [repealed by the Treaty of Amsterdam] prohibits a national of the Principality
            of Liechtenstein from purchasing a secondary residence situated in a Member State of the European Union, and, therefore, a
            national authority must disregard such national legislation
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 