
Order of the Court (Second Chamber) of May – Confcooperative and Others
(Case C-231/04)
First subparagraph of Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure – External relations – Agreement between the EC and Hungary on the reciprocal protection and control of wine names – Protection in the Community of a name relating to certain wines originating in Hungary – Geographical indication ‘Tokaj’ – Exchange of letters – Possibility of using the word ‘Tocai’ in the term ‘Tocai friulano’ or ‘Tocai italico’ for the description and presentation
         of certain Italian wines, in particular quality wines produced in specified regions (‘quality wines psr’), during a transitional
         period expiring on March – Exclusion of that possibility at the end of the transitional period – Validity – Legal basis – Article EC – Principles of international law relating to treaties – Articles to of the TRIPs Agreement – Protection of fundamental rights – Right to property
      
1.                     Preliminary rulings – Answer which may be clearly deduced from existing case-law – Question referred identical to a question
            on which a ruling has already been given – Application of Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure (Rules of Procedure of
            the Court, Art. 104(3)) (see paras 3-4)
2.                     International agreements – Agreements entered into by the Community – Conclusion – Opinion – Agreement between the EC and
            Hungary on the reciprocal protection and control of wine names (Art. EC; EC-Hungary Association Agreement; EC-Hungary
            Agreement on wines) (see para. 8, operative part 1-2)
3.                     International agreements – Agreements entered into by the Community – Agreement between the EC and Hungary on the reciprocal
            protection and control of wine names (EC-Hungary Agreement on wines, Art. 4(5)) (see para. 8, operative part 3-4)
4.                     International agreements – Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) ( TRIPs Agreement, Arts
            to 24) (see para. 8, operative part 5)
5.                     Community law – Principles – Fundamental rights – Property rights – Restrictions (EC-Hungary Agreement on wines) (see para.
            8, operative part 6)
Re:
Reference for a preliminary ruling – Tribunale Amministrativo Regionale del Lazio – Validity of the Agreement between the
                  European Community and Republic of Hungary on the reciprocal protection and control of wine names of November – Validity
                  of an exchange of letters between the parties to the agreement laying down a prohibition on the use of the name ‘Tocai’ in
                  Italy after 2007.
               
Operative part
1.
The Europe Agreement establishing an Association between the European Communities and their Member States, of the one part,
                     and the Republic of Hungary, of the other part, concluded and approved on behalf of the Community by Decision 93/742/Euratom,
                     ECSC, EC of the Council and of the Commission of December does not constitute the legal basis of Council Decision
                     93/724/EC of November concerning the conclusion of an Agreement between the European Community and the Republic of
                     Hungary on the reciprocal protection and control of wine names.
                  
2.
Article EC, as referred to in the preamble to Decision 93/724, constitutes an appropriate legal basis for the conclusion
                     by the Community alone of the Agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Hungary on the reciprocal protection
                     and control of wine names.
                  
3.
The ban on the use of the name ‘Tocai’ in Italy after March 2007, resulting from the exchange of letters concerning Article
                     of the Agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Hungary on the reciprocal protection and control of
                     wine names, is not contrary to the regime governing homonymous geographical indications in Article 4(5) of that Agreement.
                  
4.
The joint declaration regarding Article 4(5) of the Agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Hungary on
                     the reciprocal protection and control of wine names, in so far as it outlines, in its first paragraph, that, as regards Article
                     4(5)(a) of the same Agreement, the contracting parties noted that, at the time of the negotiations, they did not know of any
                     specific case where the provisions in question might apply, does not constitute a manifestly erroneous interpretation of reality.
                  
5.
Articles to of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, found at Annex C to the Agreement
                     establishing the World Trade Organisation, concluded on behalf of the European Community, as regards matters within its competence,
                     by Council Decision 94/800/EC of December 1994, must be interpreted as meaning that, in a case such as the present one
                     concerning homonymy between a geographical indication of a non-member country and a vine name used for the description and
                     presentation of certain Community wines produced from those vines, these provisions do not require that both the names can
                     continue to be used in the future, notwithstanding the twofold fact that they have been used in the past by the respective
                     producers either in good faith or for at least years prior to April and that each name indicates clearly the country
                     or region or area of origin of the protected wine to which it refers in such a way as not to mislead consumers.
                  
6.
The right to property does not preclude the ban imposed on the producers of the Friuli-Venezia Giulio region (Italy) concerning
                     use of the term ‘Tocai’ in the names ‘Tocai friulano’ or ‘Tocai italico’ for the description and presentation of certain quality
                     Italian wines produced in a specified region after the transitional period ending on March 2007, as provided for in the
                     exchange of letters concerning Article of the Agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Hungary on the
                     reciprocal protection and control of wine names, annexed to that Agreement but not forming part of it.  
                  
Top  
 