
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Seventh Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Environment – Directive 2008/1/EC – Article – Integrated pollution prevention and control – Conditions governing the granting of permits for existing installations – Obligation to ensure that such installations operate in accordance with the requirements of that directive)
In Case C‑158/12,
ACTION under Article TFEU for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on March 2012,
European Commission, represented by S. Petrova and K. Mifsud-Bonnici, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg (Luxembourg),
      
applicant,
v
Ireland, represented by E. Creedon, acting as Agent,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Seventh Chamber),
composed of G. Arestis, President of the Chamber, J.‑C. Bonichot and J.L. da Cruz Vilaça (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: P. Cruz Villalón,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the written procedure,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the European Commission asks the Court to declare that, by not issuing permits in accordance with Articles
         and of Directive 2008/1/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of January concerning integrated pollution
         prevention and control (OJ L 24, p. 8; ‘the IPPC Directive’) or, as appropriate, by not reconsidering and, where necessary,
         by not updating permit conditions, in respect of existing pig-rearing and poultry-rearing installations, and by thereby
         failing to ensure that all existing installations operate in accordance with Articles 3, 7, 9, 10, 13, 14(a) and (b) and 15(2)
         of that directive by not later than October 2007, Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 5(1) of that
         directive.
      
 Legal context
As is apparent from recital in the preamble to the IPPC Directive, Council Directive 96/61/EC of September concerning
         integrated pollution prevention and control (OJ L 257, p. 26) was codified by the IPPC Directive, after being amended
         several times. 
      
The purpose of Directive 96/was to achieve integrated prevention and control of pollution arising from the industrial activities
         listed in Annex I thereto. 
      
In accordance with Article 5(1) of Directive 96/61, Member States were required to take the necessary measures to ensure that
         the competent authorities would see to it, by means of permits issued in accordance with Articles and of that directive
         or, as appropriate, by reconsidering and, where necessary, by updating the conditions, that existing installations operate
         in accordance with the requirements of Articles 3, 7, 9, 10, 13, the first and second indents of Article 14, and Article 15(2)
         thereof not later than eight years after the date on which that directive was brought into effect, that is to say, by October
         2007.
      
According to recital in the preamble to the IPPC Directive, some of the provisions adopted pursuant to that directive had
         to be applied to existing installations after October and others had to be applied as from October 1999. 
      
Article of the IPPC Directive provides:
      
‘The purpose of this Directive is to achieve integrated prevention and control of pollution arising from the activities listed
         in Annex I. It lays down measures designed to prevent or, where that is not practicable, to reduce emissions in the air, water
         and land from the abovementioned activities, including measures concerning waste, in order to achieve a high level of protection
         of the environment taken as a whole, without prejudice to Directive 85/337/EEC and other relevant Community provisions.’ 
      
Article of the IPPC Directive, entitled ‘Definitions’, is worded as follows:
      
‘For the purposes of this Directive the following definitions shall apply: …
4.      “existing installation” means an installation which on October 1999, in accordance with legislation existing before that
         date, was in operation or was authorised or, in the view of the competent authority, was the subject of a full request for
         authorisation, provided that that installation was put into operation no later than October 2000;
      
...’.
Article 5(1) of the IPPC Directive is worded as follows: 
      
‘Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the competent authorities see to it, by means of permits in
         accordance with Articles and or, as appropriate, by reconsidering and, where necessary, by updating the conditions, that
         existing installations operate in accordance with the requirements of Articles 3, 7, 9, and 13, Article 14(a) and (b) and
         Article 15(2) not later than October 2007, without prejudice to specific Community legislation.’
      
Articles 3, 6, 7, 9, and to of the IPPC Directive establish the general principles applicable to the basic obligations
         of the operator and govern applications for permits, an integrated approach to issuing permits, conditions of the permit,
         best available techniques and environmental quality standards, the reconsideration and updating of permit conditions by the
         competent authority, compliance with those permit conditions, and access to information and public participation in the permit
         procedure.
      
 Background to the dispute and the pre-litigation procedure
Prior to the deadline of October 2007, the Commission, at several meetings of the group of experts on integrated pollution
         prevention and control, drew the attention of all Member States to the need to comply with that deadline set in Article 5(1)
         of the IPPC Directive with respect to the authorisation and operation of existing installations. 
      
By letter of November the Commission requested all the Member States to provide it with information on the total number
         of existing installations and on the number of new, reconsidered and, where appropriate, updated permits for existing installations.
         
      
In their reply of January the Irish authorities indicated that, in relation to the pig-rearing sector, of the installations had permits that had not been brought into line with the requirements of the IPPC Directive. In the poultry
         sector installations had yet to submit an application for a permit.
      
By letter of formal notice of November the Commission called on Ireland to identify the name, sector and location
         of each of the existing installations for which a permit had been granted, and of those still operating without a permit.
         
      
The Irish authorities replied by letter of January 2009, stating, inter alia, that the Irish Environmental Protection Agency
         (‘EPA’) had drawn up a list of installations – poultry-rearing installations and pig-rearing installations – that
         it considered might be operating above the threshold at which a permit was required and which therefore required such a permit.
      
After having received further information from Ireland, and taking the view that existing Irish installations were still
         operating without a permit, in breach of Article 5(1) of the IPPC Directive, the Commission sent a reasoned opinion to Ireland
         on November 2010.
      
Ireland replied to the reasoned opinion by letter of January 2011. It explained that, in respect of the installations
         recorded by the EPA, some permits had already been issued and several applications for rearing permits had been submitted,
         and that it appeared, on examination, that other installations did not require permits.
      
Subsequently, the Irish authorities regularly sent the Commission new information on developments; the latest, updated on
         January 2012, was sent to the Commission by letter of February 2012. 
      
In the light of that information, the Commission found that pig- and poultry-rearing installations were continuing to operate
         in Ireland without valid permits, and consequently brought the present action. 
      
 The action
The Commission claims that Ireland has infringed Article 5(1) of the IPPC Directive in so far as existing installations
         still do not have permits. Furthermore, Ireland has not taken any measures to prevent those installations from operating
         without a valid permit within the terms of that provision. 
      
In its defence, Ireland essentially confines itself to pointing out the efforts undertaken by the EPA to ensure that operators
         of all the intensive pig- and poultry-rearing installations concerned are informed of their legal obligation to obtain a permit
         as provided by the IPPC Directive.
      
Ireland states that, as a result of those efforts, only installations out of the referred to in the Commission’s application
         are still being assessed with a view to the issuing of permits under the IPPC Directive.
      
As is apparent from Article of the IPPC Directive, the European Union legislature has imposed on the Member States obligations
         which include those laid down in Article 5(1) of that directive, in order that a high level of protection of the environment,
         taken as a whole, might be achieved. It follows from this that it is only if the Member States carry out the obligations imposed
         on them by that directive fully and in accordance with that directive that the objective of protection may be achieved (see,
         inter alia, judgment of May in Case C‑352/Commission v Austria, paragraph 11).
      
Furthermore, according to settled case-law, the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations must
         be determined by reference to the situation prevailing in that Member State at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned
         opinion, and the Court cannot take account of any subsequent changes (see, inter alia, Case C‑286/Commission v Hungary [2012] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 41).
      
In the present case, Ireland does not dispute that, at the end of the period prescribed in the reasoned opinion, the measures
         required in order to ensure that the installations concerned would be brought into line with the provisions referred to in
         Article of the IPPC Directive, as well as the measures to ensure compliance with Article 5, had not been taken.
      
That being the case, the Commission’s application must be granted. 
      
Consequently, it must be held that, by not issuing permits in accordance with Articles and of the IPPC Directive or, as
         appropriate, by not reconsidering and, where necessary, by not updating permit conditions, in respect of existing pig-rearing
         and poultry-rearing installations, and by thereby failing to ensure that all existing installations operate in accordance
         with Articles 3, 7, 9, 10, 13, 14(a) and (b) and 15(2) of that directive by not later than October 2007, Ireland has failed
         to fulfil its obligations under Article 5(1) of that directive.
      
 Costs
Under Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs
         if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for Ireland to be ordered
         to pay the costs, and since the latter has been unsuccessful, Ireland must be ordered to pay the costs. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (Seventh Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by not issuing permits in accordance with Articles and of Directive 2008/1/EC of the European Parliament
            and of the Council of January concerning integrated pollution prevention and control or, as appropriate, by not reconsidering
            and, where necessary, by not updating permit conditions, in respect of existing pig-rearing and poultry-rearing installations,
            and by thereby failing to ensure that all existing installations operate in accordance with Articles 3, 7, 9, 10, 13, 14(a)
            and (b) and 15(2) of that directive by not later than October 2007, Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under
            Article 5(1) of that directive;
2.      Orders Ireland to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 