
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-325/Commission of the European CommunitiesvGrand Duchy of Luxembourg
«(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Failure to transpose Directive 98/81/EC)»
Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), October I - Summary of the Judgment
Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Examination of merits by the Court – Situation to be taken into consideration – Situation at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion(Art. EC)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)October (1)
((Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Failure to transpose Directive 98/81/EC))
In Case C-325/02, 
            
 Commission of the European Communities,  represented by U. Wölker and F. Simonetti, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, 
v
 Grand Duchy of Luxembourg,  represented by P. Gramegna, acting as Agent,
            
defendant, 
APPLICATION for a declaration that, by transposing only part of Article of and Annexes IV and V to Council Directive 98/81/EC
            of October amending Directive 90/219/EEC on the contained use of genetically modified micro-organisms (OJ L 330,
            p. 13), the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of that directive,
            
THE COURT (Second Chamber),,
composed of: R. Schintgen, President of the Chamber, V. Skouris and N. Colneric (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on September 2002, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         under Article EC for a declaration that, by transposing only part of Article of and Annexes IV and V to Council Directive
         98/81/EC of October amending Directive 90/219/EEC on the contained use of genetically modified micro-organisms (OJ
         L 330, p. 13), the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of that directive.
         
         
Legal framework
            
Council Directive 90/219/EEC of April on the contained use of genetically modified micro-organisms (OJ L 117,
         p. 1) was amended by Directive 98/81. 
         
            
Article of Directive 98/completely rephrases Articles to and to of Directive 90/219, inserts a new article
         20a into the Directive and, by its sole Annex, replaces the Annexes to that Directive by new Annexes I to V. 
         
            
Annex III to Directive 90/219, in the version in Directive 98/81, sets out the principles to be followed in assessing the
         contained uses referred to in Article 5(2) of the Directive. Annex IV to Directive 90/219, in the version in Directive 98/81,
         lists containment and other protective measures which must be taken to implement Article 6(1) of the Directive. Annex V to
         Directive 90/219, in the version in Directive 98/81, specifies the information which the user is required to submit to the
         competent authorities in accordance with Articles 7, and of the Directive. 
         
            
Under Article 2(1) of Directive 98/81, Member States are to bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions
         necessary to comply with the Directive not later than months after the date of its entry into force and forthwith to inform
         the Commission. The Directive entered into force on December 1998. 
         
            
Under Article 2(2) of Directive 98/81, Member States are to communicate to the Commission the text of the main provisions
         of national law which they adopt in the field governed by the Directive. 
         Pre-litigation procedure
            
Since the Luxembourg Government failed to inform the Commission of the provisions adopted for the purpose of transposing Directive
         98/into national law and in the absence of any other information which would suggest that the Member State had adopted
         the necessary provisions, the Commission, on August 2000, put the Luxembourg Government on formal notice to submit its observations
         on the matter within two months. On January 2001, it issued a reasoned opinion to that government in which it noted the
         failure to communicate any transposition measures. 
         
            
However, the Luxembourg Government had replied, by letter of December 2000, stating that Annex III to the Grand Ducal regulation
         of December (
          Mémorial  A 1999, p. 2590) replicated the text of Annex IV to Directive 98/81. 
         
            
It repeated that claim in its reply of April to the reasoned opinion, stating in addition that it intended to transpose
         other provisions of Directive 98/by means of two Grand Ducal regulations which were still at draft stage, since transposition
         would also require action by the legislature. 
         
            
By supplementary letter of formal notice of July 2001, the Commission complained that the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg had
         failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of Directive 98/by only transposing Annex IV to the Directive and, in
         any event, by failing to communicate to the Commission other transposition measures for that Directive, and invited the Luxembourg
         Government to submit its observations on that matter within two months. 
         
            
In a first reply, of September 2001, the Luxembourg Government relied on the existence of two draft Grand Ducal regulations
         and a draft law intended to complete the transposition of Directive 98/81. 
         
            
Subsequently, in a second reply, of November 2001, the Luxembourg Government communicated to the Commission a Grand Ducal
         regulation of October establishing the information which must be included in applications for the approval of proposals
         for the contained use of genetically modified organisms (
          Mémorial  A 2001, p. 2591). 
         
            
Since it took the view that the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg had still not adopted, within the prescribed period, all the measures
         necessary to comply with the obligations laid down in Directive 98/81, inasmuch as,  
          inter alia , the Grand Ducal regulation of October only transposed Article of Directive 98/in so far as it amended Articles
         7, 9(1) and 10(1) of Directive 90/and Annex V to Directive 98/81, the Commission sent the Luxembourg Government a supplementary
         reasoned opinion by letter of December 2001. The Commission invited the Luxembourg Government to take the necessary measures
         within two months of receiving the supplementary reasoned opinion. 
         The applicationArguments of the parties
         
            
The Commission claims that although the prescribed periods had expired, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg had carried out only
         a partial transposition of Directive 98/81, limited to one part of Article and to Annexes IV and V. 
         
            
The Luxembourg Government states that the Luxembourg Conseil d'État gave its opinion on October on the draft law which
         will complete the transposition into Luxembourg law of Directive 98/81. After publication of the Conseil d'État's opinion,
         that draft law was sent to the Chamber of Deputies, which was asked to treat it as a priority. The competent committees in
         the Chamber of Deputies had begun consideration of the draft law and the vote should, accordingly, take place in the near
         future and, in any event, during the first quarter of 2003. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
First of all, it must be pointed out that the application, in so far as it refers to  
         Annexes IV and V to Directive 98/81, and the defence of the Luxembourg Government in that regard must be understood to refer to the Annexes to Directive 90/in the versions contained in the single annex to Directive 98/81. 
         
            
It is settled case-law that the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations must be determined by
         reference to the situation in that Member State as it stood at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion (see,
          
          inter alia , Case C-71/Commission  v  
          Germany  [2001] ECR I-5811, paragraph 29, and Case C-110/Commission  v  
          Austria   [2001] ECR I-7545, paragraph 13). 
         
            
In the present case, full transposition of the Directive did not take place within the period laid down in the reasoned opinion.
         The action brought by the Commission must therefore be considered to be well founded. 
         
            
Accordingly, it must be held that, by transposing only part of Article of Directive 98/and Annexes IV and V to Directive
         90/in the version in Directive 98/81, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article
         of Directive 98/81. 
         
Costs
            
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party's pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg
         has been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Second Chamber)
hereby: 
         
1.
 Declares that by transposing only part of Article of Directive 98/81/EC of October amending Directive 90/219/EEC
            on the contained use of genetically modified micro-organisms and Annexes IV and V to Council Directive 90/219/EEC of April
            on the contained use of genetically modified micro-organisms in the version in Directive 98/81, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg
            has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of Directive 98/81; 
            
2.
 Orders the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg to pay the costs. 
            
Schintgen
Skouris 
Colneric 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on October 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
V. Skouris  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: French.
Top  
 