
Case C-282/P
Holcim (Deutschland) AG
v
Commission of the European Communities
(Appeals – Non-contractual liability of the Community – Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC) – Reimbursement of bank guarantee charges)
Opinion of Advocate General Mengozzi delivered on January Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), April Summary of the Judgment
1.     Actions for damages – Limitation period – Point from which time starts to run 
(Art. 288, second para., EC; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 46)
2.     Actions for damages – Limitation period – Interruption 
(Art. 288, second para., EC; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 46)
3.     Non-contractual liability – Conditions 
(Art. 288, second para., EC)
1.     The period of limitation for an action for liability of the Community cannot begin until all the requirements governing an
         obligation to provide compensation for damage are satisfied and, in particular, until the damage to be made good has materialised.
         Therefore, where the liability of the Community has its origin in a legislative measure, that period of limitation does not
         begin until the damaging effects of that measure have arisen. A different solution would call into question the principle
         of autonomy of actions, by making the procedure for an action for damages depend on the completion of an action for annulment.
      
That solution can be applied to disputes arising from individual measures. In those cases, the period of limitation begins
         as soon as the decision has produced its effects vis-à-vis the persons concerned by it. Where a fine is imposed on a company
         by a Commission decision, the damaging effects will arise vis-à-vis that undertaking as soon as it is ordered to pay the fine.
         Those orders were coupled with the option, made available in order to avoid having to pay the fines immediately, of providing
         bank guarantees. It is in fact irrelevant, as regards the starting point of the period of limitation, that the Community’s
         unlawful conduct was established by a ruling of that Court.
      
(see paras 29-31)
2.     Under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, the period of limitation is interrupted, in respect of non-contractual
         liability, if proceedings are instituted before the Court or if, prior to such proceedings, an application is made by the
         aggrieved party to the relevant institution of the Communities. Since Article relates to actions against the Communities
         in respect of non-contractual liability, the ‘proceedings’ which fall within that provision, which, moreover, are treated
         as interrupting the period of limitation, are those which seek to put that liability in issue, in accordance with the second
         paragraph of Article EC. An action for annulment cannot therefore be deemed to be ‘proceedings’ which will interrupt the
         limitation period for the purposes of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice.
      
(see para. 36)
3.     For the non-contractual liability of the Community to arise, a number of conditions must be met, including, where the unlawfulness
         of a legal measure is at issue, the existence of a sufficiently serious breach of a rule of law intended to confer rights
         on individuals. As regards that condition, the decisive criterion for establishing that a breach of Community law is sufficiently
         serious is whether the Community institution concerned manifestly and gravely disregarded the limits on its discretion. Where
         that institution has only considerably reduced, or even no, discretion, the mere infringement of Community law may be sufficient
         to establish the existence of a sufficiently serious breach. The determining factor in deciding whether there has been such
         an infringement is not the general or individual nature of the act in question.
      
(see paras 47-48)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Appeals – Non-contractual liability of the Community – Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC) – Reimbursement of bank guarantee charges)
In Case C-282/P,
APPEAL pursuant to Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, brought on July 2005,
Holcim (Deutschland) AG, formerly Alsen AG, established in Hamburg (Germany), represented by P. Niggemann and F. Wiemer, Rechtsanwälte,
      
applicant,
the other party to the proceedings being:
Commission of the European Communities, represented by R. Lyal, and G. Wilms, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, P. Kūris, J. Makarczyk, L. Bay-Larsen and J.‑C. Bonichot (Rapporteur),
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Mengozzi,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2007,
gives the following
Judgment
In its appeal, Holcim (Deutschland) AG requests the setting aside of the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European
         Communities of April in Case T-28/Holcim (Deutschland) v Commission [2005] ECR II-(‘the judgment under appeal’), in which the Court of First Instance dismissed its action seeking compensation
         for the damage it claims to have suffered as a result of the charges connected with the provision of a bank guarantee for
         the purposes of deferring payment of a fine imposed by Commission Decision 94/815/EC of November relating to a proceeding
         under Article of the EC Treaty (Cases IV/33.and 33.– Cement) (OJ L 343, p. 1) (‘the Cement decision’), which
         was subsequently annulled by the judgment of the Court of First Instance of March in Joined Cases T‑25/95, T-26/95,
         T-30/to T-32/95, T-34/to T-39/95, T-42/to T-46/95, T‑48/95, T-50/to T-65/95, T-68/to T-71/95, T-87/95, T-88/95,
         T-103/and T‑104/Cimenteries CBR and Others v Commission [2000] ECR II-491, ‘Cement’.
      
 Background 
The background was set out in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, as follows:
‘The applicant, Alsen AG, which became Holcim (Deutschland) AG, whose registered office is in Hamburg (Germany), manufactures
         construction materials. Alsen AG came about as a result of the merger in between Alsen Breitenburg Zement- und Kalkwerke
         GmbH (“Alsen Breitenburg”) and Nordcement AG (“Nordcement”).
      
By [the Cement decision], the Commission ordered Alsen Breitenburg and Nordcement to pay fines of EUR 3.million and EUR
         1.million, respectively, for infringement of Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC).
      
Alsen Breitenburg and Nordcement brought actions for annulment of that decision. Those actions were registered under the references
         T‑45/and T‑46/and were then joined to the actions brought by the other companies to which the Cement decision was addressed.
         
      
In accordance with the option given by the Commission, Alsen Breitenburg and Nordcement decided to provide bank guarantees,
         thus avoiding the need to pay the fines immediately. Alsen Breitenburg’s bank guarantee was in existence from May until
         May and was arranged by Berenberg Bank, in consideration of an annual commission of 0.45%. Nordcement provided, from
         April until May 2000, a bank guarantee arranged by Deutsche Bank, in consideration of an annual commission of 0.375%
         and a single start-up commission of EUR 15.34. The applicant paid to the banks, for arranging the bank guarantees, a total
         amount of EUR 002.21.
      
By [the Cement judgment], the Court of First Instance annulled the Cement decision in so far as the applicant was concerned and ordered
         the Commission to pay the costs.
      
Pursuant to Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance, and by letter of September 2001, the applicant
         therefore requested the defendant to pay, first, the costs of the proceedings (in particular the lawyers’ fees, amounting
         to EUR 000) and, second, the charges incurred in providing the bank guarantees.
      
By letter of January 2002, the defendant offered to pay to the applicant part of its lawyers’ fees (EUR 000), but refused
         to pay the bank guarantee charges, relying on the case-law on costs within the meaning of Article of the Rules of Procedure.
      
By letter of April 2002, the applicant again requested the applicant to pay it the whole of the lawyers’ costs and the bank
         guarantee charges. For payment of the bank guarantee charges, the applicant relied this time on the second paragraph of Article
         EC and Article EC and also on the judgment of the Court of First Instance of October in Case T‑171/Corus UK v Commission [2001] ECR II-2967, which had been delivered in the meantime. 
      
By an e-mail of May 2002, the defendant offered to pay the lawyers’ fees in the amount of EUR 000. As regards the bank
         guarantee charges, it again refused to pay them, taking the view that the possibility of deferring payment of the fine by
         providing a bank guarantee was a simple option and that the defendant could not therefore be held liable for the charges occasioned
         where undertakings decided to take advantage of that possibility.’
      
 The action before the Court of First Instance and the judgment under appeal
By application lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on January 2003, the applicant claimed that:
–       the Commission should be ordered to pay to the applicant the sum of EUR 002.together with interest at the rate of 5.75%
         a year for the period from April 2000;
      
–       the Commission should be ordered to pay the costs.
The defendant contended that the Court should:
–       dismiss the action as inadmissible, in so far as it is based on Article EC;
–       dismiss the action in its entirety, in so far as it is based on Article EC:
–       as inadmissible, or, in the alternative, as unfounded, in so far as it relates to the bank guarantee charges incurred before
         January 1998;
      
–       as unfounded for the remainder;
–       order the applicant to pay the costs. 
In its observations, the applicant accordingly claimed that the Court of First Instance should:
–       declare the action admissible, in so far as it is based on Article EC;
–       in the alternative, interpret the action, in so far as it is based on Article EC, as being an action for annulment or
         for failure to act;
      
–       order the defendant to pay the costs.
By the judgment under appeal, delivered after the parties presented oral argument and answered the questions put by the Court
         at the hearing on June 2004, the Court of First Instance dismissed the action. 
      
In the first place, the Court of First Instance considered that the action was inadmissible in so far as it was based on Article
         EC. 
      
In reaching that conclusion, the Court of First Instance noted that the remedies set out in the EC Treaty available to individuals
         in order to rely on their rights are exhaustively listed. Since Article EC, concerning the obligations arising from compliance
         with a judgment of the Court of Justice, does not provide for such a remedy, it cannot be the basis for an independent claim
         for the reimbursement of bank guarantee charges. Furthermore, the Court refused to interpret the application as constituting
         the basis of an action for annulment or for failure to act having found that the initial object of the application was to
         obtain damages (paragraph of the judgment under appeal).
      
In the second place, the Court of First Instance held that, in so far as it was based on Article EC, the action should
         be dismissed as being in part inadmissible and in part unfounded.
      
The Court took the view, as the defendant invited it to, that the application was partially inadmissible on the ground that
         the action for damages was time-barred under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice. The Court pointed out that
         the limitation period for proceedings in matters arising from non-contractual liability cannot begin until all the requirements
         governing the obligation to make good the damage are satisfied (paragraph of the judgment under appeal). It considered
         that in the present case those requirements were met as soon as the bank guarantees were provided since the applicant, being
         of the view that the Cement decision was illegal, was in a position to invoke the non-contractual liability of the Community
         (paragraph of the judgment under appeal). Accordingly, the limitation period was interrupted only when the application
         was lodged before the Court on January 2003. On the basis of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, the Court
         held that the action for damages was time-barred as regards the bank guarantee charges incurred before January (paragraph
         of the judgment under appeal).
      
The Court of First Instance ruled on the substance in relation to the charges incurred after that date. It first of all concerned
         itself with establishing whether the Commission’s conduct amounted to a serious breach of Community law. It pointed out that
         the Court had itself found the Cement decision to be illegal in the Cement judgment. It concluded, however, that that illegality did not amount to a serious breach of Community law. It admittedly accepted
         that in that case the Commission’s discretion was limited and that, in those circumstances, the infringement of Community
         law could amount to a serious breach (paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal). However, it pointed out that the
         facts underlying the Cement decision were extremely complex. In those circumstances, the Court held that the breach of Community
         law in that case was not sufficiently serious (paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal).
      
Next, the Court examined whether a causal link might exist between the Commission’s conduct and the damage complained of.
         It held that that link was not established since the provision of a bank guarantee was the consequence of the applicant’s
         exercising its freedom of choice and not the unlawfulness of the Commission’s decision (paragraphs to of the judgment
         under appeal).
      
The Court of First Instance therefore found it unnecessary to rule on the damage suffered and dismissed the application on
         the merits.
      
 Procedure before the Court of Justice and the forms of order sought
The applicant seeks the same forms of order as those sought at first instance and claims that the Court should:
–       set aside the judgment under appeal;
–       order the defendant to pay to the applicant the sum of EUR 002.21, together with interest at a rate of 5.75% a year for
         the period from April 2000;
      
–       in the alternative, refer the case back to the Court of First Instance for a fresh decision, having regard to the interpretation
         of the law given by the Court of Justice;
      
–       order the defendant to pay all the costs.
The defendant claims that the Court should:
–       dismiss the appeal;
–       order the applicant to pay the costs.
 The appeal
Three pleas in law are put forward in support of the appeal. The first alleges that the Court of First Instance erred in law
         in considering the action for damages based on Articles EC and EC to be partially time-barred. The second alleges
         that the Court erred in law by seeking to determine whether there was a sufficiently serious breach of Community law for the
         purposes of establishing the Community’s liability. The third plea alleges that the Court erred in law in holding that no
         causal link between the illegality of the Cement decision and the constitution of the guarantee charges was established in
         the particular case.
      
 The first plea in law
 Arguments of the parties
The application disputes the assessment by the Court of First Instance of the application of the rules on limitation laid
         down in Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice. It takes the view that the limitation period did not begin until
         the Court annulled the Cement decision. It bases its reasoning on paragraph of the judgment in Joined Cases 256/80, 257/80,
         265/80, 267/and 5/Birra Wührer and Others v Commission [1982] ECR 85, from which it follows that the period of limitation cannot begin until all the requirements governing the
         obligation to provide compensation for damage are satisfied and in particular before the damage to be made good has materialised.
      
According to the applicant, the annulment of the Cement decision constituted, in the case in point, a condition precedent
         to an obligation to provide compensation.
      
The applicant takes the view that by providing the bank guarantees it satisfied a legal obligation which only came to an end
         with the decision to annul. It also considers that the damage is closely linked to the institution of annulment proceedings,
         since the bank guarantees were provided because of those proceedings and because they had no suspensory effect.
      
It also claims that the Court erred in its reasoning, based on Joined Cases 56/to 60/Kurt Kampffmeyer and Others v Commission and Council [1976] ECR 711, in holding that the applicant could have brought infringement proceedings as soon as the bank guarantees were
         provided. It takes the view that to use the form of action provided for in Article EC in this way would have constituted
         an abuse of process designed to circumvent the conditions as to admissibility laid down in Article EC in respect of actions
         for annulment. 
      
The applicant considers, finally, that, contrary to what the Court of First Instance held, the damage did not continue in
         any way but fully materialised when the bank guarantees were provided. It points out that only one contract was entered into
         with the banks. That contract was also limited ratione temporis to the period of the judicial proceedings and the applicable rates of interest were annual. Accordingly, the bank charges
         relating to those guarantees were not calculated on a daily basis.
      
In the alternative, the applicant submits that the limitation period was interrupted by the institution of annulment proceedings
         before the Court of First Instance. According to the applicant, the facts of the case were only definitively established in
         the course of that action and the institution of the application for damages was essentially dependent on the outcome of the
         annulment proceedings.
      
The defendant for its part takes the view that the Court of First Instance correctly applied the rules on limitation. It contends
         in particular that the unlawful decision is the act giving rise to liability.
      
It considers that the provision of bank guarantees cannot amount to a legal obligation since it is the direct consequence
         of the exercise of its freedom of choice by the applicant, which could also have decided to pay the fine. By annulling the
         Cement decision, the Court of First Instance was thus unable to bring to an end an obligation which did not exist. The annulment
         is therefore not the act giving rise to liability, which is, on the contrary, the Cement decision itself.
      
The defendant also points out that the applicant was, as the Court of First Instance held, able to bring an action for damages
         as soon as the guarantees were provided. The defendant takes the view that the Court was right to apply the judgment in Kampffmeyer and Others v Commission and Council, since the actions under Articles EC and EC were separate. 
      
Accordingly, the defendant takes the view that the Court of First Instance did not err in law by holding that the period of
         limitation began as soon as the bank guarantees were provided.
      
The defendant also bases its contention that the institution of the annulment proceedings did not interrupt the period of
         limitation on the fact that Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice provides expressly that that period is interrupted
         by the institution of an action for damages. An action for annulment cannot therefore interrupt that period.
      
 Findings of the Court 
The first plea in law falls into three parts.
 The first part, based on the assessment of the starting point of the limitation period
The period of limitation for an action for liability of the Community cannot begin until all the requirements governing an
         obligation to provide compensation for damage are satisfied and, in particular, until the damage to be made good has materialised.
         Therefore, where the liability of the Community has its origin in a legislative measure, that period of limitation does not
         begin until the damaging effects of that measure have arisen.
      
A different solution would call into question the principle of autonomy of actions, by making the procedure for an action
         for damages depend on the completion of an action for annulment. That solution can be applied to disputes arising from individual
         measures. In those cases, the period of limitation begins as soon as the decision has produced its effects vis-à-vis the persons
         concerned by it.
      
In the present case, however, the damaging effects of the Cement decision arose vis-à-vis the applicant’s predecessors as
         soon as they were ordered to pay a fine. Those orders were coupled with the option, made available in order to avoid having
         to pay the fines immediately, of providing bank guarantees. Contrary to what is submitted by the applicant, the damaging effects
         of the Cement decision therefore did not arise when the Court of First Instance annulled that decision. It is in fact irrelevant,
         as regards the starting point of the period of limitation, that the Community’s unlawful conduct was established by a ruling
         of that Court. 
      
The applicant’s predecessors could, in accordance with the approach adopted by the Court of Justice in paragraph of Kampffmeyer and Others v Commission and Council, therefore bring an action in order to establish the Community’s non-contractual liability as soon as the cause of damage
         became certain, that is, in the present case, as soon as the bank guarantees were provided. Contrary to what the applicant
         argues, that would not have constituted an abuse of process, since an action for damages is a separate cause of action from
         an action for annulment. 
      
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance erred in law by holding that the limitation period
         began to run as soon as the bank guarantees were provided. Whilst the claim for damages could no doubt have been brought as
         soon as the guarantees were provided, since at that time the damage caused by the contested Commission decision was certain
         as to the grounds and could be determined as to the scope, the period of limitation could not, for its part, begin until the
         financial loss had in fact materialised, that is, until the bank guarantee charges had begun to run. However, whatever date
         is used falls well before that on which the Court gave its ruling in the Cement judgment, which the applicant regards as being the starting date of the limitation period. The first part of the first plea
         in law must be rejected.
      
 The second part, alleging that the damage was ongoing
The damage alleged by the applicant comprises sums of money which it was required to pay the banks for providing the guarantees.
         As is clear from the documents submitted to the Court of First Instance and the proceedings before it, those bank charges
         were calculated in proportion to the number of days during which the bank guarantees were in force.
      
The amount of the alleged damage therefore increased in proportion to the number of days which elapsed. The applicant is accordingly
         not justified in submitting that the loss was instantaneous in nature and limited to the provision of the bank guarantees
         alone. Consequently, the Court of First Instance was correct to hold, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the
         damage relied on by the applicant was ongoing. The second part of the first plea in law must therefore be rejected.
      
 The third part, alleging interruption of the limitation period
Under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, the period of limitation is interrupted, in respect of non-contractual
         liability, if proceedings are instituted before the Court or if, prior to such proceedings, an application is made by the
         aggrieved party to the relevant institution of the Communities. Since Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice relates
         to actions against the Communities in respect of non-contractual liability, the ‘proceedings’ which fall within that provision,
         which, moreover, are treated as interrupting the period of limitation, are those which seek to put that liability in issue,
         in accordance with Article 288(2) EC. An action for annulment cannot therefore be deemed to be ‘proceedings’ which will interrupt
         the limitation period or the purposes of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice. Accordingly, the applicant is
         not justified in maintaining, by the final part of its first plea in law, that, by holding that the institution of proceedings
         for annulment did not interrupt the limitation period, the Court of First Instance erred in law.
      
It follows that the first plea must be rejected in its entirety.
 The second plea in law
 Arguments of the parties
The applicant claims that the Court erred in law by seeking to determine whether there was a sufficiently serious breach of
         Community law as a condition for requiring the Community to provide compensation for damage.
      
It maintains that the criterion of a sufficiently serious breach applies only where a legislative act of the Community is
         at issue. In the present case, the liability of the Community falls to be considered in the legal context created by the annulment
         of an individual administrative act. Accordingly, the Court of First Instance did not have to seek to determine whether there
         was a sufficiently serious breach, since the mere finding of unlawfulness was sufficient to give rise to the obligation to
         provide compensation for damage.
      
The applicant goes on to state that the criterion of a sufficiently serious breach is required in the context of legislative
         acts in order to prevent a deluge of cases. Those cases will be less likely to succeed than when individual measures are at
         issue, as is the case here.
      
In the alternative, the applicant asks the Court to accept that in the present case there was a sufficiently serious breach
         of Community law. To this end, it relies on the case-law to the effect that there is a sufficiently serious breach where an
         institution manifestly and gravely disregards the limits of its discretion, a mere infringement being sufficient where that
         discretion is itself reduced (see Case C‑5/Hedley Lomas [1996] ECR I-2553). The applicant takes the view that the defendant’s discretion in the present case was reduced and agrees
         with the Court of First Instance on this point (see paragraph of the judgment under appeal). Conversely, it considers
         that the Court of First Instance was wrong to take into account the complexity of the facts and the difficulties in applying
         Community law for the purposes of ascertaining whether there had been a sufficiently serious breach, since the case-law referred
         to provides no basis for the judgment under appeal on those grounds.
      
Finally, the applicant claims that the facts of the case as regards the applicant were not complex and that the length of
         the Cement judgment can be explained by the mere fact that the defendant and the Court of First Instance preferred to join a number of
         related cases rather than make Alsen Breitenburg and Nordcement the subject of a separate judgment.
      
The defendant, for its part, takes the view that the Court of First Instance was correct to seek to determine whether there
         was a sufficiently serious breach.
      
It contends in particular that the distinction made by the applicant between legislative acts and individual acts is not relevant.
         According to the case-law of the Court, the nature of a measure is not a decisive criterion for identifying the limits of
         the institutions’ discretion (see Case C‑352/P Bergaderm and Goupil v Commission [2000] ECR I‑5291, paragraphs and 42). It takes the view that, in order to assess the extent of that discretion, the relevant
         perspective is that of the time when the decision was taken. In those circumstances, it is appropriate to take into account
         the Commission’s specific situation at that time and thus the complexity of the facts in the case. It adds that the lack of
         complexity of the facts of the case, alleged by the applicant, is a matter which falls outside the scope of the Court’s jurisdiction
         in the context of an appeal.
      
In the alternative, the defendant contends that the assessment of the complexity of the facts cannot be limited only to the
         applicant’s situation in an appeal but must also take into account all the situations which led to the Commission’s adoption
         of the Cement decision.
      
 Findings of the Court
The second plea in law falls into three parts 
 The first part, alleging that the Court of First Instance was wrong to seek to establish whether there was a sufficiently
            serious breach of Community law 
For the non-contractual liability of the Community to arise, a number of conditions must be met, including, where the unlawfulness
         of a legal measure is at issue, the existence of a sufficiently serious breach of a rule of law intended to confer rights
         on individuals. As regards that condition, the decisive criterion for establishing that a breach of Community law is sufficiently
         serious is whether the Community institution concerned manifestly and gravely disregarded the limits on its discretion. Where
         that institution has only considerably reduced, or even no, discretion, the mere infringement of Community law may be sufficient
         to establish the existence of a sufficiently serious breach (Bergaderm and Goupil v Commission, paragraphs and 44) 
      
The determining factor in deciding whether there has been such an infringement is not the general or individual nature of
         the act in question (Bergaderm and Goupil v Commission, paragraph 46, and Case C-472/Commission v Fresh Marine [2003] ECR I-7541, paragraph 27).
      
Accordingly, the applicant is not justified in submitting that the criterion of a sufficiently serious breach of a rule of
         law applies only where a legislative act of the Community is at issue and is excluded when, as in the present case, an individual
         act is at issue. Contrary to what is argued, the Court of First Instance could not limit itself to making a finding of unlawfulness,
         but had to apply, as it correctly did, the criterion of the existence of a sufficiently serious breach. Therefore, by seeking
         to determine whether there was a sufficiently serious breach of Community law in the present case, the Court’s judgment was
         not vitiated by an error of law. It follows that the first part of the second plea in law must be rejected.
      
 The second part, based on the criteria used by the Court of First Instance to identify a sufficiently serious breach of Community
            law
The system of rules which the Court of Justice has worked out in relation to the non-contractual liability of the Community
         takes into account, inter alia, the complexity of the situations to be regulated, difficulties in the application or interpretation
         of the legislation and, more particularly, the margin of discretion available to the author of the act in question (Bergaderm and Goupil v Commission, paragraph 40, and Commission v Fresh Marine, paragraph 24).
      
By the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance took into account not only the defendant’s discretion but also the
         complexity of the facts and the difficulties in applying Community law in order to establish whether there had been a sufficiently
         serious breach of Community law. The criteria to which it had recourse to establish the existence of such a breach of Community
         law are therefore not vitiated by an error of law. The second part of the second plea in law must therefore be rejected. 
      
 The third part, seeking a finding from the Court, in the alternative, that the facts of the case were not complex
The applicant advances two arguments with a view to showing that the facts were not complex. It maintains, in the first place,
         that the complexity of the facts established by the Court of First Instance are merely a result of the length of the Cement judgment, which is due only to the fact that the Court decided in that judgment to join various related cases, while it could,
         without difficulty, have ruled separately in relation to Alsen Breitenburg and Nordcement.
      
However, contrary to what is submitted, in the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance did not deduce the complexity
         of the facts from the particularly long nature of the Cement judgment. The Court considered, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, in the light of all the circumstances of the Cement case, that the defendant was faced with complex situations to be regulated. Accordingly, the applicant is not justified in
         maintaining that the Court of First Instance erred in law by concluding from the length of the Cement judgment, a length which can only be explained by the fact of joining several cases, that the facts in the case were complex.
      
As regards, in the second place, the question whether the facts in the case were complex, it must be borne in mind that it
         is clear from the second subparagraph of Article 225(1) EC and the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court
         of Justice that appeals are to be limited to points of law.
      
As pointed out in paragraph of the present judgment, the system of rules which the Court of Justice has worked out requires
         that account be taken, inter alia, of the degree of complexity of the case which the Community authorities had to deal with.
         The question whether the facts at issue in an action for damages are of such a complex nature is for the Court of First Instance
         alone to determine and may be discussed in the context of an appeal only where there has been distortion, which is not alleged
         in this case. Accordingly, that part of the plea in law is not admissible.
      
Since the third part of the second plea in law is in part unfounded and in part inadmissible, the second plea in law must
         be rejected in its entirety.
      
It follows that the applicant has not been able to show that the Court of First Instance erred in law by holding that, in
         the present case, there was not a sufficiently serious breach of Community law, a breach which alone could have given rise
         to the non-contractual liability of the Community. In the light of the cumulative nature of the conditions governing that
         liability, that consideration suffices to dismiss the appeal without having to rule on the third plea in law relating to the
         existence of a causal link between the conduct of which the Community is accused and the alleged damage.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, which applies to the procedure on appeal by virtue of Article of those
         rules, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings.
         Since the applicant has been unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
2.      Holcim (Deutschland) AG is ordered to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 