
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-263/P
Commission of the European Communities
v
Jégo-Quéré & Cie SA
(Appeal – Admissibility of an action for annulment of a regulation brought by a legal person)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        European Communities – Judicial review of the legality of acts of the institutions – Measures of general application – Need
            for natural or legal persons to have recourse to a plea of illegality or a reference for a preliminary ruling on validity
            – Obligation for national courts to apply national procedural rules in a way that enables the legality of Community acts of
            general application to be challenged – Availability of an action for annulment before the Community Court in the event of
            an insurmountable obstacle at the level of national procedural rules – Excluded
(Arts EC, 230, fourth para, EC, EC and EC)
2.        Actions for annulment – Natural or legal persons – Measures of direct and individual concern to them – Interpretation contra
            legem of the requirement of being individually concerned – Not permissible
(Art. 230, fourth para, EC)
3.        Actions for annulment – Natural or legal persons – Measures of direct and individual concern to them – Regulation establishing
            measures for the recovery of the stock of hake and associated conditions for the control of activities of fishing vessels
            – Absence of any particular legal status for an operator with regard to the adoption of that regulation – Inadmissible
(Art. 230, fourth para, EC; Commission Regulation No 1162/2001)
1.        By Articles EC and Article EC, on the one hand, and by Article EC, on the other, the Treaty has established a
         complete system of legal remedies and procedures designed to ensure review of the legality of acts of the institutions, and
         has entrusted such review to the Community Courts. Under that system, where natural or legal persons cannot, by reason of
         the conditions for admissibility laid down in the fourth paragraph of Article EC, directly challenge Community measures
         of general application, they are able, depending on the case, either indirectly to plead the invalidity of such acts before
         the Community Courts under Article EC or to do so before the national courts and ask them, since they have no jurisdiction
         themselves to declare those measures invalid, to make a reference to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling on validity.
      
Thus it is for the Member States to establish a system of legal remedies and procedures which ensure respect for the right
         to effective judicial protection.
      
In that context, in accordance with the principle of sincere cooperation laid down in Article EC, national courts are required,
         so far as possible, to interpret and apply national procedural rules governing the exercise of rights of action in a way that
         enables natural and legal persons to challenge before the courts the legality of any decision or other national measure relative
         to the application to them of a Community act of general application, by pleading the invalidity of such an act.
      
However, it is not appropriate for an action for annulment before the Community Court to be available to an individual who
         contests the validity of a measure of general application, such as a regulation, which does not distinguish him individually
         in the same way as an addressee, even if it could be shown, following an examination by that Court of the particular national
         procedural rules, that those rules do not allow the individual to bring proceedings to contest the validity of the Community
         measure at issue. Such an interpretation would require the Community Court, in each individual case, to examine and interpret
         national procedural law. That would go beyond its jurisdiction when reviewing the legality of Community measures.
      
Accordingly, an action for annulment before the Community Court should not on any view be available, even where it is apparent
         that the national procedural rules do not allow the individual to contest the validity of the Community measure at issue unless
         he has first contravened it.
      
In that regard, the fact that a regulation applies directly, without intervention by the national authorities, does not mean
         that a party who is directly concerned by it can only contest the validity of that regulation if he has first contravened
         it. It is possible for domestic law to permit an individual directly concerned by a general legislative measure of national
         law which cannot be directly contested before the courts to seek from the national authorities under that legislation a measure
         which may itself be contested before the national courts, so that the individual may challenge the legislation indirectly.
         It is likewise possible that under national law an operator directly concerned by a regulation may seek from the national
         authorities a measure under that regulation which may be contested before the national court, enabling the operator to challenge
         the regulation indirectly.
      
(see paras 30-35)
2.        Although the condition that a natural or legal person can bring an action challenging a regulation only if he is concerned
         both directly and individually must be interpreted in the light of the principle of effective judicial protection by taking
         account of the various circumstances that may distinguish an applicant individually, such an interpretation cannot have the
         effect of setting aside the condition in question, expressly laid down in the Treaty. The Community Courts would otherwise
         go beyond the jurisdiction conferred by the Treaty.
      
That applies to the interpretation of the condition in question to the effect that a natural or legal person is to be regarded
         as individually concerned by a Community measure of general application that concerns him directly if the measure in question
         affects his legal position, in a manner which is both definite and immediate, by restricting his rights or by imposing obligations
         on him.
      
Such an interpretation has the effect of removing all meaning from the requirement of individual concern set out in the fourth
         paragraph of Article EC.
      
(see paras 36-38)
3.        In the absence of a provision of Community law requiring the Commission, when adopting a given regulation, to follow a procedure
         under which an operator is entitled to claim rights that might be available to it, including the right to be heard, that operator
         is not given any particular legal status with regard to the adoption of that regulation. The fact that the operator was the
         only one to propose, before the regulation was adopted, a particular solution for the achievement of the objective pursued
         by that regulation does not make it individually concerned for the purposes of the fourth paragraph of Article EC
      
(see paras 47-48)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)April 2004(1)
(Appeal  –  Admissibility of an action for annulment of a regulation brought by a legal person)
 In Case C-263/P,
            
Commission of the European Communities, represented by T. van Rijn and A. Bordes, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant,
 APPEAL against the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities (First Chamber, Extended Composition)
            of May in Case T-177/Jégo-Quéré  v Commission [2002] ECR II-2365, seeking to have that judgment set aside, 
            
 the other party to the proceedings being:
            Jégo-Quéré & Cie SA, represented by A. Creus Carreras and B. Uriarte Valiente, abogados,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
 composed of C. Gulmann (Rapporteur), acting for the President of the  Sixth Chamber, J. N. Cunha Rodrigues, J.-P. Puissochet,
            R. Schintgen and F. Macken,  Judges,
            
 Advocate General: F. G. Jacobs,Registrar:  L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
            
 after hearing oral argument from the parties at the hearing on May 2003,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on July 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By application lodged at the Court Registry on July 2002, the Commission of the European Communities brought an appeal
         under Article of the EC Statute of the Court of Justice against the judgment of the Court of First Instance of May in Case T‑177/Jégo‑Quéré  v Commission [2002] ECR II-(hereinafter ‘the contested judgment’), in which the Court of First Instance held that the action brought
         by the company Jégo-Quéré & Cie S.A. (hereinafter ‘Jégo‑Quéré’) for annulment of Articles 3(d) and of Commission Regulation
         (EC) No 1162/of June establishing measures for the recovery of the stock of hake in ICES sub-areas III, IV, V,
         VI and VII and ICES divisions VIII a, b, d, e and associated conditions for the control of activities of fishing vessels (OJ L 159, p. 4) was admissible.
         
Legal framework
            
 Article of Council Regulation (EEC) No 3760/of December establishing a Community system for fisheries and aquaculture
         (OJ L 389, p. 1) empowers the Commission to take emergency measures when the conservation of fish stocks is threatened
         by serious and unexpected upheaval. 
         
            
 In December 2000, the Commission and the Council, having been alerted by the International Council for the Exploration of
         the Sea (ICES), noted the urgent need to establish a plan for the recovery of the stock of hake. 
         
            
 The principal aim of Regulation No 1162/2001, which was adopted in consequence, is to reduce catches of juvenile hake immediately.
         This regulation applies to fishing vessels operating in the areas defined by it. It imposes minimum mesh sizes for those vessels,
         varying according to the areas concerned, for the different net fishing techniques employed, irrespective of the type of fish
         which the vessel is seeking to catch. The provision does not apply to vessels of less than metres in length which leave
         port for not more than hours. 
         
            
 Article 3(d) of Regulation No 1162/prohibits the use of ‘any demersal towed net to which a cod-end of mesh size less
         than mm is attached by any means other than being sewn into that part of the net anterior to the cod-end’. Article 5(1)
         of the regulation defines the geographical areas in which the regulation is applicable and Article 5(2) specifies, in respect
         of all of those areas, the prohibitions concerning the use, immersion and deployment of towed nets of a specified mesh size,
         and the obligations regarding the lashing and stowing of such nets. It also sets out the prohibitions applicable in each of
         those areas concerning the use, immersion and deployment of fixed gear of a specified mesh size and the obligations regarding
         the lashing and stowing of such gear. As regards towed nets, the prohibitions apply to mesh sizes of between and mm;
         as regards fixed gear, they apply, depending on the zone concerned, to mesh sizes of less than or mm. 
         
The facts and the contested judgment
            
 Jégo-Quéré is a fishing company established in France which operates on a regular basis in the waters south of Ireland, in
         ICES sub-area VII as referred to in Article 5(1)(a) of Regulation No 1162/2001. It fishes mainly for whiting, which represents,
         on average, 67.3% of its catches. It owns four vessels over metres in length and uses nets having a mesh size of mm.
         
         
            
 By application lodged at the Court Registry on August 2001, Jégo‑Quéré brought an action under the fourth paragraph of Article
         EC for annulment of Articles 3(d) and of Regulation No 1162/2001. 
         
            
 By separate document lodged at the Court Registry on October 2001, the Commission raised an objection of inadmissibility
         under Article 114(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance. 
         
            
 By the contested judgment, the Court of First Instance dismissed the objection of inadmissibility and ordered that the action
         should proceed on the substance. 
         
            
 Having held at paragraph of its judgment that the contested provisions are, by their nature, of general application, the
         Court of First Instance pointed out at paragraph of the judgment that the fact that a provision is of general application
         does not prevent it from being of direct and individual concern to some of the economic operators whom it affects. 
         
            
 At paragraph of the contested judgment, the Court of First Instance held that Jégo-Quéré ‘cannot be regarded as individually
         concerned within the meaning of the fourth paragraph of Article EC, on the basis of the criteria hitherto established
         by Community case-law’. 
         
            
 Jégo-Quéré had claimed that, in the circumstances, it had no right of action before the national courts, as Regulation No
         1162/does not provide for the adoption of any implementing measures by the Member States, and accordingly that, were
         its action before the Court of First Instance to be dismissed as inadmissible, it would be denied any legal remedy enabling
         it to challenge the legality of the contested provisions. The Court of First Instance held that it was therefore necessary
         to consider whether, in proceedings such as the case before it, where an individual applicant is contesting the lawfulness
         of provisions of general application directly affecting its legal situation, the inadmissibility of the action for annulment
         would deprive the applicant of the right to an effective remedy, of the kind guaranteed by the legal order based on the EC
         Treaty, and in particular under Articles and of the European Convention for the Protection of Fundamental Human Rights
         and Freedoms (hereinafter the ‘ECHR’). 
         
            
 In that regard, the Court of First Instance held as follows: 
         
‘… it should be recalled that, apart from an action for annulment, there exist two other procedural routes by which an individual
               may be able to bring a case before the Community judicature - which alone has jurisdiction for this purpose - in order to
               obtain a ruling that a Community measure is unlawful, namely proceedings before a national court giving rise to a reference
               to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling under Article EC and an action based on the non-contractual liability
               of the Community, as provided for in Article EC and the second paragraph of Article EC. 
            
However, as regards proceedings before a national court giving rise to a reference to the Court of Justice for a preliminary
               ruling under Article EC, it should be noted that, in a case such as the present, there are no acts of implementation capable
               of forming the basis of an action before national courts. The fact that an individual affected by a Community measure may
               be able to bring its validity before the national courts by violating the rules it lays down and then asserting their illegality
               in subsequent judicial proceedings brought against him does not constitute an adequate means of judicial protection. Individuals
               cannot be required to breach the law in order to gain access to justice (see [paragraph] of the Opinion of Advocate General
               Jacobs in Case C-50/P Unión de Pequeños Agricultores  v Council [2002] ECR I-6677). 
            
The procedural route of an action for damages based on the non-contractual liability of the Community does not, in a case
               such as the present, provide a solution that satisfactorily protects the interests of the individual affected. Such an action
               cannot result in the removal from the Community legal order of a measure which is nevertheless necessarily held to be illegal.
               Given that it presupposes that damage has been directly occasioned by the application of the measure in issue, such an action
               is subject to criteria of admissibility and substance which are different from those governing actions for annulment, and
               does not therefore place the Community judicature in a position whereby it can carry out the comprehensive judicial review
               which it is its task to perform. In particular, where a measure of general application, such as the provisions contested in
               the present case, is challenged in the context of such an action, the review carried out by the Community judicature does
               not cover all the factors which may affect the legality of that measure, being limited instead to the censuring of sufficiently
               serious infringements of rules of law intended to confer rights on individuals (see Case C-352/P Bergaderm and Goupil  v Commission [2000] ECR I-5291, paragraphs to 43; Case T-155/Dieckmann & Hansen  v Commission [2001] ECR II-3143, paragraphs and 43; see also, as regards an insufficiently serious infringement, Joined Cases C‑104/and C-37/Mulder and Others  v Council and Commission [1992] ECR I-3061, paragraphs and 19, and, for a case in which the rule invoked was not intended to confer rights on individuals,
               paragraph of the judgment in Case T-196/Area Cova and Others  v Council and Commission [2001] ECR II‑3597). 
            
On the basis of the foregoing, the inevitable conclusion must be that the procedures provided for in, on the one hand, Article EC
               and, on the other hand, Article EC and the second paragraph of Article EC can no longer be regarded, in the light
               of Articles and of the ECHR and of Article of the Charter of Fundamental Rights, as guaranteeing persons the right
               to an effective remedy enabling them to contest the legality of Community measures of general application which directly affect
               their legal situation. 
            
It is true that such a circumstance cannot constitute authority for changing the system of remedies and procedures established
               by the Treaty, which is designed to give the Community judicature the power to review the legality of acts of the institutions.
               In no case can such a circumstance allow an action for annulment brought by a natural or legal person which does not satisfy
               the conditions laid down by the fourth paragraph of Article EC to be declared admissible (see the order of the President
               of the Court of Justice of October in Case C-300/P(R) Federación de Cofradías de Pescadores and Others  v Council [2000] ECR I‑8797, paragraph 37). 
            
However, as Advocate General Jacobs stated in [paragraph] of his Opinion in Unión de Pequeños Agricultores  v Council (cited in paragraph above), there is no compelling reason to read into the notion of individual concern, within the meaning
               of the fourth paragraph of Article EC, a requirement that an individual applicant seeking to challenge a general measure
               must be differentiated from all others affected by it in the same way as an addressee. 
            
In those circumstances, and having regard to the fact that the EC Treaty established a complete system of legal remedies and
               procedures designed to permit the Community judicature to review the legality of measures adopted by the institutions (paragraph
               of the judgment in Les Verts  v Parliament, cited in paragraph above), the strict interpretation, applied until now, of the notion of a person individually concerned
               according to the fourth paragraph of Article EC, must be reconsidered. 
            
In the light of the foregoing, and in order to ensure effective judicial protection for individuals, a natural or legal person
               is to be regarded as individually concerned by a Community measure of general application that concerns him directly if the
               measure in question affects his legal position, in a manner which is both definite and immediate, by restricting his rights
               or by imposing obligations on him. The number and position of other persons who are likewise affected by the measure, or who
               may be so, are of no relevance in that regard. 
            
In the present case, obligations are indeed imposed on Jégo-Quéré by the contested provisions. The applicant, whose vessels
               are covered by the scope of the regulation, carries on fishing operations in one of the areas in which, by virtue of the contested
               provisions, such operations are subjected to detailed obligations governing the mesh size of the nets to be used. 
            
It follows that the contested provisions are of individual concern to the applicant. 
Since those provisions are also of direct concern to the applicant (see paragraph above), the objection of inadmissibility
               raised by the Commission must be dismissed and an order made for the action to proceed.’
            
The appeal
            
 By its appeal, the Commission claims that the Court should:
         
–
set aside the contested judgment;
–
declare the action for annulment of Regulation No 1162/to be inadmissible or, alternatively, refer the case back to the
               Court of First Instance;
            
–
order Jégo-Quéré to pay the costs, including those incurred in the Court of First Instance. 
            
 Jégo-Quéré claims that the Court should:
         
–
declare the appeal to be inadmissible as it was brought out of time; 
–
declare the appeal to be unfounded and uphold the contested judgment;
–
set aside the contested judgment in so far as it holds that Jégo‑Quéré was not individually concerned for the purpose of the
               fourth paragraph of Article EC; 
            
–
adjudicate on the case itself in accordance with Jégo-Quéré’s observations submitted to the Court of First Instance, and,
               in particular,
            
–
declare the action brought before the Court of First Instance to be admissible;
–
annul Articles 3(d) and of Regluation No 1162/2001;
–
examine the following witnesses:
–
Mr John Farnell, Director ‘Conservation Policy’ of the Commission’s Fisheries Directorate‑General;
–
Mr Victor Badiola, manager of the Organisation of Fish Producers of Ondárroa;
–
order the Commission to pay the costs of these proceedings and those incurred before the Court of First Instance. 
            
 The Commission advances two pleas in law in support of its appeal.
         
            
 First, it claims that the Court of First Instance infringed its own Rules of Procedure, on the ground that the case should
         have been referred to the Court of First Instance sitting in plenary session. Secondly, it claims that the Court of First
         Instance infringed the fourth paragraph of Article EC, by interpreting the requirement that the applicant be individually
         concerned in a manner contrary to the judicial system established by the EC Treaty. 
         
The admissibility of the appeal
            
 Jégo-Quéré submits that the appeal is inadmissible. It claims that the Commission gave no indication of the date on which
         the judgment was notified to it. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, Jégo-Quéré does not accept that the appeal was
         lodged within the time-limit. 
         
            
 It should be noted in that regard that under Article of the EC Statute on the Court of Justice, read in conjunction with
         Article 81(2) of the Rules of Procedure, an appeal may be brought before the Court within two months of the notification of
         the decision appealed against, with an extension on account of distance of a single period of days. Under Article 112(2)
         of the Rules of Procedure, the decision of the Court of First Instance appealed against is to be attached to the appeal and
         the date on which the decision appealed against was notified to the appellant is to be stated. 
         
            
 The Commission appended to its appeal the judgment appealed against, together with the letter which accompanied it from the
         Registrar of the Court of First Instance, which bears a stamp indicating that the letter was received on May 2002. That
         date, moreover, is confirmed by the certificate of receipt of the letter. As mentioned at paragraph of this judgment, the
         Commission’s appeal was lodged at the Court Registry on July 2002.
         
            
 It therefore appears that the Commission indicated in its appeal the date on which it was notified of the contested judgment
         and that it lodged its appeal within the time-limit. 
         
            
 The Commission’s appeal must therefore be held to be admissible. 
         
The second plea Arguments of the parties
         
            
 The Commission alleges that the interpretation of individual concern adopted by the Court of First Instance in the contested
         judgment is so wide as to remove in fact the requirement of individual concern laid down by the fourth paragraph of Article
         EC. The Court of First Instance erred in law by confusing the right to an effective remedy with a general individual direct
         right to bring proceedings for annulment of general measures, as the fact that the latter is unavailable does not mean that
         the former does not exist. It is wrong to conclude, as the Court of First Instance did at paragraph of the contested judgment,
         that the judicial system established by the Treaty can no longer be regarded as guaranteeing persons the right to an effective
         remedy enabling them to contest the legality of Community measures of general application which directly affect their legal
         situation, and that, accordingly, the conditions governing the admissibility of an application for annulment should be extended
         for the benefit of individuals by reconsidering the settled case-law relating to the notion of a person individually concerned
         according to the fourth paragraph of Article EC. 
         
            
 The Commission points out in this regard that in the majority of the Member States, the right of individuals to bring direct
         proceedings for the annulment of a measure of general application is limited in various ways. Frequently, it is impossible
         to bring proceedings for the annulment of a law, or the right to do so is restricted by reason of the legal bases on which
         proceedings may be brought or the conditions governing locus standi.  In some Member States, there is in fact no general right of individuals to bring direct proceedings for the annulment of legislative
         acts promulgated by the administrative authorities. Those systems have never been subject to censure by the European Court
         of Human Rights.
         
            
 Lastly, the Commission claims that, having regard to the case-law set out in Case C-188/TWD Textilwerke Deggendorf [1994] ECR I‑833, the interpretation of individual concern upheld by the Court of First Instance would restrict the ability
         of individuals to challenge the legality of Community measures of general application.
         
            
 Jégo-Quéré argues that a wide and flexible interpretation of the fourth paragraph of Article EC, as adopted by the Court
         of First Instance, would allow it, without at the same time changing the system of judicial remedies established by the Treaty,
         to challenge the legality of a provision which causes it considerable harm. Failing such an interpretation, there would be
         a breach of Articles and of the ECHR, as there would be no means for it to contest the validity of the provisions at
         issue. Since Regulation No 1162/applies directly, without intervention on the part of the national authorities, there
         is no measure capable of being challenged before the national courts, thus enabling the validity of that regulation to be
         contested indirectly. Accordingly, it cannot benefit from full legal protection under national law without contravening Regulation
         No 1162/2001.
         
            
 As regards proceedings brought on the basis of non-contractual liability under Articles EC and the second paragraph of
         Article EC, Jégo-Quéré disputes the Commission’s argument that, given the fact that the duration of Regulation No 1162/is limited to six months, an action for damages might constitute a more appropriate remedy than an application for annulment.
         It claims that the regulation is merely a stage in an ongoing process of reform of the common fisheries policy, which requires
         the adoption of medium and long-term measures. As a consequence, Jégo-Quéré would be left with no choice but to bring fresh
         actions for damages on a periodic basis. 
         
            
 Furthermore, it would be paradoxical to interpret the notion of individual concern restrictively, when there are no restrictions
         on individuals bringing actions for damages under Articles EC and EC, which are based on the premiss that the legality
         of Community measures of general application may be contested without restriction.
         
 Assessment by the Court
         
            
 It should be noted that individuals are entitled to effective judicial protection of the rights they derive from the Community
         legal order, and the right to such protection is one of the general principles of law stemming from the constitutional traditions
         common to the Member States. That right has also been enshrined in Articles and of the ECHR (see, in particular, Case
         222/Johnston [1986] ECR 1651, paragraph 18, and Case C-50/P Unión de Pequeños Agricultores  v Council [2002] ECR I-6677, paragraph 39). 
         
            
 By Articles EC and Article EC, on the one hand, and by Article 234, on the other, the Treaty has established a complete
         system of legal remedies and procedures designed to ensure review of the legality of acts of the institutions, and has entrusted
         such review to the Community Courts. Under that system, where natural or legal persons cannot, by reason of the conditions
         for admissibility laid down in the fourth paragraph of Article EC, directly challenge Community measures of general application,
         they are able, depending on the case, either indirectly to plead the invalidity of such acts before the Community Courts under
         Article EC or to do so before the national courts and ask them, since they have no jurisdiction themselves to declare
         those measures invalid, to make a reference to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling on validity (see Unión de Pequeños Agricultores  v Council, paragraph 40). 
         
            
 Thus it is for the Member States to establish a system of legal remedies and procedures which ensure respect for the right
         to effective judicial protection (see Unión de Pequeños Agricultores  v Council, paragraph 41). 
         
            
 In that context, in accordance with the principle of sincere cooperation laid down in Article EC, national courts are required,
         so far as possible, to interpret and apply national procedural rules governing the exercise of rights of action in a way that
         enables natural and legal persons to challenge before the courts the legality of any decision or other national measure relative
         to the application to them of a Community act of general application, by pleading the invalidity of such an act (see Unión de Pequeños Agricultores  v Council, paragraph 42). 
         
            
 However, it is not appropriate for an action for annulment before the Community Court to be available to an individual who
         contests the validity of a measure of general application, such as a regulation, which does not distinguish him individually
         in the same way as an addressee, even if it could be shown, following an examination by that Court of the particular national
         procedural rules, that those rules do not allow the individual to bring proceedings to contest the validity of the Community
         measure at issue. Such an interpretation would require the Community Court, in each individual case, to examine and interpret
         national procedural law. That would go beyond its jurisdiction when reviewing the legality of Community measures (see Unión de Pequeños Agricultores  v Council, paragraphs and 43). 
         
            
 Accordingly, an action for annulment before the Community Court should not on any view be available, even where it is apparent
         that the national procedural rules do not allow the individual to contest the validity of the Community measure at issue unless
         he has first contravened it.
         
            
 In the present case, it should be pointed out that the fact that Regulation No 1162/applies directly, without intervention
         by the national authorities, does not mean that a party who is directly concerned by it can only contest the validity of that
         regulation if he has first contravened it. It is possible for domestic law to permit an individual directly concerned by a
         general legislative measure of national law which cannot be directly contested before the courts to seek from the national
         authorities under that legislation a measure which may itself be contested before the national courts, so that the individual
         may challenge the legislation indirectly. It is likewise possible that under national law an operator directly concerned by
         Regulation No 1162/may seek from the national authorities a measure under that regulation which may be contested before
         the national court, enabling the operator to challenge the regulation indirectly.
         
            
 Although the condition that a natural or legal person can bring an action challenging a regulation only if he is concerned
         both directly and individually must be interpreted in the light of the principle of effective judicial protection by taking
         account of the various circumstances that may distinguish an applicant individually, such an interpretation cannot have the
         effect of setting aside the condition in question, expressly laid down in the Treaty. The Community Courts would otherwise
         go beyond the jurisdiction conferred by the Treaty (see Unión de Pequeños Agricultores  v Council, paragraph 44). 
         
            
 That applies to the interpretation of the condition in question set out at paragraph of the contested judgment, to the
         effect that a natural or legal person is to be regarded as individually concerned by a Community measure of general application
         that concerns him directly if the measure in question affects his legal position, in a manner which is both definite and immediate,
         by restricting his rights or by imposing obligations on him. 
         
            
 Such an interpretation has the effect of removing all meaning from the requirement of individual concern set out in the fourth
         paragraph of Article EC.
         
            
 It follows from the above that the Court of First Instance erred in law. Accordingly, the second plea in law must be declared
         to be well founded.
         
The cross-appeal Arguments of the parties
         
            
 Jégo-Quéré claims that the Court of First Instance was wrong to hold that it is not individually concerned by Regulation No
         1162/for the purposes of the fourth paragraph of Article EC, as that provision has been interpreted in the settled
         case-law of the Court. The regulation in question is in reality made up of a bundle of individual decisions, adapted to meet
         the particular circumstances of some of the operators concerned. There are no objective reasons justifying such a differentiated
         approach. Having regard to the objective of the protection of juvenile hake, a regulation of general application should prohibit
         all fishing in the relevant areas with a mesh size of less than mm.
         
            
 According to Jégo-Quéré, there are two particular circumstances which differentiate it from all other persons affected by
         Regulation No 1162/2001. First, it is the only party fishing for whiting in the Irish Sea on a permanent basis with vessels
         of over metres in length and which only catches minimal quantities of juvenile hake in the form of by‑catches. Secondly,
         it is the only fishing company to have proposed to the Commission, before Regulation No 1162/was adopted, a particular
         solution for the renewal of hake stocks, which was ultimately not accepted.
         
            
 At the hearing, the Commission submitted that none of the arguments relied on by Jègo-Quéré could justify the conclusion that
         that company was individually concerned by Regulation No 1162/2001. The appeal should accordingly be dismissed.
         
 Asssessment by the Court
         
            
 As the Court of First Instance rightly held at paragraphs and of the contested judgment, Articles 3(d) and of Regulation
         No 1162/2001, which Jégo‑Quéré seeks to have annulled, are addressed in abstract terms to undefined classes of persons and
         apply to objectively determined situations. Accordingly, those articles are, by their nature, of general application.
         
            
 However, the Court has consistently held that the fact that a measure is of general application does not mean that it cannot
         be of direct and individual concern to certain economic operators (see, inter alia, Case C-142/P Commission  v Netherlands Antilles [2003] ECR I-3484, paragraph 64). 
         
            
 In particular, natural or legal persons cannot be individually concerned by such a measure unless they are affected by it
         by reason of certain attributes peculiar to them, or by reason of a factual situation which differentiates them from all other
         persons and distinguishes them individually in the same way as an addressee (see, inter alia, Case 25/Plaumann  v Commission [1963] ECR 95, 107, and Commission  v Netherlands Antilles, paragraph 65). 
         
            
 The fact that Jégo-Quéré is the only operator fishing for whiting in the waters south of Ireland with vessels of over metres
         in length does not, as the Court of First Instance points out at paragraph of the contested judgment, differentiate it,
         as Articles 3(d) and of Regulation No 1162/are of concern to it only in its objective capacity as an entity which fishes
         for whiting using a certain fishing technique in a specific area, in the same way as any other economic operator actually
         or potentially in the same situation. 
         
            
 Furthermore, no provision of Community law required the Commission, when adopting Regulation No 1162/2001, to follow a procedure
         under which Jégo‑Quére would be entitled to claim rights that might be available to it, including the right to be heard. Community
         law has accordingly not conferred any particular legal status on an operator such as Jégo-Quéré with regard to the adoption
         of Regulation No 1162/(see, to that effect, Case 191/FEDIOL  v Commission [1983] ECR 2913, paragraph 31).
         
            
 In those circumstances, the fact that Jégo-Quéré was the only fishing company to propose to the Commission, before Regulation
         No 1162/was adopted, a particular solution for the renewal of hake stocks does not make it individually concerned for
         the purposes of the fourth paragraph of Article EC. 
         
            
 The cross-appeal should accordingly be dismissed.
         
            
 In the light of the foregoing, the contested judgment should be set aside, and, having regard to the first paragraph of Article
         of the Statute of the Court of Justice, the application for annulment of Articles 3(d) and of Regulation No 1162/must be declared to be inadmissible.
         
Costs
            
 Under the first paragraph of Article of the Rules of Procedure, where the appeal is well founded and the Court itself
         gives final judgment in the case, the Court is to make a decision as to costs. Under Article 69(2) of the Rules, applicable
         to appeals by virtue of Article of the Rules, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs, if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. 
         
            
 As the appeal brought by the Commission and the objection of inadmissibility raised by it are well founded, Jégo-Quéré must
         be ordered to pay the whole of the costs before the Court of First Instance and the Court of Justice.
         
On those grounds,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
 hereby:
         
 
1.
Sets aside the judgment of the Court of First Instance of May in Jégo-Quéré  v Commission;
                  
 
2.
Declares the application for annulment by Jégo-Quéré & Cie SA of Articles 3(d) and of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1162/of June establishing measures for the recovery of the stock of hake in ICES sub-areas III, IV, V, VI and VII and ICES
                     divisions VIII a, b, d, e and associated conditions for the control of activities of fishing vessels to be inadmissible;
                  
 
3.
Orders Jégo-Quéré & Cie SA to pay the costs of both sets of proceedings.
Gulmann
Cunha Rodrigues
Puissochet
Schintgen
Macken
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on April 2004.
         
R. Grass
V. Skouris
Registrar
President of the Sixth Chamber
 –
            
Language of the case: French.
Top  
 