
Joined Cases C-23/to C-25/Sfakianakis AEVE
v
Elliniko Dimosio
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Diikitiko Protodikio Athinon)
(EEC-Hungary Association Agreement – Obligation of mutual assistance between customs authorities – Post-clearance recovery of import duties following revocation in the State of export of the movement certificates for the
         imported products)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        International agreements – Agreements concluded by the Community – EC-Hungary Association Agreement
(EC-Hungary Association Agreement, Protocol 4, Arts 31(2), and 33)
2.        International agreements – Agreements concluded by the Community – EC-Hungary Association Agreement
(EC-Hungary Association Agreement, Protocol 4, Art. 33)
1.        Articles 31(2) and of Protocol to the Europe Agreement establishing an association between the European Communities and
         their Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Hungary, of the other part, as amended by Decision No 3/of the
         Association Council between the European Communities and their Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Hungary,
         of the other part, are to be interpreted as meaning that the customs authorities of the State of import are bound to take
         account of judicial decisions delivered in the State of export on actions brought against the results of verification of the
         validity of goods movement certificates conducted by the customs authorities of the State of export, once they have been informed
         of the existence of those actions and the content of those decisions, regardless of whether the verification of the validity
         of the movement certificates was carried out at the request of the customs authorities of the State of import.
      
The fact that the dispute was not referred to the Association Committee pursuant to Article of Protocol cannot be used
         as a justification to derogate from the system of cooperation and not to respect the powers as allocated under the Association
         Agreement.
      
(see paras 32, 52, 54, operative part 1, 3)
2.        The effectiveness of the abolition of the imposition of customs duties under the Europe Agreement establishing an association
         between the European Communities and their Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Hungary, of the other part,
         as amended by Decision No 3/of the Association Council between the European Communities and their Member States, of the
         one part, and the Republic of Hungary, of the other part, precludes administrative decisions imposing the payment of customs
         duties, taxes and penalties taken by the customs authorities of the State of import before the definitive result of actions
         brought against the findings of the subsequent verification have been communicated to them, when the decisions of the authorities
         of the State of export which initially issued the movement certificates EUR.have not been revoked or annulled.
      
This interpretation is not affected by the fact that the dispute was not referred to the Association Committee pursuant to
         Article of Protocol to that agreement.
      
(see paras 43, 52, 54, operative part 2-3)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
February (*)
      
(Association Agreement EEC-Hungary – Obligation of mutual assistance between customs authorities – Post-clearance recovery of import duties following revocation in the State of export of the movement certificates for the
         imported products)
      
In Joined Cases C-23/to C-25/04,
REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Diikitiko Protodikio Athinon (Greece) by decision of September 2003,
         received at the Court on January 2004, for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending before that court between
      
Sfakianakis AEVE
v
Elliniko Dimosio,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, J. Makarczyk, R. Silva de Lapuerta (Rapporteur), P. Kūris and G.
         Arestis, Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Léger,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2005,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Sfakianakis AEVE, by S. Maratos and G. Katrinakis, dikigori,
–        the Greek Government, by M. Apessos and I. Bakopoulos, and M. Tassopoulou, and subsequently by I. Bakopoulos, M. Tassopoulou
         and S. Spyropoulos, acting as Agents,
      
–        the Hungarian Government, by A. Müller and T. Számadó, acting as Agents,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by X. Lewis and M. Konstantinidis, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on October 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
These references for a preliminary ruling concern the interpretation of the Europe Agreement establishing an association between
         the European Communities and their Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Hungary, of the other part, concluded
         and approved by the decision of the Council and the Commission of December (OJ L 347, p. 2) (‘the Association
         Agreement’) and more specifically Articles 31(2) and of Protocol to that agreement, as amended by Decision No 3/of
         the Association Council between the European Communities and their Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Hungary,
         of the other part, of December (OJ L 92, p. 1) (‘the Protocol’), as well as Article 220(2) of Council Regulation
         (EEC) No 2913/of October establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L 302, p. 1) (‘the Customs Code’).
      
The references were made in the context of proceedings between Sfakianakis AEVE (‘Sfakianakis’) and the Elliniko Dimosio (Greek
         State) concerning additional duties levied following a post-clearance examination of the origin of the vehicles imported into
         Greece by that company.
      
 Community legal context 
Article 16(1) of the Protocol provides:
      
‘Products originating in the Community shall, on importation into Hungary and products originating in Hungary shall, on importation
         into the Community benefit from this Agreement upon submission of either: 
      
a)      a movement certificate EUR.…;
…’
According to Article of that protocol:
      
‘1.      A movement certificate EUR.shall be issued by the customs authorities of the exporting country on application having been
         made in writing by the exporter or, under the exporter’s responsibility, by his authorised representative.
      
…
5.      The issuing customs authorities shall take any steps necessary to verify the originating status of the products and the fulfilment
         of the other requirements of this Protocol. For this purpose, they shall have the right to call for any evidence and to carry
         out any inspection of the exporter’s accounts or any other check considered appropriate. …
      
…’
Article 31(2) of the same protocol provides:
      
‘In order to ensure the proper application of this Protocol, the Community and Hungary shall assist each other, through the
         competent customs administrations, in checking the authenticity of the movement certificates EUR.or the invoice declarations
         and the correctness of the information given in these documents.’
      
Article of the Protocol further provides:
      
‘1.      Subsequent verifications of proofs of origin shall be carried out at random or whenever the customs authorities of the importing
         country have reasonable doubts as to the authenticity of such documents, the originating status of the products concerned
         or the fulfilment of the other requirements of this Protocol. 
      
…
3.      The verification shall be carried out by the customs authorities of the exporting country. For this purpose, they shall have
         the right to call for any evidence and to carry out any inspection of the exporter’s accounts or any other check considered
         appropriate.
      
4.      If the customs authorities of the importing country decide to suspend the granting of preferential treatment to the products
         concerned while awaiting the results of the verification, release of the products shall be offered to the importer subject
         to any precautionary measures judged necessary.
      
5.      The customs authorities requesting the verification shall be informed of the results of this verification as soon as possible.
         These results must indicate clearly whether the documents are authentic and whether the products concerned can be considered
         as products originating in the Community, Hungary or one of the other countries referred to in Article and fulfil the other
         requirements of this Protocol.
      
6.      If in cases of reasonable doubt there is no reply within months of the date of the verification request or if the reply
         does not contain sufficient information to determine the authenticity of the document in question or the real origin of the
         products, the requesting customs authorities shall, except in exceptional circumstances, refuse entitlement to the preferences.’
      
According to Article of that protocol:
      
‘Where disputes arise in relation to the verification procedures of Article which cannot be settled between the customs
         authorities requesting a verification and the customs authorities responsible for carrying out this verification or where
         they raise a question as to the interpretation of this Protocol, they shall be submitted to the Association Committee.
      
…’
Article 220(2) of the Community Customs Code reads as follows:
      
‘Except in the cases referred to in the second and third subparagraphs of Article 217(1), subsequent entry in the accounts
         shall not occur where:
      
…
(b)      the amount of duty legally owed failed to be entered in the accounts as a result of an error on the part of the customs authorities
         which could not reasonably have been detected by the person liable for payment, the latter for his part having acted in good
         faith and complied with all the provisions laid down by the legislation in force as regards the customs declaration;
      
…’
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
In 1995, Sfakianakis, sole representative in Greece of the Japanese motor manufacturer, Suzuki Motor Corporation, imported
         from Hungary a certain number of Suzuki brand vehicles. Those imports were carried out under the preferential customs scheme
         established by the Association Agreement (‘the preferential scheme’), upon presentation of the EUR.movement certificates
         certifying that the products were of Hungarian origin. In that context, the applicant in the main proceedings benefited from
         the provisions of that scheme.
      
Between and 1998, at the request of Commission of the European Communities’ anti-fraud unit (UCLAF), the competent Hungarian
         authorities conducted a subsequent verification of the Hungarian manufacturing undertaking Magyar Suzuki Corporation in order
         to ascertain the origin and value of that company’s vehicles which had been imported into the Community between December
         and December 1997, free of import duties and under cover of Hungarian EUR.movement certificates. As part of that
         verification, UCLAF asked the competent Greek authorities to provide it with all the certificates of origin and corresponding
         import invoices relating to the import of Suzuki brand automobiles from Hungary during the years in question.
      
Following that investigation, which was carried out in collaboration with a Community delegation, the competent Hungarian
         authorities communicated the results thereof to the Greek customs authorities by letter of November 1998. Attached to that
         letter was a list of all the documents that those authorities had forwarded for the subsequent verification. That list comprised
         three parts. The first contained the identification details of all the vehicles for which Hungarian origin had been established
         by both the manufacturer and the Hungarian inspection authorities; the second listed the vehicles for which the Hungarian
         authorities had established non-Hungarian origin, which had been formally recognised by the manufacturer; the third concerned
         the vehicles the status of which had been the subject of legal proceedings. In relation to the third part, which includes
         the vehicles for which the additional duty is at issue before the national court, the Hungarian inspection authorities stated
         that that they were unable to provide information on the outcome of the legal proceedings until such time as those proceedings
         came to an end; they also asked the competent Greek authorities to be patient before proceeding with recovery of the customs
         duties at issue in the main proceedings. Lastly, they informed the Greek authorities that the EUR.movement certificates
         relating only to the vehicles of non-Hungarian origin had already been revoked.
      
The Greek customs authority also received from UCLAF records of all the imports of automobiles into Greece from Hungary, highlighting
         imports of vehicles which had benefited unduly from preferential treatment.
      
Since, according to the records provided by UCLAF, the vehicles at issue in the main proceedings did not fulfil the criteria
         for preferential treatment, the Greek customs authorities, by the act at issue before the national court, demanded further
         payment of customs duties on imports, the corresponding amount of value added tax on the duty, together with the further sum
         provided for under Article of the Greek Customs Code.
      
However, the Hungarian courts, after an action had been brought by the manufacturer of those vehicles, definitively anulled
         the relevant decisions of the Hungarian customs authorities made during the course of the subsequent verification of origin
         of the exported vehicles and ordered the customs authorities to recommence the procedure for checking the EUR.movement certificates,
         in accordance with the relevant judicial decisions delivered.
      
By letter of July the competent Hungarian authorities notified the Greek customs directorate of those developments,
         forwarding to it an annex listing the vehicles in respect of which EUR.movement certificates had ultimately been found to
         have been issued unlawfully and another annex listing the vehicles in respect of which those certificates had been lawfully
         issued, including the abovementioned vehicles of the applicant in the main proceedings. Notwithstanding the above notification,
         the defendant in the main proceedings undertook no further action.
      
Sfakianakis brought three actions before the national court, seeking annulment of the decision of the Greek authorities to
         impose additional duty. It was in the context of those proceedings that the Diikitiko Protodikio Athinon (Administrative Court
         of First Instance, Athens) decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary
         ruling:
      
‘1.      Does the obligation of mutual assistance imposed on the customs authorities of the Member State of import by Article 31(2)
         of the Protocol … require them to take into account decisions of the Hungarian courts concerning the validity of the investigations
         carried out by the authorities of the State of export into the correctness of the EUR.export certificate in the light of
         the fact that:
      
–        the Hungarian authorities duly informed the customs authorities of the State of import concerning the results of the initial
         investigation which established the inaccuracy of certain export certificates, stressing none the less that the validity of
         the investigation was the subject-matter of proceedings pending before the Hungarian courts and
      
–        the Hungarian authorities officially communicated to the customs authorities of the State of import the outcome of those proceedings,
         that is to say, the decisions of the abovementioned courts, whereby it was found that ultimately a number of the EUR.certificates
         were accurate?
      
2.      Is Article of the Protocol … to be construed as meaning that the customs authorities of the Member State of import are
         required to take into account the decisions of the courts of the State of export overturning the outcome of investigations
         ordered and carried out by the Hungarian authorities after the export operation, regard being had to the fact that:
      
–        the authorities of the State of import were duly informed both of the fact that proceedings were pending before the Hungarian
         courts and of the outcome of the relevant procedures and
      
–        those authorities never asked for any investigation to be carried out?
3.      If the answer to one of the above questions is affirmative, are the abovementioned provisions of Community law to be construed
         as not permitting the adoption of administrative acts imposing additional duties, taxes and penalties by the national authorities
         of the State of import after notification by the Hungarian authorities of the outcome of the investigation conducted by them
         but before publication of the court decisions overturning the results of the investigation, in order to ensure the effectiveness
         of the prohibition on the imposition of duties under the Association Agreement, in the light also of the fact that ultimately
         the EUR.certificates issued were correct?
      
4.      In that connection are the above questions affected by the fact that neither the Greek nor the Hungarian authorities sought
         convocation of the association committee mentioned in Article of the Protocol … for it to rule on the matter, which tends
         to demonstrates that neither of the two authorities considered that the decisions of the Hungarian courts was a matter of dispute between
         them which ought to have been brought before that committee for a decision?
      
5.      In the alternative, if the answer to the foregoing questions is in the negative, that is to say, if the Greek customs authorities
         did not infringe the abovementioned provisions of Community law by the imposition of additional duty, VAT and a penalty, is
         it then possible to take the view that the ex post determination of duties as against the importer is not permitted under
         Article 220(2) of the Community Customs Code on the ground of error by the customs authorities of the State of import or export,
         regard being had in particular to the fact that the customs authorities of the State of export had available to them all the
         factual elements in connection with the origin of the vehicles for export on the basis of which the EUR.certificate ought
         not to have been issued, with the result that the authorities of the State of import would from the beginning have been in
         a position to ascertain the duty lawfully payable?’
      
 The questions
 The first two questions
By its first two questions, which it is appropriate to consider together, the national court asks essentially whether the
         Association Agreement and Articles 31(2) and of the Protocol are to be interpreted as meaning that the customs authorities
         in the State of import are obliged to take account of judicial decisions handed down in the State of export on actions brought
         against the results of investigations into the validity of goods movement certificates carried out by the customs authorities
         of the State of export, in the light of the fact that those authorities in the State of import have been informed of the existence
         of those actions and the content of those decisions and they are not the party which initiated the investigation.
      
In their observations, the applicant in the main proceedings, the Hungarian Government and the Commission maintain that the
         customs authorities of the State of import must take into account the final position of the State of export, even if that
         position is the result of simultaneous action by the executive and judicial branches of power and in particular when the authorities
         of the State of export have provided information on the proceedings under way. They refer to the administrative cooperation
         mechanism established by the Protocol, which is based on the principle of the general and exclusive competence of the customs
         authorities of the State of export to assess the origin of the products in order to benefit from the preferential scheme.
      
The Greek Government states, by contrast, that it is the customs authorities, and not the courts, of the State of export which
         are competent to carry out the subsequent verification of the certificates of origin. This being so, and given the need to
         complete the investigation as expeditiously as possible, the Hungarian administrative authorities in the main proceedings
         acted correctly in revoking the EUR.certificates by decisions which have become definitive. In such a scenario, nothing
         in the Protocol requires the customs authorities of the State of import to attest to the accuracy of the results of the investigation
         or the actual origin of the goods, still less to await the outcome of legal proceedings, the results of which are not relevant
         to the provisions of the Protocol relating to administrative cooperation.
      
The position thus set out by the Greek Government cannot be accepted.
      
As pointed out by the Advocate General in point of his Opinion, the system of administrative cooperation provided for in
         the Protocol is based on a division of responsibilities together with mutual trust between the authorities of the Member State
         concerned and those of the Republic of Hungary.
      
In that division, the Protocol allocates competence for verifying the originating status of the products from the Republic
         of Hungary to the Hungarian customs authorities. Thus, Article 17(4) and (5) of the Protocol lays down the obligation for
         the customs authorities issuing EUR.certificates to take any steps necessary to verify the originating status of the products.
         Moreover, according to Article 32(3) of the same protocol, the subsequent verification is to be carried out by the customs
         authorities of the exporting country who are, for that purpose, empowered to call for any evidence and to carry out any checks
         considered appropriate.
      
As the Court has held concerning the protocols pertaining to the definition of the concept of ‘originating products’ and to
         methods of administrative cooperation comparable to those of the Protocol, such a division of responsibilities is justified
         by the fact that the authorities of the State of export are in the best position to verify directly the facts determining
         the origin of the product concerned. That system can function only if the customs authorities of the State of import accept
         the determinations legally made by the authorities of the State of export (see, to that effect, Case 218/Les Rapides Savoyards and Others [1984] ECR 3105, paragraphs and 27).
      
This requirement of acceptance is fulfilled only if the authorities of the State of import also comply with and accept the
         judicial decisions delivered on actions brought against the initial results of subsequent verification of the origins of goods.
      
It is an objective of the Association Agreement that goods meeting the requirements for being considered to have originated
         in Hungary or in a Member State of the Community may be imported into the Community or into Hungary under the preferential
         scheme. This means that the customs authorities of the State of import must take into account the results of the investigation
         into the origin of the goods carried out by the courts in order to ensure that all goods meeting the required conditions as
         to their origin, and only those goods, benefit from the preferential scheme.
      
Accordingly, the Court finds that if the Protocol is to be applied correctly, the obligation of mutual recognition of the
         decisions taken by the authorities of the State concerned as to the origin of certain goods must necessarily also cover the
         decisions delivered by the courts in each State as part of their duty to review the legality of the decisions taken by the
         customs authorities.
      
Moreover, a failure to take into account the decisions delivered by the national courts’ ruling in carrying out their duty
         to review the legality of administrative decisions, as in the cases in the main proceedings, infringes the exporter’s right
         to an effective judicial remedy.
      
As the Court has held on several occasions, the right to an effective judicial remedy is a general principle of Community
         law which underlies the constitutional traditions common to the Member States (Case 222/Johnston [1986] ECR 1651, paragraph 18). Since the Association Agreement is an integral part of the Community legal order, it is therefore
         for the competent authorities of the Member States to uphold the right to an effective legal remedy in respect of the application
         of the customs scheme provided for by that agreement (see, to that effect, Case 12/Demirel [1987] ECR 3719, paragraphs and 28).
      
As to the situation described in the first indent of the first question referred, the Court notes that, since the Greek authorities
         had been officially informed of the existence of legal proceedings, the result of which could lead to a finding of irregularity
         of the post-clearance investigations carried out by the Hungarian customs authorities, they could not be unaware that the
         EUR.certificates in question had not been definitively revoked. 
      
Lastly, the Court notes that the situation described in the second indent of the second question, in which it was not the
         Greek authorities who requested verification, does not affect the obligation of the authorities of the State of import to
         act in accordance with the final result of that investigation.
      
Article 32(1) of the Protocol provides that the subsequent verification may be carried out by the competent authorities of
         the State of export on their own initiative or at the request of the authorities of the State of import. Or, as was the case
         in the main proceedings here, that verification may also be carried out at the request of the services of the Commission which,
         pursuant to Article EC, is charged with ensuring the proper application of the Association Agreement and its protocols
         (see, to that effect, Case C‑251/Ilumitrónica [2002] ECR I‑10433, paragraph 60).
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the first two questions must be that Articles 31(2) and of the Protocol are
         to be interpreted as meaning that the customs authorities of the State of import are bound to take account of judicial decisions
         delivered in the State of export on actions brought against the results of verifications of the validity of goods movement
         certificates conducted by the customs authorities of the State of export, once they have been informed of the existence of
         those actions and the content of those decisions, regardless of whether the verification of the validity of the movement certificates
         was carried out at the request of the customs authorities of the State of import.
      
 The third question
By its third question, the national court asks essentially whether the effectiveness of the abolition of the customs duties
         provided for by the Association Agreement precludes administrative decisions imposing payment of customs duties, taxes and
         penalties taken by the customs authorities of the State of import before the definitive result of actions brought against
         the findings of a subsequent verification is communicated to them.
      
According to the applicant in the main proceedings, the Hungarian Government and the Commission, it follows from the answers
         to the first two questions that the authorities of the State of import are required to take into account the outcome of proceedings
         brought by the authorities of the State of export, which may not amend them unilaterally. The applicable provisions should
         therefore be interpreted as not authorising the authorities of the State of import to adopt administrative decisions imposing
         customs duties or additional taxes before the definitive end of proceedings relating to the subsequent verification.
      
Having answered the first two questions in the negative, the Greek Government does not offer an answer to the third question
         referred.
      
In order to provide a useful response to the national court, it is appropriate to reiterate the grounds set out in paragraphs
         to of this judgment. In accordance with those grounds, the competence for determining the origin of goods from the Republic
         of Hungary is, as a rule, attributed to the Hungarian customs authorities, the customs authorities of the State of import
         being bound by the determinations legally made by those authorities (see, to that effect, Les Rapides Savoyards, paragraphs and 27).
      
An initial conclusion to be drawn from those grounds is that it is for the customs authorities of the State of export to allow
         the issue of EUR.certificates attesting to the Hungarian origin of goods manufactured in the Republic of Hungary. At the
         same time, the authorities of the State of import must accept the validity of such certificates.
      
Only in the circumstances described in Article 32(6) of the Protocol, that is to say, when there is reasonable doubt and there
         is no reply within months of the date of the verification request or if the reply does not contain sufficient information,
         may the customs authorities which requested the subsequent verification refuse entitlement to preferential treatment. In any
         other situation, the Protocol does not provide for the possibility of one contracting State unilaterally revoking certificates
         issued by the customs authorities of another contracting State.
      
It follows that certificates duly issued by the authorities of the State of export remain valid and produce the effects provided
         for by the Protocol for as long as they have not been revoked or cancelled by the competent administrative or judicial authorities
         of that State.
      
In the main proceedings, it is not apparent from the information provided by the national court that the Hungarian authorities
         did proceed with such a revocation which would have allowed the Greek authorities to suspend the application of the preferential
         scheme to the goods in question.
      
In point of fact, the Hungarian customs authorities sent a letter of November to the Greek customs authorities, in
         which they referred to pending litigation concerning the certificates giving rise to the main proceedings, stating in particular
         that only the EUR.certificates relating to vehicles the non-Hungarian origin of which had been formally recognised by the
         manufacturer had been revoked. It is, however, for the national court to determine whether the Greek authorities had sufficient
         information available to them to find that the EUR.certificates in question had not been revoked and therefore remained
         in effect.
      
The effective protection of the Community’s financial interests is, moreover, guaranteed by Article 32(4) of the Protocol,
         which allows the customs authorities of the State of import to take any precautionary measures judged necessary when the product
         is released, if they decide to suspend the granting of preferential treatment to the product concerned while awaiting the
         results of the verification.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the third question must be that the effectiveness of the abolition of the imposition
         of customs duties under the Association Agreement precludes administrative decisions imposing the payment of customs duties,
         taxes and penalties taken by the customs authorities of the State of import before the definitive result of actions brought
         against the findings of the subsequent verification have been communicated to them, when the decisions of the authorities
         of the State of export which initially issued the EUR.certificates have not been revoked or cancelled.
      
 The fourth question 
By its fourth question, the national court asks essentially whether the answer to the first three questions may be affected
         by the fact that neither the Greek customs authorities nor the Hungarian customs authorities asked for a meeting of the Association
         Committee referred to in Article of the Protocol.
      
In its observations, the applicant in the main proceedings indicates that the possibility of undertaking a settlement dispute
         procedure provided for by the Protocol is subject to the condition of having ‘reasonable’ doubts and there being no possibility
         of an ‘amicable’ settlement to the dispute with the competent customs authorities of the State of export. The applicant expresses
         doubts that it is possible for there to be any discretion left to raise a ‘reasonable’ objection when the issue has been resolved
         by definitive, irrevocable decisions delivered by the competent courts in the State of export.
      
The Greek Government submits, for its part, that the competent Greek and Hungarian customs authorities did not have any differences
         in their assessments which might have been brought before the Association Committee.
      
According to the Commission, the fact that neither the administration of the State of import nor that of the State of export
         commenced the procedure provided for in Article of the Protocol in order to settle their differences does not in any way
         affect the answer given to the first three questions, since the meeting of the Association Committee is only one possibility
         open to the competent customs authorities.
      
The Hungarian Government maintains that, even though no question relating to the Hungarian court’s decision and the implementation
         of the decisions adopted under the new procedure commenced following that judicial decision was put before the Association
         Committee, that committee’s power to settle disputes cannot have the effect of restricting the fundamental rights of the party
         concerned in the main proceedings, particularly the right to an effective judicial remedy. 
      
The Court states in this respect as a preliminary that the Protocol is based on a system of administrative cooperation, which
         in turn is based on a division of responsibilities and mutual trust between the authorities of the Member States concerned.
         Under that system, in situations other than that described in Article 32(6) of the Protocol, the customs authorities of the
         State of import may not unilaterally declare invalid an EUR.certificate duly issued by the customs authorities of the State
         of export. Likewise, in cases of subsequent verification, the same authorities are bound by the results of such verification.
      
Moreover, according to Article of the Protocol, if in the course of that verification the customs authorities of the State
         of import disagree with the customs authorities of the State of export, they must endeavour to reach an amicable solution.
         If an amicable solution is not possible, they must then refer the dispute to the Association Committee.
      
Those provisions tend to reinforce the cooperation mechanisms between the contracting States, thereby ensuring that the powers
         of each State regarding investigations into the origin of goods are duly respected.
      
In that light, the fact that the dispute was not referred to the Association Committee cannot be used as a justification to
         derogate from the system of cooperation and not to respect the powers as allocated under the Association Agreement.
      
It is, moreover, apparent from the observations submitted to the Court that the Greek authorities did not take issue with
         the results of the verification procedure with the Hungarian authorities or at a meeting of the Association Committee and
         that, consequently, there was no dispute which might have been referred to that committee.
      
The answer to the fourth question must therefore be that the answer to the first three questions referred is not affected
         by the fact that neither the Greek customs authorities nor the Hungarian customs authorities sought convocation of the Association
         Committee pursuant to Article of the Protocol.
      
 The fifth question
The fifth question is asked by the national court only in the event of a negative answer to the first two questions. Since
         they have been answered in the affirmative, it is not necessary to consider the fifth question.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Articles 31(2) and of Protocol to the Europe Agreement establishing an association between the European Communities and
            their Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Hungary, of the other part, as amended by Decision No 3/of the
            Association Council between the European Communities and their Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Hungary,
            of the other part, of December 1996, are to be interpreted as meaning that the customs authorities of the State of import
            are bound to take account of judicial decisions delivered in the State of export on actions brought against the results of
            verification of the validity of goods movement certificates conducted by the customs authorities of the State of export, once
            they have been informed of the existence of those actions and the content of those decisions, regardless of whether the verification
            of the validity of the movement certificates was carried out at the request of the customs authorities of the State of import.
2.      The effectiveness of the abolition of the imposition of customs duties under the Europe Agreement establishing an association
            between the European Communities and their Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Hungary, of the other part,
            concluded and approved by the decision of the Council and the Commission of December 1993, precludes administrative decisions
            imposing the payment of customs duties, taxes and penalties taken by the customs authorities of the State of import before
            the definitive result of actions brought against the findings of the subsequent verification have been communicated to them,
            when the decisions of the authorities of the State of export which initially issued the EUR.certificates have not been revoked
            or annulled.
3.      The answer to the first three questions is not affected by the fact that neither the Greek customs authorities nor the Hungarian
            customs authorities sought convocation of the Association Committee pursuant to Article of Protocol No 4, as amended by
            Decision 3/96. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Greek.
      
Top  
 