
Case C-333/European Commission
v
French Republic
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Free movement of goods – Articles EC and EC – Quantitative restriction on imports – Measure having equivalent effect – Prior authorisation scheme – Processing aids, and foodstuffs whose preparation involved the use of processing aids, from other Member States where they
         are lawfully manufactured and/or marketed – Procedure allowing economic operators to obtain the entry of such substances on a ‘positive list’ – Mutual recognition clause − National legislative context creating a situation of legal uncertainty for economic operators)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Free movement of goods – Quantitative restrictions – Measures having equivalent effect
(Art. EC)
2.        Free movement of goods – Quantitative restrictions – Measures having equivalent effect
(Arts EC and EC)
1.        A Member State which fails to provide an easily accessible procedure for enabling processing aids used in the preparation
         of foodstuffs from other Member States where they are lawfully manufactured and/or marketed to be entered in the national
         list of authorised substances fails to fulfil its obligations under Article EC.
      
Such a procedure must be simple and capable of being concluded within a reasonable time, and, if it leads to a refusal, the
         refusal decision must be capable of review before the courts.
      
(see paras 81-82, 117-118)
2.        A Member State which lays down, for processing aids and foodstuffs whose preparation involved the use of processing aids from
         other Member States where they are lawfully manufactured and/or marketed, a prior authorisation scheme not complying with
         the principle of proportionality, fails to fulfil its obligations under Article EC.
      
Whilst, in the absence of harmonisation, it is for the Member States to decide at which level they intend to ensure the protection
         of the health and life of persons, and whether to require prior authorisation for the marketing of processing aids and foodstuffs
         in the preparation of which such aids have been used, and whilst, by reason of  a high degree of scientific and practical
         uncertainty, a Member State may, under the precautionary principle, take protective measures without having to wait for the
         reality and the seriousness of the risks posed by the marketing of those products to be fully demonstrated, the fact remains
         that if there are risks concerning certain categories of processing aids, the national legislation must be targeted and clearly
         justified by evidence in relation to the categories concerned.  An authorisation scheme is thus disproportionate in so far
         as, in the absence of prior authorisation, it systematically prohibits the marketing of any processing aid or any foodstuffs
         in the preparation of which processing aids have been used which have been lawfully manufactured and/or marketed in other
         Member States, without making any distinction according to the various categories or according to the level of risk which
         their use might potentially pose for health.
      
(see paras 85, 90-91, 95, 97, 100, 122, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
January (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Free movement of goods – Articles EC and EC – Quantitative restriction on imports – Measure having equivalent effect – Prior authorisation scheme – Processing aids, and foodstuffs whose preparation involved the use of processing aids, from other Member States where they
         are lawfully manufactured and/or marketed – Procedure allowing economic operators to obtain the entry of such substances on a ‘positive list’ – Mutual recognition clause − National legislative context creating a situation of legal uncertainty for economic operators)
      
In Case C‑333/08,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on July 2008,
European Commission, represented by B. Stromsky, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
French Republic, represented by G. de Bergues and R. Loosli-Surrans, acting as Agents,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, President of the Second Chamber, acting as President of the Third Chamber, P. Lindh, A.
         Rosas, A. Ó Caoimh (Rapporteur) and A. Arabadjiev, Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: R. Grass,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2009,
gives the following
Judgment
By its action, the Commission of the European Communities seeks a declaration from the Court that, by laying down, for processing
         aids and foodstuffs whose preparation involved the use of processing aids from other Member States where they are lawfully
         manufactured and/or marketed, a prior authorisation scheme not complying with the principle of proportionality, the French
         Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC.
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
Processing aids are substances used in the process of elaborating or manufacturing a foodstuff, and the aim of which is to
         obtain a certain technical effect during that process.
      
Although Community law harmonises certain categories of processing aids, the latter are not subject to horizontal harmonisation
         at Community level, so that, in general, Member States remain free to regulate the use of processing aids while complying
         with the EC Treaty.
      
 Directive 89/Article 1(3)(a) of Council Directive 89/107/EEC of December on the approximation of the laws of the Member States
         concerning food additives authorised for use in foodstuffs intended for human consumption (OJ L 40, p. 27) defines processing
         aids, in a footnote, as being any substance not consumed as a food ingredient by itself, intentionally used in the processing
         of raw materials, foods or their ingredients, to fulfil a certain technological purpose during treatment or processing and
         which may result in the unintentional but technically unavoidable presence of residues of the substance or its derivatives
         in the final product, provided that these residues do not present any health risk and do not have any technological effect
         on the finished product.
      
It follows from that same provision of Directive 89/that processing aids are excluded from the scope of the latter.
      
 Directive 98/Article of Directive 98/34/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of June laying down a procedure for
         the provision of information in the field of technical standards and regulations (OJ L 204, p. 37) provides:
      
‘1.      Subject to Article 10, Member States shall immediately communicate to the Commission any draft technical regulation, except
         where it merely transposes the full text of an international or European standard, in which case information regarding the
         relevant standard shall suffice; they shall also let the Commission have a statement of the grounds which make the enactment
         of such a technical regulation necessary, where these have not already been made clear in the draft.
      
…
Where, in particular, the draft seeks to limit the marketing or use of a chemical substance, preparation or product on grounds
         of public health or of the protection of consumers or the environment, Member States shall also forward either a summary or
         the references of all relevant data relating to the substance, preparation or product concerned and to known and available
         substitutes, where such information may be available, and communicate the anticipated effects of the measure on public health
         and the protection of the consumer and the environment, together with an analysis of the risk carried out as appropriate …
      
…
2.      The Commission and the Member States may make comments to the Member State which has forwarded a draft technical regulation;
         that Member State shall take such comments into account as far as possible in the subsequent preparation of the technical
         regulation.
      
…’
 Directive 2000/Article 3(1) of Directive 2000/13/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of March on the approximation of
         the laws of the Member States relating to the labelling, presentation and advertising of foodstuffs (OJ L 109, p. 29),
         provides that, under the conditions and subject to the exceptions laid down in Articles to of that directive, the labelling
         of foodstuffs must contain certain information, including the list of ingredients.
      
However, according to Article 6(4)(c)(ii) of Directive 2000/13, additives used as processing aids are not regarded as ingredients.
      
Article of Directive 2000/reads:
      
‘1.      Member States may not forbid trade in foodstuffs which comply with the rules laid down in this Directive by the application
         of non-harmonised national provisions governing the labelling and presentation of certain foodstuffs or of foodstuffs in general.
      
2.      Paragraph shall not apply to non-harmonised national provisions justified on grounds of:
–        protection of public health,
…’
 Regulation (EC) No 178/The third recital of Regulation (EC) No 178/of the European Parliament and of the Council of January laying down
         the general principles and requirements of food law, establishing the European Food Safety Authority and laying down procedures
         in matters of food safety (OJ L 31, p. 1) reads:
      
‘The free movement of food and feed within the Community can be achieved only if food and feed safety requirements do not
         differ significantly from Member State to Member State.’
      
Pursuant to Article of Regulation No 178/2002, that regulation provides the basis for the assurance of a high level of protection
         of human health and consumers’ interest in relation to food, taking into account in particular the diversity in the supply
         of food including traditional products, whilst ensuring the effective functioning of the internal market. It establishes common
         principles and responsibilities, the means to provide a strong science base, efficient organisational arrangements and procedures
         to underpin decision-making in matters of food and feed safety.
      
Article of Regulation No 178/2002, headed ‘General objectives’, provides:
      
‘1.      Food law shall pursue one or more of the general objectives of a high level of protection of human life and health and the
         protection of consumers’ interests, including fair practices in food trade, taking account of, where appropriate, the protection
         of animal health and welfare, plant health and the environment.
      
2.      Food law shall aim to achieve the free movement in the Community of food and feed manufactured or marketed according to the
         general principles and requirements in this Chapter.
      
…’
Article of Regulation No 178/2002, headed ‘Risk analysis’, reads:
      
‘1.      In order to achieve the general objective of a high level of protection of human health and life, food law shall be based
         on risk analysis except where this is not appropriate to the circumstances or the nature of the measure.
      
2.      Risk assessment shall be based on the available scientific evidence and undertaken in an independent, objective and transparent
         manner.
      
3.      Risk management shall take into account the results of risk assessment, and in particular, the opinions of the European Food
         Safety Authority, other factors legitimate to the matter under consideration and the precautionary principle where the conditions
         laid down in Article 7(1) are relevant, in order to achieve the general objectives of food law established in Article 5.’
      
Article of Regulation No 178/2002, headed ‘Precautionary principle’, reads:
      
‘1.      In specific circumstances where, following an assessment of available information, the possibility of harmful effects on health
         is identified but scientific uncertainty persists, provisional risk management measures necessary to ensure the high level
         of health protection chosen in the Community may be adopted, pending further scientific information for a more comprehensive
         risk assessment.’
      
2.      Measures adopted on the basis of paragraph shall be proportionate and no more restrictive of trade than is required to achieve
         the high level of health protection chosen in the Community, regard being had to technical and economic feasibility and other
         factors regarded as legitimate in the matter under consideration. The measures shall be reviewed within a reasonable period
         of time, depending on the nature of the risk to life or health identified and the type of scientific information needed to
         clarify the scientific uncertainty and to conduct a more comprehensive risk assessment.’
      
Article of Regulation No 178/2002, headed ‘Food safety requirements’, reads:
      
‘1.      Food shall not be placed on the market if it is unsafe.
2.      Food shall be deemed to be unsafe if it is considered to be:
(a)      injurious to health;
(b)      unfit for human consumption.
…
7.      Food that complies with specific Community provisions governing food safety shall be deemed to be safe insofar as the aspects
         covered by the specific Community provisions are concerned.
      
…
9.      Where there are no specific Community provisions, food shall be deemed to be safe when it conforms to the specific provisions
         of national food law of the Member State in whose territory the food is marketed, such provisions being drawn up and applied
         without prejudice to the Treaty, in particular Articles and thereof.’
      
 National legislation
 The Decree
Under Article of the Decree of April laying down administrative regulations for implementing the Law of August
         to prevent deception in the sale of goods and adulteration of foodstuffs, as amended on numerous occasions (‘the Decree’):
      
‘It is prohibited to hold with a view to sale, to offer for sale or to sell any goods or foodstuffs intended for human consumption
         when they have undergone the addition of chemical products other than those the use of which is declared lawful by decrees
         issued in concert by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, the Ministry of the Economy and Finance, the Ministry
         of Scientific and Industrial Development and the Ministry of Public Health, having heard the advice of the Conseil supérieur
         d’hygiène publique de France [CSHPF] and the national academy of medicine.’
      
The CSHPF is an expert scientific and technical body, under the auspices of the health ministry.
      
Article of the Decree reads:
      
‘It is also prohibited to introduce, even temporarily, during the preparation of goods and foodstuffs intended for human consumption,
         chemical products other than those the use of which is declared lawful by the decrees issued in accordance with Article above.’
      
A series of decrees was adopted pursuant to the Decree laying down the conditions in which processing aids may be used
         in the manufacturing process.
      
Those decrees generally regulate the authorised substance and the use and the foodstuff for which it is authorised. They specify
         the purity criteria and other characteristics with which the processing aid used must comply, and determine, in addition to
         the conditions for using the processing aid concerned in the manufacturing process, the maximum residual amounts of the processing
         aid used in the finished foodstuff.
      
Only four of those decrees contain a mutual recognition clause, namely the Decree of February laying down the list
         of processing aids which may be used in confectionery, the Decree of March concerning the use of ß cyclodextrine as
         a processing aid, the Decree of February on the use of various processing aids in human foodstuffs, and the Decree
         of March concerning the use of antifoaming agents for washing potatoes and mushrooms.
      
 The Decree
The first paragraph of Article of Decree No 2001-of July 2001, concerning the processing aids which may be used in
         the manufacture of foodstuffs intended for human consumption (JORF of August 2001; ‘the Decree’) defines processing
         aids as ‘any substance not consumed as a food ingredient by itself, intentionally used in the processing of raw materials,
         foodstuffs or their ingredients, to fulfil a given technological purpose during treatment or processing and which may result
         in the unintentional but technically unavoidable presence of residues of the substance or its derivatives in the final product,
         provided that those residues do not present any health risk and do not have any technological effect on the finished product’.
      
The second paragraph of Article of that decree provides:
      
‘The provisions of this Decree apply to processing aids belonging to the categories listed in the Annex to this Decree, used
         or intended to be used in the manufacture of foodstuffs intended for human consumption.
      
They do not apply:
1.      to processing aids used for the production of food additives, aromas, vitamins and other nutritional additives;
2.      to substances used during operations for processing natural mineral water or spring water where those operations precede the
         marketing of those waters under one of the product names laid down by the Decree of June …;
      
3.      to substances used during the implementation of methods for improving water intended for human consumption, where those methods
         are laid down pursuant to the regulations based on Article L. 1321‑of the Public Health Code.’
      
Article of the Decree reads:
      
‘An order of the Ministers for Consumer Affairs, Agriculture, Health, and Industry, issued after taking the advice of the
         Agence française de sécurité sanitaire des aliments (French Food Safety Agency; “AFSSA”) shall determine, for the categories
         mentioned in the Annex to this Decree:
      
1.      The list of processing aids the use of which is authorised, and, where appropriate, the conditions for their use and the permissible
         maximum residue limits;
      
2.      The identity and purity criteria which they must meet;
3.      The rules governing substances used as supporting and diluting products.
Processing aids must be used in compliance with good hygiene and manufacturing practices, particularly in cases where no condition
         for use is imposed by the order for which this article provides.
      
The dose of processing aids used must not exceed the quantity strictly necessary to obtain the desired effect and must not
         mislead the consumer.
      
Information establishing that those substances have been used in compliance with good manufacturing practices must be kept
         available for official inspection by manufacturers.’
      
It is apparent from Article L. 1323-of the Public Health Code that AFSSA is a public institution of the State, under the
         tutelage of the Agriculture, Consumer Affairs, and Health Ministries.
      
Article of the Decree provides:
      
‘Applications to amend or add to the provisions of the order referred to in Article can be made by any natural or legal
         person. They are to be addressed to the Directorate-General for Competition Policy, Consumer Affairs and Fraud Control (Direction
         générale de la concurrence, de la consommation et de la répression des fraudes), together with the file necessary for their
         investigation, with a view to their transmission to AFFSA.
      
An order of the Ministers for Consumer Affairs, Agriculture, Health, and Industry shall determine the rules concerning the
         preparation and content of files.
      
When the file is complete, the Directorate-General for Competition Policy, Consumer Affairs and Fraud Control shall acknowledge
         receipt thereof and ensure its transmission to AFFSA. The Agency has a period of four months from receipt of the application
         to issue an opinion.
      
The Directorate-General for Competition Policy, Consumer Affairs and Fraud Control shall notify the applicant of the opinion
         of AFFSA and the reasoned decision of the Minister based on that opinion. Such notification shall be made within one month
         following the adoption of the opinion.’
      
In accordance with Article of that Decree:
      
‘The order referred to in Article shall be updated, in particular in order to comply with the Community obligations of France
         and proposals formulated by AFFSA as a result of new information concerning possible toxicity of processing aids.’
      
Article of the Decree provides:
      
‘It is prohibited to hold, exhibit for sale, offer for sale, sell, or distribute free of charge:
1.      Foodstuffs intended for human consumption in the preparation of which processing aids have been used which do not comply with
         the provisions of Article hereof, or with the provisions of Decree No 2004-of February transposing Directive
         98/8/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of February concerning the placing of biocidal products on the
         market;
      
2.      Processing aids which do not comply with the provisions of Articles and or with the provisions of Decree No 204-of
         February implementing Directive 98/...;
      
However, these provisions shall not hinder the principle of free movement:
(a)      of the foodstuffs referred to in paragraph (1) of this article from other Member States of the European Community, or other
         contracting parties to the agreement on the European Economic Area, where those States have put in place a method for evaluating
         the risks presented by the use of processing aids, ensuring an equivalent level of safety to that guaranteed by this directive;
      
(b)      of processing aids from other Member States of the European Community, or other contracting parties to the Agreement on the
         European Economic Area, with purity criteria different from those set by the order referred to in Article 2, where those criteria
         have been fixed by one of those States, or have been subject to a favourable opinion of a competent body in one of those States,
         officially published.’
      
According to Article of the Decree:
      
‘The provisions of this Decree shall enter into force as from the publication date of the order referred to in Article above.
         The persons responsible for placing processing aids on the market have a period of six months as from the publication date
         of that order to comply with the requirements of Article above.’
      
The Annex to the Decree lists the categories of processing aids covered by that decree. The aids in question are antifoaming
         agents, catalysts, clarifying agents/filtering additives, discolouring agents, washing and peeling agents, plucking and hair
         removal agents, ion exchanging resins, contact freezing and cooling agents, desiccating/anticaking agents, enzymes, acidifying,
         alcalysing or neutralising agents, release agents, flocculating and coagulating agents, biocides, anti-scaling agents, extracting
         solvents, and a category headed ‘Miscellaneous’.
      
 The ministerial order of October A draft ministerial order was notified to the Commission and the Member States on October pursuant to the provisions
         of Article of Directive 98/34.
      
The documents on file show that that draft order did not form the subject-matter of observations by the Commission, but gave
         rise to detailed submissions from the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Kingdom of Denmark.
      
The order of October on the use of processing aids in certain foodstuffs (JORF of December 2006), repealed the provisions
         of the orders made pursuant to the Decree.
      
That order contains, in an annex, a list of the processing aids authorised for use in France. It lays down the conditions
         for using those processing aids, the maximum authorised residual doses, and the applicable purity criteria.
      
 The notice to undertakings
On January 2002, the French authorities published a notice to undertakings in the food sector (JORF of January 2002,
         p. 1234; the notice to undertakings).
      
That notice to undertakings states:
      
‘Article of [the Decree] provides that “the provisions of this Decree shall enter into force as from the publication
         date of the order referred to in Article 2”. …
      
However, there shall be no barrier, as from the date of publication of this notice, to the application of the provisions on
         the submission of files (Art. 3) and concerning the principle of free movement (Art. 6) of the [Decree] referred to above.’
      
 The pre-litigation procédure 
Following a first letter of formal notice dated July and a reasoned opinion dated March 1998, the Commission sent
         the French Republic an additional letter of formal notice, dated October 2005, annulling and replacing the earlier letter
         of formal notice and reasoned opinion. 
      
In that letter, the Commission argued that the French legislation, both in the Decree and in the Decree, conflicted
         with Article EC, first, by imposing a prior authorisation scheme on processing aids and foodstuffs where their manufacturing
         process used processing aids from other Member States where they were legally manufactured and/or marketed; and, in the alternative,
         by failing to establish, for the purpose of obtaining authorisations for the use of processing aids, a procedure which was
         sufficiently clear, easily accessible and transparent, and met the requirements of legal certainty.
      
As regards the Decree, the Commission took the view that, as a ministerial order had not been adopted, that decree had
         not yet entered into force. The Commission maintains, concerning the notice to undertakings, that, as the latter is not binding
         by nature, it did not offer the legal certainty necessary for economic operators.
      
It is apparent from the application and from the additional letter of formal notice that the latter was sent by reason of
         the extensive correspondence between the French Republic and the Commission, of the time which had elapsed since the sending
         of the first letter of formal notice, of attempted reform of the French legislation which subsequently proved abortive, and
         of further reflections of the Commission.
      
After an extension of the period for replying to the additional letter of formal notice, the French Republic replied thereto
         by letter of February 2006. It sent the Commission all the orders issued pursuant to the Decree and pointed out that
         it was essentially because of the lack of an operative clause ensuring mutual recognition that reform of that decree, leading
         to the adoption of the Decree, had been undertaken. The French Republic insisted that a notice to undertakings already
         permitted the implementation of the principle of free movement in practice, even if the ministerial order envisaged by the
         Decree had not yet been adopted. 
      
Concerning new national legislation intended to govern the use of processing aids in the future, the French Republic stated
         its willingness to adopt that order implementing the Decree as soon as possible, attempted to justify the prior authorisation
         scheme for processing aids, and proposed to amend the drafting of the mutual recognition clause appearing in the Decree.
         
      
By letter of July 2006, the Commission sent that Member State an additional reasoned opinion.
      
By letter of September 2006, the French Republic replied to the additional reasoned opinion, indicating that it had started
         the procedure for signing the order implementing the Decree. Recalling that certain categories of processing aids were
         governed or in the course of harmonisation at Community level, it maintained that a prior authorisation scheme for processing
         aids was justified. It drew the Commission’s attention in particular to the risks posed by processing agents used as biocides
         or decontaminating agents in products of vegetable origin and by the use of antifoaming agents in certain conditions. Regarding
         the mutual recognition clause, the French Republic indicated that it had begun a process of reflection concerning amendment
         of the relevant provision of the Decree in order to answer the Commission’s arguments.
      
Being dissatisfied with the reply given by that Member State, the Commission decided to bring the present action.
      
 The action
In its application, the Commission raises, essentially, three pleas against the legislation in question, namely, first, lack
         of justification on grounds of protecting public health for the obstacles to the free movement of goods created by the prior
         authorisation schemes enacted by that legislation; second, and in the alternative, as regards the Decree, the existence
         of an obstance to Article EC resulting from the legal uncertainty created by that decree; and, third, the lack of simplified
         procedures for entering processing aids on the national list of authorised processing aids.
      
 Preliminary observations on the scope of the action
It should be noted, first, that the Commission’s action regarding infringement of Article EC concerns all processing aids
         save for those for which harmonisation measures exist at Community level.
      
Second, even if the subject-matter of the Commission’s action has been described as concerning French legislation in general,
         it follows from the pre-litigation procedure and the grounds of the application that the action is directed at the two prior
         authorisation schemes laid down by the and Decrees.
      
Concerning the Decree, as the documents before the Court show, the Commission and the French Republic are at issue as
         to whether the notice to undertakings already permitted, particularly at the expiry of the time-limit laid down by the reasoned
         opinion, the implementation of the principle of free movement laid down by the Decree, the ministerial order referred
         to in Article of that decree having not yet been adopted at that date. According to that Member State, the notice to undertakings
         permitted, at the expiration of that time-limit, the implementation of that principle and of Articles and of the Decree.
      
The Court considers, in that respect, that, on the basis of the information sent to it concerning the legal value and the
         scope of the notice to undertakings, and taking account of the very wording of the Decree, that notice cannot be regarded
         as compensating for the failure to adopt the ministerial decree referred to in Article of that decree, permitting the entry
         into force, in particular, of Articles and of the Decree and its definitive substitution for the Decree.
      
First, in reply to the Commission’s arguments concerning the notice to undertakings, the French Republic has not demonstrated
         that that notice does not constitute a simple administrative circular devoid of obligatory character and not legally binding.
         In its reply to the Commission’s letter of formal notice, that Member State acknowledged that full implementation of the Decree required the publication of a ministerial order determining the list of all authorised substances and their conditions
         for use, and stated that it was not until such a list was published that the Decree would definitively replace the Decree.
      
Second, nothing in the clear and explicit wording of Articles and of the Decree appears to support the effects accorded
         by the French Republic to that notice. For example, in accordance with Article of that decree, a ministerial order has to
         be adopted laying down the list of processing aids the use of which is authorised. As regards Article of that decree, its
         wording shows that ‘the provisions of this Decree shall enter into force as from the publication date of the order referred
         to in Article 2’. Therefore, the publication of such a ministerial order appears to be a necessary condition for the entry
         into force of the Decree, as has been explicitly stated in the notice to undertakings itself.
      
Third, whilst that notice indicates that there is no barrier to the application as from January 2002, its publication date,
         of the provisions of the Decree concerning, for example, the submission of files by economic operators pursuant to Article
         of that decree, it is difficult to see how an economic operator might submit a file requesting amendment of the list of
         authorised processing aids laid down by a ministerial order when that list has not yet been established, owing to the failure
         to adopt the order in question.
      
In those circumstances, this Court finds that the notice to undertakings has not remedied the failure to adopt the ministerial
         order referred to in Article of the Decree, and that, at the expiry of the time-limit laid down by the reasoned opinion,
         the Decree had not yet ceased to have effect.
      
In an action under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil
         its obligations must be determined by reference to the situation prevailing in the State at the end of the period laid down
         in the reasoned opinion, and subsequent changes cannot be taken into account by the Court (Case C-214/Commission v Spain [1998] ECR I-7661, paragraph 25).
      
In the context of the present action, the Commission has maintained many times that the Decree makes its entry into force
         conditional on the publication of a ministerial order and that, failing such publication, that decree has not entered into
         force. In its application, for example, it stated that ‘two schemes have successively been applicable in France to processing
         aids. The first of those schemes remained in force during the pre-litigation procedure and did not come to an end until December 2006. The [second] scheme was definitively adopted on July 2001, but its entry into force was deferred until the
         first scheme came to an end’.
      
The time-limit laid down by the reasoned opinion expired on September 2006. The ministerial order referred to in Article
         of the Decree was adopted on October and published in the Journal officiel de la République française on December 2006.
      
It follows that, because the ministerial order referred to in Article of the Decree was not adopted, the Commission’s
         action concerning that decree can be examined by the Court only in relation to its claim based on the existence of an obstacle
         to Article EC arising from the legal uncertainty created by the latter.
      
 The first head of claim, concerning lack of justification based on the objective of protecting public health
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission argues that it is for the French Republic to justify the existence of a prior authorisation scheme for the
         various categories of processing aids. Recourse to a prior authorisation scheme, whilst not excluded in principle, should
         be targeted and precisely justified on a scientific basis. The French prior authorisation scheme, the Commission submits,
         is based on a generalised presumption of risk, the principle of which is not compatible with Article EC.
      
The general prior authorisation scheme as laid down by the Decree is, the Commission argues, disproportionate in relation
         to the possible risks which processing aids may pose for human health. Requiring compliance with certain conditions for using
         an authorised processing aid or with certain purity criteria cannot be justified on a public health ground where the finished
         products do not contain any residues of processing aids, or where the residues do not present any danger for human health
         when ingested by consumers.
      
According to the Commission, the presumption of risk on which the French scheme is based is all the more difficult to justify
         having regard to Regulation No 178/2002. In accordance with that regulation, other Member States normally carry out an assessment
         of the risks posed by foodstuffs and control that their food legislation has been complied with. 
      
The Commission observes that the French Republic appears to be one of the rare Member States to make the use of processing
         aids subject to a prior authorisation procedure. Whilst that circumstance does not in itself imply that the prior authorisation
         scheme established by the French Republic is incompatible with Article EC, it does demonstrate that the risk alleged by
         that Member State is far from being generally acknowledged and that a scheme systematically making all processing aids subject
         to prior authorisation goes beyond the legitimate objective pursued by the latter.
      
The Commission maintains, as regards the mutual recognition clauses included in certain orders adopted pursuant to the Decree, that the latter cannot have any practical effect since France appears to be one of the rare Member States to lay down
         a prior authorisation procedure for the use of processing aids. In those circumstances, any reference to a higher residual
         content recognised in other Member States is of only theoretical use. It is the French legislation which is applied in all
         cases.
      
It argues that, since other Member States must comply with the requirements, in particular, of Article of Regulation No
         178/in relation to the rules concerning foodstuffs placed on the market, and an infringement of Community law by the
         latter cannot be presumed, a mutual recognition clause should be limited to providing that the provisions of the relevant
         national legislation shall not hinder the principle of the free movement of foodstuffs in the preparation of which processing
         aids have been used which do not comply with the provisions of that legislation but which come from other Member States of
         the Community where they are lawfully manufactured and/or marketed.
      
The French Republic acknowledges that processing aids may, at first sight, present fewer health risks than nutritional substances
         such as vitamins and food additives which are added to a foodstuff, where they remain until the latter is ingested by the
         consumer. The fact remains, however, that processing aids may present risks for public health, arising from the presence of
         residues of the processing aids themselves and/or the presence of ‘newly-formed’ products. In that latter respect, the French
         Republic explains that, under the influence of certain processing procedures, the processing aids may cause changes in the
         structure of the molecules constituting the foodstuff, and those new molecules are capable of producing toxic effects for
         the health of the consumer.
      
The French Republic refers to the note of August from AFSSA to the Director-General for Competition Policy, Consumer
         Affairs and Fraud Control, summarising its findings over eight years of assessing applications for authorisation to use processing
         aids. In that letter, AFSSA stated that, in the majority of cases, the residual quantities of processing aids in the final
         foodstuff are not known and that exposing the consumer to processing aids runs the risk of exceeding in certain cases the
         reference toxicological values, where they have been established. It also raised the issue of the formation of neoformed products
         arising from the use of certain processing aids in the manufacturing process.
      
According to the French Republic, in order to ensure that a product does not contain residues of processing aids, it is necessary
         for that processing aid to be known and for it to have been identified by the operative part of an authorisation or a declaration.
         Moreover, in order to be sure that residues do not pose risks to human health, the processing aid must itself have given rise
         to a health assessment of the residues present in certain foodstuffs, bearing in mind the conditions under which such foodstuffs
         are normally consumed. That sort of assessment of the final health risk posed by a foodstuff containing a processing aid is
         effective only in the context either of a marketing authorisation procedure or of a relevant scientific assessment before
         international, Community or national bodies. Given the potential risks for public health of certain categories of processing
         aids, a Member State is perfectly entitled, in respect of aids belonging to those categories which are not subject to Community
         harmonisation provisions, to require an authorisation procedure prior to their being placed on the market. The French Republic
         further maintains that, having regard to the permanent evolution of manufacturing processes, it is not possible to identify
         in advance categories of processing aids which are inoffensive.
      
As regards the Commission’s argument that the national authorities must demonstrate the existence of a precise risk for each
         category of processing aid, the French Republic points out that the precautionary principle applies in the area of public
         health. In its submission, in accordance with that principle, it is for the Member States to establish the risk which the
         use of processing aids may pose, but they are not obliged to establish precisely and scientifically the existence of the risk
         which they pose.
      
In the absence of an assessment mechanism for processing aids in the great majority of Member States, the fact that a substance
         has been marketed in another Member State cannot exonerate it from an examination by AFSSA and the French administration.
         The fact that a Member State imposes rules which are less strict than those applicable in another Member State does not in
         itself mean that the latter are disproportionate.
      
Regarding mutual recognition clauses, the French Republic merely argues that it is precisely in order to respond to the Commission’s
         complaint that the Decree did not contain such mutual clauses that the Decree was adopted.
      
As for the possibility of informing and protecting consumers by means of labelling, the French Republic argues, first, that
         labelling is no substitute for the result of a risk analysis for consumer health. Moreover, since Directive 2000/exempts
         processing aids from the labelling obligation, to require those substances to be mentioned in labelling would constitute an
         infringement of that directive.
      
Concerning the AFSSA study report of April annexed for the first time to its rejoinder, the French Republic argues that,
         even if that report is focused on certain products and procedures, as the Commission has observed, such a focus is logical
         bearing in mind the particular problem posed by the production of neoformed products. In its submission, an exhaustive examination
         of processing aids cannot be envisaged, given the considerable quantity of usable processing aids. In any event, contrary
         to what the Commission claims, the French legislation was not adopted without a prior, in-depth, overall study of the impact
         of processing aids on health, such a study having been begun between and and the second phase of that study being
         envisaged for the period from to 2011.
      
 Findings of the Court
It should be recalled, as a preliminary observation, that the free movement of goods between Member States is a fundamental
         principle of the Treaty which finds its expression in the prohibition, set out in Article EC, of quantitative restrictions
         on imports between Member States and all measures having equivalent effect.
      
The prohibition on measures having an effect equivalent to restrictions set out in Article EC covers all commercial rules
         enacted by the Member States which are capable of hindering, directly or indirectly, actually or potentially, intra-Community
         trade (see, in particular, Case 8/Dassonville [1974] ECR 837, paragraph 5; Case C-192/Commission v Denmark [2003] ECR I-9693, paragraph 39; and Case C‑24/Commission v France [2004] ECR I-1277, paragraph 22).
      
It is undisputed that the prior authorisation scheme laid down by the Decree constitutes a measure having equivalent
         effect to a quantitative restriction within the meaning of Article EC.
      
The prior authorisation scheme laid down by that decree makes it more costly and difficult, or, in certain cases, impossible,
         to market processing aids and foodstuffs in the preparation of which processing aids lawfully manufactured and/or marketed
         in other Member States have been used.
      
First, that scheme hinders the free movement of processing aids, intended to be used in the preparation of foodstuffs, coming
         from other Member States where they are lawfully manufactured and/or marketed, in so far as they are subjected to criteria
         of purity or other characteristics, such as maximum authorised residual doses, established by the French legislation.
      
Second, it hinders the free movement of finished foodstuffs from other Member States in which the presence, however infinitesimal,
         of residues of a processing aid not authorised in France can be found, or in which the presence of residues of processing
         aids authorised in France can be found, where the maximum residual amounts determined by the French authorisation decisions
         have been exceeded. 
      
Third, that prior authorisation scheme hinders the free movement of finished foodstuffs from other Member States whose preparation
         involved the use of a processing aid not authorised in France, or authorised there but not satisfying the criteria as to purity
         or other characteristics laid down by the French legislation, or authorised there but used in a different manner from that
         authorised by the French legislation, even where there are no residues in the finished foodstuff, or residues are present
         only in the authorised quantities.
      
According to consistent case-law, national legislation making the addition of a nutritive substance to a foodstuff lawfully
         manufactured and/or marketed in other Member States subject to prior authorisation is not in principle contrary to Community
         law provided certain conditions are fulfilled (see, to that effect, Case C-344/Commission v France [1992] ECR I-4719, paragraph 8, and Commission v Denmark, paragraph 44).
      
First, such legislation must be accompanied by a procedure allowing economic operators to obtain the entry of that nutritive
         substance in the national list of authorised substances. That procedure must be easily accessible, must be capable of being
         concluded within a reasonable time, and, if it leads to a refusal, the refusal decision must be capable of review before the
         courts (see, to that effect, Case C‑344/Commission v France, paragraph 9, and Case C‑24/Commission v France, paragraph 26). 
      
Second, an application for the entry of a nutritive substance on the national list of authorised substances may be rejected
         by the competent national authorities only if that substance poses a genuine threat to public health (Commission v Denmark, paragraph 46, and Case C‑24/Commission v France, paragraph 27).
      
In this case, the Commission argues that, unlike additives and nutritive substances, such as vitamins, which formed the subject-matter
         of the abovementioned judgments in Commission v Denmark and Case C‑24/Commission v France, processing aids are not substances added to foodstuffs but merely substances used in the process of elaborating and manufacturing
         a foodstuff, of which traces may be detected in certain cases. In contrast with vitamins and additives, their presence in
         the finished foodstuff is rare and involuntary. Having regard to those differences, the Commission considers that a prior
         authorisation scheme is not justified for processing aids, since the latter do not threaten the same harmfulness to public
         health as additives or vitamins.
      
It should be noted in this respect that those differences between nutritive substances voluntarily and intentionally added
         to foodstuffs and processing aids are not capable of excluding the possibility of a Member State relying, in principle, on
         Article EC and the objective of protecting public health in order to justify prior authorisation schemes such as those
         at issue in this case. If such differences existed in relation to substances subject to a prior authorisation scheme, they
         would be relevant not for determining whether the choice of such a scheme is in principle excluded in Member States but as
         regards the means of applying the principle of proportionality in relation to the scheme which is applicable to them.
      
As regards the objective of protecting public health, it is for the Member States, in the absence of harmonisation and in
         so far as doubts subsist in the current state of scientific research, to decide at which level they intend to ensure the protection
         of the health and life of persons, and whether to require prior authorisation for the marketing of processing aids and foodstuffs
         in the preparation of which such aids have been used, whilst at the same time taking into account the requirements of the
         free movement of goods within the Community (see, to that effect, Case 174/Sandoz [1983] ECR 2445, paragraph 16; Case C‑42/Bellon [1990] ECR I-4863, paragraph 11; Commission v Denmark, paragraph 42; and Case C‑24/Commission v France, paragraph 49).
      
That discretion relating to the protection of public health is particularly wide where it is shown that uncertainties continue
         to exist in the current state of scientific research as to certain substances used in the preparation of foodstuffs (Commission v Denmark, paragraph 43, and Case C–24/Commission v France, paragraph 50).
      
Since Article EC contains an exception, which must be narrowly interpreted, to the rule of the free movement of goods within
         the Community, it is for the national authorities which invoke it to demonstrate in each case, taking account of the results
         of international scientific research, that their legislation is necessary in order effectively to protect the interests referred
         to in that provision, and, in particular, that the marketing of the products in question poses a genuine threat to public
         health (see, to that effect, Commission v Denmark, paragraph 46, and Case C‑24/Commission v France, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
A prohibition on marketing processing aids or foodstuffs in which processing aids have been used which have been lawfully
         manufactured and/or marketed in other Member States must therefore be based on an in-depth assessment of the risk alleged
         by the Member State invoking Article EC (see, to that effect, Commission v Denmark, paragraph 47; Case C‑24/Commission v France, paragraph 54; and Case C‑41/Commission v Netherlands [2004] ECR I-11375, paragraph 48).
      
A decision to prohibit marketing, which indeed constitutes the most restrictive obstacle to trade in products lawfully manufactured
         and marketed in other Member States, can be adopted only if the real risk alleged for public health appears sufficiently established
         on the basis of the latest scientific data available at the date of the adoption of such decision. In such a context, the
         object of the risk assessment to be carried out by the Member State is to appraise the degree of probability of harmful effects
         on human health from the addition of certain nutrients to foodstuffs and the seriousness of those potential effects (Commission v Denmark, paragraph 48; Case C‑24/Commission v France, paragraph 55; and Commission v Netherlands, paragraph 49).
      
In exercising their discretion relating to the protection of public health, the Member States must comply with the principle
         of proportionality. The means which they choose must therefore be confined to what is actually necessary to ensure the safeguarding
         of public health; they must be proportional to the objective thus pursued, which could not have been attained by measures
         which are less restrictive of intra-Community trade (Commission v Denmark, paragraph 45, and Case C‑24/Commission v France, paragraph 52).
      
It is true that the assessment which a Member State is required to make may reveal a high degree of scientific and practical
         uncertainty in that regard. Such uncertainty, which is inseparable from the concept of precaution, influences the extent of
         the discretion of the Member State and thus has an impact on the means of applying the proportionality principle. In such
         circumstances, it must be acknowledged that a Member State may, under the precautionary principle, take protective measures
         without having to wait for the reality and the seriousness of those risks to be fully demonstrated (see, to that effect, Case
         C-157/National Farmers’ Union and Others [1998] ECR I‑2211, paragraph 63, and Commission v Netherlands, paragraphs and 52). However, the assessment of the risk cannot be based on purely hypothetical considerations (see, to
         that effect, Case C‑236/Monsanto Agricoltura Italia and Others [2003] ECR I‑8105, paragraph 106; Commission v Denmark, paragraph 49; and Commission v Netherlands, paragraph 52).
      
A correct application of the precautionary principle presupposes, first, identification of the potentially negative consequences
         for health of the proposed use of processing aids, and, secondly, a comprehensive assessment of the risk to health based on
         the most reliable scientific data available and the most recent results of international research (Monsanto Agricoltura Italia and Others, paragraph 113; Commission v Denmark, paragraph 51; and Commission v Netherlands, paragraph 53).
      
Where it proves to be impossible to determine with certainty the existence or extent of the alleged risk because of the insufficiency,
         inconclusiveness or imprecision of the results of studies conducted, but the likelihood of real harm to public health persists
         should the risk materialise, the precautionary principle justifies the adoption of restrictive measures, provided they are
         non-discriminatory and objective (Commission v Denmark, paragraph 52, and Commission v Netherlands, paragraph 54).
      
In this case, the French Republic justifies the prior authorisation scheme laid down by its legislation by reference to the
         potential health risks of certain categories of processing aids.
      
However, if there are risks concerning certain categories of processing aids, the national legislation must be targeted and
         clearly justified in relation to those categories and must not envisage all processing aids or all foodstuffs in the preparation
         of which processing aids not entering into those dangerous or suspect categories have been used. It is not sufficient to base
         justification on potential risks posed by the substances or products subject to authorisation.
      
It is true that a Member State may base justification on the precautionary principle where it proves impossible to determine
         with certainty the existence or the scope of the alleged risk. However, a correct application of that principle presupposes
         that the Member State demonstrates the existence of the conditions, referred to in paragraph of this judgment, required
         for the latter to apply.
      
As regards the prior authorisation scheme laid down by the Decree, there is no demonstration of the existence of those
         conditions. Even if, as the French Republic claims, in accordance with the precautionary principle the Member State merely
         has to establish the risk which the use of processing aids may pose, the fact remains that the generalised presumption of
         a health risk put forward by that Member State in this case is not supported by evidence to explain why the marketing of any
         foodstuff, in the preparation of which processing aids have been used which have been lawfully manufactured and/or marketed
         in other Member States, must depend on the entry of the processing aid in question on a positive list established by French
         legislation, which in turn depends on the conformity of the foodstuff in question with purity criteria, requirements concerning
         maximum residual doses or conditions for using processing aids laid down by that legislation.
      
Moreover, as regards the evidence put forward by the French Republic to demonstrate that the choice of schemes at issue is
         based on a comprehensive risk analysis in accordance with Articles EC and EC, it should be noted that the AFFSA note
         of August and its study report of April to demonstrate that the legislation in question complied with Articles
         EC and EC substantially post-date the Decree. Furthermore, following the publication, on December 2006, of the
         ministerial order referred to in Article of the Decree, the Decree was no longer in force at the time those documents
         were drawn up. 
      
As is apparent from paragraph of this judgment, in order to comply with the principle of proportionality, the means which
         the Member States choose must be limited to what is actually necessary in order to safeguard health.
      
Examination of the file concerning the prior authorisation scheme laid down by the Decree shows the latter to be disproportionate
         in that it systematically prohibits, without prior authorisation, the marketing of any processing aids or of any foodstuffs
         in the preparation of which processing aids lawfully manufactured and/or marketed in other Member States were used, without
         making any distinction according to the various processing aids or according to the level of risk which their use might potentially
         pose for health.
      
By its systematic nature, the Decree does not permit compliance with Community law as regards prior identification of
         the harmful effects of processing aids and the assessment of the actual risk which they pose for health, both of which require
         an in-depth, case-by-case assessment of the effects which use of the processing aids in question might produce.
      
Moreover, that scheme systematically hinders the marketing of foodstuffs in the preparation of which processing aids were
         used if the method of using the latter does not correspond to the method of use prescribed by the French legislation, even
         in the absence of detectable residues of those processing aids in the final foodstuffs.
      
A Member State cannot justify a systematic and untargeted prior authorisation scheme such as that laid down by the Decree
         by pleading the impossibility of carrying out more exhaustive prior examinations by reason of the considerable quantity of
         processing aids which may be used or by reason of the fact that manufacturing processes are constantly changing. As is apparent
         from Articles and of Regulation No 178/2002, concerning the analysis of risks and the application of the precautionary
         principle, such an approach does not correspond to the requirements laid down by the Community legislature as regards both
         Community and national food legislation and designed to achieve the general objective of a high level of health protection.
      
It is true that, as the French Republic has argued, one of the alternative methods less restrictive of free movement suggested
         by the Commission, namely the mentioning of the processing aids used in the manufacturing process of a foodstuff, is not capable
         of achieving the objective of protection envisaged by the French legislation concerning processing aids in relation to which
         a genuine risk to health has been established. However, this Court must reject the argument of that Member State that such
         a mention would in any event constitute an infringement of Directive 2000/13. Although Article 6(4)(c)(ii) of that directive
         shows that processing aids do not constitute ingredients which must compulsorily be mentioned on labelling, in accordance
         with Article 3(1) of that directive, the Member States may, in accordance with Article 18(1) of that directive, lay down measures
         on labelling which are justified for reasons of protecting public health.
      
It should also be noted, as the French Republic has pointed out, that the mere fact that one Member State imposes less strict
         rules than those applicable in another Member State does not mean that the latter are incompatible with Articles EC and
         EC (see, to that effect, Case C‑514/Commission v Spain [2006] ECR I-963, paragraph 49). However, the absence of a prior authorisation scheme with regard to the use of processing
         aids in the preparation of foodstuffs in all or nearly all of the other Member States may be relevant when assessing the objective
         justification put forward in relation to the French legislation, and, particularly, with regard to the assessment of its proportionality.
      
As for the Commission’s arguments concerning the nature of the mutual recognition clauses which each Member State must incorporate
         into its national legislation in relation to a prior authorisation scheme such as that at issue in this case, it should be
         noted, as is apparent from paragraph of this judgment, that national legislation subjecting to prior authorisation foodstuffs
         in the preparation of which processing aids have been used which are lawfully manufactured and/or marketed in other Member
         States is not in principle contrary to Community law provided the conditions set out in paragraphs and of this judgment
         are met.
      
The Commission’s argument in paragraph of this judgment concerning the nature of the mutual recognition clause necessary
         in order to comply with Community law cannot be accepted.
      
It is true that a Member State which establishes a prior authorisation scheme must provide for a simplified registration procedure
         and justify the scheme by demonstrating the existence of a genuine health risk. That State must demonstrate that the scheme
         which it has chosen in order to attain the legitimate objective of the protection of health does not go beyond what is necessary
         to attain that objective, which the French Republic has not succeeded in doing in this case as regards the scheme laid down
         by the Decree.
      
However, to require in national legislation establishing a prior authorisation scheme that a mutual recognition clause be
         included such as that contemplated by the Commission in paragraph of this judgment would go against the very rationale
         of such a scheme, since the Member State concerned would be obliged to allow the marketing on its territory of processing
         aids and foodstuffs benefiting from that clause without being able to verify the absence of genuine risks for public health.
      
Having regard to the above, the Commission’s first head of claim must be regarded as being well founded as regards the Decree.
      
 The second head of claim, alleging the existence of an obstacle to Article EC arising from the legal uncertainty created
            by the Decree
During the pre-litigation procedure and before the Court, the Commission has argued that the adoption of the Decree,
         which only entered into force on December following the publication of the ministerial order referred to in Article
         thereof, the publication, in 2002, of the notice to undertakings, and the publication, in 2003, of guidelines for the constitution
         of a file concerning the use of a processing aid applicable to categories of processing aids listed in the annex to the Decree (the guidelines) have created a situation of legal uncertainty which itself constitutes an unjustified obstacle to
         Article EC.
      
In that regard, it should be noted that the lapse of time between the adoption of the Decree and the publication, on
         December 2006, of the ministerial order permitting the entry of that decree into force and the coexistence during that period
         of the said decree and the Decree have given rise to an ambiguous factual situation by maintaining, for economic operators,
         a state of uncertainty as regards the possibilities for marketing in France processing aids or foodstuffs in the preparation
         of which processing aids were used which are lawfully manufactured and/or marketed in other Member States.
      
That legal uncertainty has been reinforced, first, by the notice to undertakings which indicated to economic operators that
         there was no obstacle, as from the publication date of that notice, to the application of certain provisions of the Decree
         and, second, by the guidelines published by AFFSA on July which were, in its own words, applicable to categories of
         processing aids listed in the annex to the Decree.
      
Even if those guidelines were in conformity with the requirements arising from the case-law of the Court concerning the existence
         of a simplified registration procedure, an economic operator would not have been able to constitute a file concerning the
         use of a processing aid and seeking to enter the latter on a positive list referred to in Article of the Decree at
         a time when that list had not been established, the ministerial order intended to make provision for that list having not
         yet been either adopted or published. 
      
In those circumstances, the Commission’s second head of claim concerning the Decree must be regarded as well founded.
      
 The third head of claim, concerning the lack of a simplified procedure for registering processing aids
The Commission takes the view that the registration procedure laid down by the Decree does not comply with the requirements
         arising from the case-law of the Court and referred to in paragraph of this judgment. The Decree does not contain
         any indication as to the duration of the procedure, the right of economic operators to initiate it, or their opportunities
         to appeal in the event of refusal. Nor was any indication given to those operators as to the body to which they should address
         their applications or the documents which they should place on file.
      
In that respect, it should be noted that, as is apparent from paragraph of this judgment, national legislation making the
         addition of a substance such as a processing aid to a foodstuff subject to prior authorisation must be accompanied by a procedure
         allowing economic operators to obtain the entry of that substance in the national list of authorised substances. That procedure
         must be easily accessible, must be capable of being concluded within a reasonable time, and, if it leads to a refusal, the
         refusal decision must be capable of review before the courts (see, to that effect, Case C-344/Commission v France, paragraph 9, and Case C‑24/Commission v France, paragraph 26).
      
In paragraph of its judgment in Case C-24/Commission v France, the Court held, having regard to the examples provided by the Commission concerning the registration procedure laid down
         by the Decree, that applications for authorisation submitted by economic operators were not dealt with either within
         a reasonable period or according to a procedure which was sufficiently transparent as regards the possibility of challenging
         refusal to authorise before the courts.
      
In the present case, the documents before the Court show that the registration procedure applicable to nutritive substances
         such as the vitamins at issue in Case C-24/Commission v France is similar or identical to that laid down by the Decree for the entry of processing aids onto the list of substances
         authorised in France. The French Republic has not provided any evidence to demonstrate that that is not the case.
      
In those circumstances, the conclusions which the Court reached in Case C-24/Commission v France, concerning the registration procedure laid down by the Decree, may be transposed to the registration procedure applicable,
         by virtue of the same decree, to processing aids.
      
It must therefore be concluded that, as regards the Decree, the Commission’s third head of claim, concerning the lack
         of a simplified registration procedure, must be regarded as well founded.
      
Having regard to the above, this Court finds that, by laying down, for processing aids and foodstuffs whose preparation involved
         the use of processing aids from other Member States where they are lawfully manufactured and/or marketed, a prior authorisation
         scheme not complying with the principle of proportionality, the French Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under
         Article EC.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for a costs order against the French Republic,
         and the latter has been unsuccessful, the French Republic must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      By laying down, for processing aids and foodstuffs whose preparation involved the use of processing aids from other Member
            States where they are lawfully manufactured and/or marketed, a prior authorisation scheme not complying with the principle
            of proportionality, the French Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC.
2.      The French Republic is ordered to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 