
Case C-61/European Commission
v
Hellenic Republic
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Article EC – Freedom of establishment – Civil-law notaries – Nationality requirement – Article EC – Connection with the exercise of official authority – Directive 89/48/EEC)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Freedom to provide services – Exceptions – Activities connected
            with the exercise of official authority – Activities of Civil-law notaries – Not included – Nationality requirement for access
            to the profession of notary – Not permissible
(Arts EC and 45, first para., EC)
2.        Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Examination of the merits by the Court – Situation to be taken into consideration
            – Situation on expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion – Situation of uncertainty as a result of particular
            circumstances during the legislative procedure – No failure to fulfil obligations
(Arts EC, 45, first para., EC and EC; European Parliament and Council Directive 2005/36)
1.        A Member State whose legislation imposes a nationality requirement for access to the profession of notary fails to fulfil
         its obligations under Article EC, where the activities entrusted to notaries within the legal order of that Member State
         are not connected with the exercise of official authority within the meaning of the first paragraph of Article EC. In that
         regard, the first paragraph of Article EC is an exception to the fundamental rule of freedom of establishment which must
         be interpreted in a manner which limits its scope to what is strictly necessary in order to safeguard the interests which
         that provision allows the Member States to protect. In addition, that exception must be restricted solely to activities that
         are, in themselves, directly and specifically connected with the exercise of official authority.
      
In order to assess whether the activities entrusted to notaries involve a direct and specific connection with the exercise
         of official authority, account must be taken of the nature of the activities carried out by notaries. In that regard, the
         various activities carried out by notaries lack a direct and specific connection with the exercise of official authority within
         the meaning of the first paragraph of Article EC, notwithstanding the significant legal effects conferred on their acts,
         in so far as either the intention of the parties or judicial supervision or decisions have particular importance.
      
First, as regards authentic instruments, the only documents that may be authenticated are documents and agreements freely
         entered into by the parties, while a notary cannot unilaterally alter the agreement which he is called on to authenticate
         without obtaining the prior consent of the parties. Further, while the obligation of verification incumbent on notaries admittedly
         pursues an objective in the public interest, the mere pursuit of that objective cannot however justify the powers necessary
         for that purpose being reserved exclusively to notaries who are nationals of the Member State concerned and is not, in itself,
         sufficient for an activity to be regarded as directly and specifically connected with the exercise of official authority.
      
Secondly as regards enforceability, while a notary’s endorsement of authority to execute on an authentic instrument does give
         it enforceable status, that status is based on the intention of the parties to sign a document or agreement, after its conformity
         with the law has been checked by the notary, and confer enforceability on it. Likewise, the probative force enjoyed by notarial
         acts derives from the rules on evidence and thus has no direct effect on whether the activity which includes the drawing up
         of the document in question is in itself directly and specifically connected with the exercise of official authority, the
         more so when a notarial act does not unconditionally bind a court exercising its power of assessment, since the judge decides
         in accordance with his own firm conviction. 
      
The same is true of other activities entrusted to notaries, such as tasks entrusted to a notary in connection with enforcement,
         when the notary’s main responsibility is to carry out the auction and, in cases of compulsory sale, to draw up the bidding
         papers, activities carried out by a notary in the special liquidation of companies in difficulty, involvement in cases of
         non‑acceptance or non‑payment of bills or cheques, transactions and acts such as the constitution and transfer of real rights
         in immoveable property, gifts of immoveable property, voluntary acknowledgement of paternity and bequests, and acts constituting
         companies and trusts.
      
Lastly, as regards the specific status of notaries, in the first place, it follows from the fact that the quality of the services
         provided may vary from one notary to another, depending in particular on their professional capabilities, that, within the
         geographical boundaries of their office, notaries practise their profession in conditions of competition, which is not characteristic
         of the exercise of official authority. In the second place, notaries are directly and personally liable to their clients for
         harm or loss resulting from any fault committed in the exercise of their activities.
      
(see paras 74, 76-77, 79-84, 86-88, 91-97, 99-100, 102-107, 110)
2.        When, in the course of the legislative procedure, particular circumstances, such as the failure of the legislature to adopt
         a clear position or the failure clearly to determine the scope of a provision of Union law, give rise to a situation of uncertainty,
         it is not possible to conclude that, at the end of the period prescribed in the reasoned opinion, there existed a sufficiently
         clear obligation for the Member States to transpose a directive.
      
(see paras 130-132)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Article EC – Freedom of establishment – Notaries – Nationality requirement – Article EC – Connection with the exercise of official authority – Directive 89/48/EEC)
In Case C‑61/08,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on February 2008,
European Commission, represented by G. Zavvos and H. Støvlbæk, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
supported by:
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, represented by S. Ossowski, acting as Agent,
      
intervener,
v
Hellenic Republic, represented by V. Christianos, E.-M. Mamouna and A. Samoni-Rantou, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant,
supported by:
Czech Republic, represented by M. Smolek, acting as Agent,
      
French Republic, represented by G. de Bergues and B. Messmer, acting as Agents,
      
Republic of Lithuania, represented by D. Kriaučiūnas and E. Matulionytė, acting as Agents,
      
Republic of Slovenia, represented by V. Klemenc and Ž. Cilenšek Bončina, acting as Agents,
      
Slovak Republic, represented by J. Čorba and B. Ricziová, acting as Agents,
      
interveners,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, A. Tizzano, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, K. Lenaerts, J.-C. Bonichot, A. Arabadjiev (Rapporteur)
         and J-J. Kasel, Presidents of Chambers, R. Silva de Lapuerta, E. Juhász, G. Arestis, M. Ilešič, C. Toader and M. Safjan, Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Cruz Villalón,
Registrar: M-A. Gaudissart, head of unit,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on April 2010,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application the Commission of the European Communities asks the Court to declare that, by imposing a nationality requirement
         for access to the profession of civil-law notary and by failing to transpose for that profession Council Directive 89/48/EEC
         of December on a general system for the recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of professional
         education and training of at least three years’ duration (OJ L 19, p. 16), as amended by Directive 2001/19/EC of the
         European Parliament and of the Council of May (OJ L 206, p. 1) (‘Directive 89/48’), the Hellenic Republic failed
         to fulfil its obligations under Articles EC and EC and under Directive 89/48.
      
 Legal context
 European Union law 
The 12th recital in the preamble to Directive 89/stated that ‘the general system for the recognition of higher-education
         diplomas is entirely without prejudice to the application of … Article [EC]’.
      
Article of Directive 89/read as follows:
      
‘This Directive shall apply to any national of a Member State wishing to pursue a regulated profession in a host Member State
         in a self-employed capacity or as an employed person.
      
This Directive shall not apply to professions which are the subject of a separate Directive establishing arrangements for
         the mutual recognition of diplomas by Member States.’
      
The profession of notary was not the subject of any legislation of the kind referred to in the second paragraph of Article
         2.
      
Directive 89/laid down a period for its transposition, which, in accordance with Article 12, expired on January 1991.
         
      
Directive 2005/36/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of September on the recognition of professional
         qualifications (OJ L 255, p. 22), repealed Directive 89/with effect from October 2007, pursuant to Article of
         Directive 2005/36.
      
Recital in the preamble to Directive 2005/states that the directive ‘is without prejudice to the application of Articles
         39(4) [EC] and [EC] concerning notably notaries’. 
      
 National legislation
 The general organisation of the notarial profession 
Notaries carry out their duties, within the Greek legal system, as members of a liberal profession. The organisation of that
         profession is regulated by Law No 2830/of March (FEK A’ 96/16.3.2000, ‘the Code of Notaries’). 
      
Under Article 1(1) of that code, the task of a notary is, inter alia, to draft and keep safe documents which constitute certain
         legal acts or serve as evidence of them, to append an order of enforcement on those documents, to stamp private documents
         and thereby confer on them a definite date and to certify the authenticity of the signatures of all parties concerned. 
      
The same provision defines the notary as an ‘unremunerated public official’ in the sense that he is remunerated not by the
         State, but by his clients. Each party can freely choose a notary.
      
The number of notaries, the location of their offices and their residence are determined in accordance with, inter alia, Articles
         and of the Code of Notaries. The former article provides that notaries are to perform their duties within the area of
         the judicial district in which they reside.
      
In accordance with Article of the Code of Notaries, notaries’ fees, which include a fixed component and a variable component
         according to the value stated in the notarial act concerned, are determined by a joint ministerial decision of the Minister
         for Economic affairs and Finance and the Minister of Justice, the most recent being Decision 100692(1)/2009.
      
Under Article of the Code of Notaries, two or more qualified notaries who reside in the same judicial district can perform
         their duties in the form of a civil law partnership. 
      
Before a person can apply to become a notary in Greece, one of the conditions in Article of the Code of Notaries is that
         that person must be Greek.
      
 The activities of a notary
As regards the various activities of a notary in the Greek legal system, it is common ground that a notary’s principal task
         is to draw up authentic instruments. The involvement of a notary may thus be obligatory or optional, depending on the nature
         of the act which he is called on to authenticate. By his intervention the notary confirms that all the conditions required
         by law for the drawing up of the act in question are satisfied and that the parties concerned have legal capacity and capacity
         to act. 
      
It is provided by Article of the Code of Civil Procedure, in Chapter VIII headed ‘Documents’, that an authentic instrument
         is an official document drawn up by a public official which when produced is complete proof, effective against all, of everything
         attested to have been done by the official or before him. 
      
Notarial acts are enforceable pursuant to Article 904(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure. That provision further confers enforceability
         on, inter alia, a formal summons and on documents legally recognised as enforcement orders. Before notarial acts can be enforceable,
         a notary must, under Article of that code, endorse on them an enforcement clause.
      
In accordance with Article 1(2) of Law 2318/of June on the code of bailiffs (FEK A’ 126/19.6.1995), a bailiff
         is the only person who has the power, unless otherwise provided, to enforce court decisions and enforceable documents or orders.
         
      
Further, it is evident from Article et seq. of the Code of Civil Procedure that any challenge in relation to methods of
         enforcement is to be brought before a court.
      
The role of a notary in connection with actual enforcement consists, in essence, in carrying out a public auction, in accordance
         with the provisions of Articles to 981, and to of the Code of Civil Procedure.
      
Under the relevant provisions of that code, the enforcement order is initially executed by a bailiff, who serves on the debtor
         an order to pay. The debtor is given a period of time within which to comply. On the expiry of that period, if the debtor
         has not in the meantime complied, the moveable property concerned is attached by means of service by the bailiff of a writ,
         that stage being followed by the recording of that writ at the register of mortgages. The bailiff then fixes the date of the
         public auction, if appropriate, appoints a notary and instructs him to carry out that auction. Lastly, the notary carries
         out the public auction and in cases of compulsory sale, draws up the bidding papers, which contain an assignment of the price
         to creditors, and draws up, when necessary, the list of creditors. If there is any challenge to the validity of the enforcement
         order, the enforcement procedure or the debt, that challenge must be brought before a court in accordance with Articles et seq. of that code.
      
Further, certain transactions must be carried out by notarial act, in default of which they are void. That applies, inter
         alia, to the constitution and transfer of real rights in immoveable property. Under Article of the Civil Code, before
         the ownership of immoveable property can be transferred, there must be agreement between the owner and the purchaser to transfer
         ownership to the latter for valid consideration, and that agreement must be established by notarial act. There are other acts
         the validity of which is subject to notarial authentication, for example, voluntary acknowledgement of paternity, gifts of
         immoveable property and bequests. 
      
A notary is also involved in the area of company law. By way of example, acts constituting public and private limited liability
         companies and certain acts relating to the conversion and merger of those companies must, in accordance with the relevant
         provisions of Laws 2190/on public limited liability companies (FEK A’ 37/30.3.1963) and 3190/on private limited
         liability companies (FEK A’ 91/16.4.1955), take the form of notarial acts, in default of which they are void. In addition,
         the constitution of those companies is in each case subject to the approval of the Minister for Development or the court with
         jurisdiction. Their status as legal persons is acquired on the publication of their articles of association, their founding
         documents and the administrative decision approving the articles of association in the registers of public or private limited
         liability companies and in the official journal. Similarly, the creation of a trust, which must be executed by notarial act
         under Article of the Civil code, is subject to the approval of the competent authority, in accordance with Article of that code. 
      
 The pre-litigation procedure 
The Commission received a complaint concerning the nationality requirement for access to the profession of notary in Greece.
         Following consideration of that complaint, the Commission sent a letter of formal notice dated November to the Hellenic
         Republic requesting that it submit, within two months, its observations on the compatibility of that nationality requirement
         with the first paragraph of Article EC and on the failure to transpose Directive 89/in respect of the profession of
         notary.
      
By letter dated February the Hellenic Republic replied to that letter of formal notice.
      
On July the Commission sent an additional letter of formal notice to the Hellenic Republic, claiming that it had failed
         to fulfil its obligations under Article EC, the first paragraph of Article EC and Directive 89/48. 
      
The Hellenic Republic replied to that additional letter of formal notice by letter dated October 2002.
      
The Commission was not persuaded by the arguments put forward by the Hellenic Republic and on October it sent to the
         Hellenic Republic a reasoned opinion in which it concluded that the Hellenic Republic had failed to fulfil its obligations
         under Article EC, the first paragraph of Article EC and Directive 89/48. The Commission invited the Hellenic Republic
         to take the measures necessary to comply with the reasoned opinion within two months from its receipt.
      
By letter of December the Hellenic Republic set out the grounds for its belief that the position adopted by the Commission
         was unfounded.
      
In those circumstances the Commission decided to bring the current action.
      
 The action
 Admissibility of the intervention by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
The Hellenic Republic considers that the statement in intervention of the United Kingdom is inadmissible because, contrary
         to the requirements of the fourth paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice and Article 93(4) of its
         Rules of Procedure, the United Kingdom does not seek to support the forms of order sought by the Commission. That statement
         is also claimed to be inadmissible because the United Kingdom referred, first, solely to Directive 2005/36, whereas the current
         action relates to Directive 89/48, and, second, to Article 39(4) EC, although that provision has no relevance to the subject-matter
         of these proceedings.
      
It must be recalled that, in accordance with the fourth paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court, the forms of
         order in an application to intervene must be limited to supporting the forms of order of one of the parties.
      
Similarly, Article 93(4) of the Court’s Rules of Procedure provides that the intervener must accept the case as he finds it
         at the time of his intervention.
      
The conclusion arrived at by the United Kingdom in its statement in intervention is worded as follows: 
      
‘the profession of notary falls within the scope of [Directive 2005/36]. Certain activities performed by notaries can only
         be excluded from the scope of [Directive 2005/36] if the Court of Justice concludes that those activities are included within
         the exception referred to in Recital of [Directive 2005/36], under Articles 39(4) and/or EC’.
      
It is clear that, in its action, the Commission does not seek a declaration from the Court that the Hellenic Republic failed
         to fulfil its obligations under Article 39(4) EC and Directive 2005/36. 
      
However, even though, read literally, the objective of the United Kingdom’s intervention as thus described appears different
         from that which a statement in intervention can legitimately pursue, it is evident from an overall reading of the statement
         in intervention concerned and the background to that statement that the arguments which the United Kingdom has submitted are
         intended to contribute to the success of the Commission’s action by shedding further light on the dispute.
      
That analysis is not rebutted by the two objections pleaded by the Hellenic Republic. As regards the references made in the
         statement in intervention to Directive 2005/36, it is clear that the view of the United Kingdom is that that directive essentially
         restates the provisions of Directive 89/48, which it replaced. 
      
That is why the United Kingdom chose to refer, in its arguments, to Directive 2005/36, leaving it to be understood that those
         arguments have equal force in relation to Directive 89/48. 
      
Moreover, as regards the references made in that statement in intervention to Article 39(4) EC, the United Kingdom expressly
         acknowledges that that provision is not applicable in the present case but maintains that the Court’s case-law in relation
         to that article ought however to be applied by analogy when the first paragraph of Article EC is examined. 
      
It must therefore be held that the United Kingdom’s statement in intervention is admissible. 
      
 First head of claim
 Arguments of the parties
By its first head of claim, the Commission asks the Court to declare that, by reserving access to the profession of notary
         exclusively to its own nationals, the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC and the first
         paragraph of Article EC. The Commission states that, by that claim, its complaint is that the Hellenic Republic infringed
         Article EC, that infringement not being justified by the derogation laid down in the first paragraph of Article EC.
         
      
The Commission notes, as a preliminary point, that access to the profession of notary is not subject to any nationality requirement
         in some Member States and that requirement has been abolished in other Member States, such as the Kingdom of Spain, the Italian
         Republic and the Portuguese Republic. 
      
The Commission observes that Article EC is one of the fundamental provisions of European Union law which is intended to
         ensure that all nationals of Member States who establish themselves in another Member State, even if that establishment is
         only secondary, for the purpose of pursuing activities there as self-employed persons receive the same treatment as nationals
         of that State and prohibits any discrimination on grounds of nationality. 
      
The Commission and the United Kingdom submit that the first paragraph of Article EC must be given an autonomous and uniform
         interpretation (Case 147/Commission v Greece [1988] ECR 1637, paragraph 8). In that it lays down an exception to freedom of establishment for activities connected with
         the exercise of official authority, that article must moreover be interpreted strictly (Case 2/Reyners [1974] ECR 631, paragraph 43).
      
The exception under the first paragraph of Article EC must therefore be restricted to activities which in themselves involve
         a direct and specific connection with the exercise of official authority (Reyners, paragraphs and 45). According to the Commission, the concept of official authority implies the exercise of a decision-making
         power going beyond the ordinary law and taking the form of being able to act independently of, or even contrary to, the will
         of other subjects of law. Official authority manifests itself in particular, according to the Court’s case-law, in the exercise
         of powers of constraint (Case C‑114/Commission v Spain [1998] ECR I‑6717, paragraph 37). 
      
In the view of the Commission and the United Kingdom, activities connected with the exercise of official authority must be
         distinguished from those carried out in the public interest. A number of professions are entrusted with special powers in
         the public interest, but do not for all that take part in the exercise of official authority. 
      
Activities constituting assistance or support to the operation of official authority are also outside the scope of the first
         paragraph of Article EC (see, to that effect, Case C‑42/Thijssen [1993] ECR I‑4047, paragraph 22). 
      
The Commission and the United Kingdom also point out that the first paragraph of Article EC in principle refers to specific
         activities, not to an entire profession, unless the activities concerned are inseparable from the professional activity in
         question taken as a whole.
      
The Commission proceeds, next, to examine the various activities of notaries in the Greek legal system. 
      
First, as regards the authentication of documents and agreements, the Commission submits that the notary merely attests the
         intentions of the parties, after advising them, and gives legal effect to those intentions. In carrying out that activity,
         the notary has no decision‑making powers with respect to the parties. Accordingly, authentication is no more than confirmation
         of a prior agreement by those parties. The fact that it is mandatory that certain instruments should be authenticated is of
         no relevance, given that the mandatory nature of many procedures is not necessarily an indication of the exercise of official
         authority. 
      
The same is true of the specific properties attached to notarial acts under the rules of evidence, since a comparable probative
         force is also conferred on other documents which do not fall under the exercise of official authority, such as, for example,
         reports drawn up by accredited gamekeepers. The fact that a notary incurs personal liability by drawing up notarial acts is
         also not relevant. That is the case for the majority of independent professionals, such as lawyers, architects or medical
         practitioners.
      
As regards the enforceability of authentic instruments, the Commission considers that the endorsing of the order for enforcement
         precedes the actual enforcement and is not a part of it. Accordingly, that enforceability confers no power of constraint on
         notaries. Moreover, any legal challenge is resolved not by a notary, but by a court.
      
Second, in relation to the tasks of a notary in the area of company law and the law on associations, the Commission’s view
         is that a notary does no more than carry out certain procedural requirements, laid down by legislation, necessary to the constitution
         of a legal person. Further, those tasks can also be performed by legal advisers and lawyers.
      
Third, as regards the tasks of a notary in the area of constituting and transferring real rights to immoveable property, those
         contain no decision‑making power going beyond the ordinary law. The same is true of the tasks of a notary relating to the
         execution of certain acts, such as, inter alia, gifts, voluntary acknowledgements of paternity and bequests. 
      
Fourth, a notary’s connection to actual enforcement also does not, by itself, reflect an exercise of official authority, since
         his role is moreover comparable to that of a director of public auctions.
      
Lastly, the Commission and the United Kingdom add that the case which gave rise to the judgment in Case C‑405/Colegio de Oficiales de la Marina Mercante Española [2003] ECR I‑10391, to which several Member States refer in their written observations, concerned the fact that the masters
         and chief mates of merchant navy ships have a wide range of duties relating to ensuring safety and public order and powers
         in respect of notarising documents and registering births, marriages and deaths. Accordingly, the Court had no occasion to
         examine in detail the various activities carried out by notaries in the light of the first paragraph of Article EC. Consequently,
         that judgment is not authority for the conclusion that that provision is applicable to notaries.
      
The Hellenic Republic’s initial contention is that this claim is unfounded in that it relates to an alleged infringement of
         both Articles EC and EC, whereas the application of one of those two provisions excludes the application of the other.
      
As regards the concept of connection with the exercise of official authority within the meaning of the first paragraph of
         Article EC, the Hellenic Republic considers that that concept must be interpreted as meaning that activities involving
         the use of powers outside the scope of the ordinary law are covered by the exception laid down in that provision. The Court
         confirmed, in Colegio de la Marina Mercante Espanola, that a notary has a connection with the exercise of official authority.
      
As regards the direct and specific connection of a notary with the exercise of official authority, the Hellenic Republic considers
         that that connection must be assessed on the basis of a set of criteria which include, first, the fact that there are activities
         of a notary which are substantive and primary, and not ancillary or secondary; second, the fact that those activities are
         carried out regularly and habitually and not sporadically or exceptionally; third, the exercise of such activities must represent
         a significant part of all the activities at issue and, fourth, the exercise of such activities must affect the discretion
         of the judicial authority (see Reyners, paragraph 53, and Case C‑306/Commission v Greece [1991] ECR I‑5863, paragraph 7). Those criteria are met by the activities carried out by notaries in the Greek legal system.
         The role of a notary cannot therefore be assessed solely in the light of whether he has a decision-making power, as suggested
         by the Commission.
      
The fact that the involvement of a notary is obligatory, particularly in the creation of legal persons and alterations of
         their legal personality, the constitution and transfer of real rights in immoveable property and the control of enforcement,
         demonstrates that a notary is directly and specifically connected with the exercise of official authority.
      
In that regard, the Hellenic Republic first contends that a notary is involved in the instruments constituting a trust, a
         public limited liability company, a European company and a private limited liability company. Further, any alteration to the
         legal personality of those bodies requires the involvement of a notary if the alteration is not to be void. The assignment
         of legal personality to those bodies and the alterations made to the form of that personality are official authority powers.
         
      
Secondly, the involvement of a notary is also obligatory for the constitution and transfer of real rights in immoveable property.
         If there is no notarial act, there can be no acquisition of any right of property or of other real rights. The same is true
         of voluntary acknowledgments of paternity, inter vivos gifts of immoveable property and bequests.
      
Thirdly, the involvement of a notary is obligatory in enforcement procedures and, more particularly, in enforced auctions
         of moveable and immoveable property, ships and aircraft. A notary thus has authority, inter alia, to rank creditors and to
         distribute funds to them where property has been attached. Comparable tasks are entrusted to a notary when there is a special
         liquidation of a company in difficulty. In such cases, a notary has, according to the Hellenic Republic, powers of constraint.
         
      
Fourthly, the Hellenic Republic emphasises that notarial acts constitute enforceable orders and there is no requirement of
         prior court involvement. For that purpose, those instruments must have endorsed to them an enforcement clause. Similarly,
         a notary has the power to note protests in case of non‑acceptance or non-payment of bills or cheques. Those activities constitute,
         according to the Hellenic Republic, the preparatory stage of either enforcement or the raising of proceedings in a court of
         law.
      
 Findings of the Court
–       Preliminary observations
By its first head of claim, the Commission complains that the Hellenic Republic is preventing the establishment of nationals
         of other Member States in its territory for the purpose of practising as a notary, by reserving access to that profession
         to its own nationals, in breach of Article EC. 
      
That head of claim thus concerns solely the nationality requirement laid down by the Greek legislation at issue for access
         to that profession, in the light of Article EC.
      
Accordingly, it does not relate to the status and organisation of notaries in the Greek legal system, nor the conditions of
         access, other than that of nationality, to the profession of notary in that Member State. 
      
Moreover, as the Commission stated at the hearing, the first head of claim does not concern the application of the provisions
         of the EC Treaty on the freedom to provide services. Nor does it relate to the Treaty provisions on freedom of movement for
         workers.
      
–       Substance
Article EC is one of the fundamental provisions of European Union law (see, to that effect, inter alia, Reyners, paragraph 43). 
      
The concept of establishment within the meaning of that provision is a very broad one, allowing a national of the European
         Union to participate, on a stable and continuous basis, in the economic life of a Member State other than his State of origin
         and to profit therefrom, so contributing to economic and social interpenetration within the European Union in the sphere of
         activities of self-employed persons (see, inter alia, Case C‑161/Commission v Austria [2008] ECR I‑10671, paragraph 24).
      
The freedom of establishment conferred on nationals of one Member State in the territory of another Member State includes
         in particular access to and exercise of activities of self-employed persons under the same conditions as are laid down by
         the law of the Member State of establishment for its own nationals (see, inter alia, Case 270/Commission v France [1986] ECR 273, paragraph 13, and, to that effect, Commission v Austria, paragraph 27). In other words, Article EC prohibits the Member States from laying down in their laws conditions for the
         pursuit of activities by persons exercising their right of establishment there which differ from those laid down for its own
         nationals (Commission v Austria, paragraph 28). 
      
Article EC is thus intended to ensure that all nationals of all Member States who establish themselves in another Member
         State for the purpose of pursuing activities there as self-employed persons receive the same treatment as nationals of that
         State, and it prohibits, as a restriction on freedom of establishment, any discrimination on grounds of nationality resulting
         from national legislation (Commission v France, paragraph 14). 
      
In the present case, the national legislation at issue reserves access to the profession of notary to Greek nationals, thus
         enshrining a difference in treatment on grounds of nationality which is prohibited in principle by Article EC. 
      
The Hellenic Republic submits, however, that the activities of notaries are outside the scope of Article EC because they
         are connected with the exercise of official authority within the meaning of the first paragraph of Article EC. The Court
         must therefore begin by examining the concept of the exercise of official authority within the meaning of that provision,
         before going on to ascertain whether the activities of notaries in the Greek legal system fall within that concept.
      
As regards the concept of the ‘exercise of official authority’ within the meaning of the first paragraph of Article EC,
         the assessment of that concept must take account, in accordance with settled case-law, of the character as European Union
         law of the limits imposed by that provision on the permitted exceptions to the principle of freedom of establishment, so as
         to ensure that the effectiveness of the Treaty in the field of freedom of establishment is not frustrated by unilateral provisions
         of the Member States (see, to that effect, Reyners, paragraph 50; Case 147/Commission v Greece, paragraph 8; and Case C‑438/Commission v Portugal [2009] ECR I‑10219, paragraph 35) 
      
It is also settled case-law that the first paragraph of Article EC is an exception to the fundamental rule of freedom of
         establishment. As such, the exception must be interpreted in a manner which limits its scope to what is strictly necessary
         to safeguard the interests it allows the Member States to protect (Case 147/Commission v Greece, paragraph 7; Commission v Spain, paragraph 34; Case C‑451/Servizi Ausiliari Dottori Commercialisti [2006] ECR I‑2941, paragraph 45; Case C‑393/Commission v Austria [2007] ECR I‑10195, paragraph 35; Case C‑404/Commission v Germany [2007] ECR I‑10239, paragraphs and 46; and Commission v Portugal, paragraph 34).
      
In addition, the Court has repeatedly held that the exception in the first paragraph of Article EC must be restricted to
         activities which in themselves are directly and specifically connected with the exercise of official authority (Reyners, paragraph 45; Thijssen, paragraph 8; Commission v Spain, paragraph 35; Servizi Ausiliari Dottori Commercialisti, paragraph 46; Commission v Germany, paragraph 38; and Commission v Portugal, paragraph 36).
      
In this respect, the Court has had occasion to rule that the exception in the first paragraph of Article EC does not extend
         to certain activities that are auxiliary or preparatory to the exercise of official authority (see, to that effect, Thijssen, paragraph 22; Commission v Spain, paragraph 38; Servizi Ausiliari Dottori Commercialisti, paragraph 47; Commission v Germany, paragraph 38, and Commission v Portugal, paragraph 36), or to certain activities whose exercise, although involving contacts, even regular and organic, with the
         administrative or judicial authorities, or indeed cooperation, even compulsory, in their functioning, leaves their discretionary
         and decision-making powers intact (see, to that effect, Reyners, paragraphs and 53), or to certain activities which do not involve the exercise of decision-making powers (see, to that
         effect, Thijssen, paragraphs and 22; Case C‑393/Commission v Austria, paragraphs and 42; Commission v Germany, paragraphs and 44; and Commission v Portugal, paragraphs and 41), powers of constraint (see, to that effect, inter alia, Commission v Spain, paragraph 37) or powers of coercion (see, to that effect, Case C‑47/Anker and Others [2003] ECR I‑10447, paragraph 61, and Commission v Portugal, paragraph 44).
      
It must be ascertained in the light of the above considerations whether the activities entrusted to notaries in the Greek
         legal system involve a direct and specific connection with the exercise of official authority. 
      
Account must be taken of the nature of the activities carried out by the members of the profession at issue (see, to that
         effect, Thijssen, paragraph 9). 
      
The Hellenic Republic and the Commission are agreed that the main activity of notaries in the Greek legal system consists
         of drawing up authentic instruments in due and proper form. To achieve that, the notary must, inter alia, ascertain that all
         the conditions required by law for drawing up the instrument are satisfied. Moreover, an authentic instrument has probative
         force and is enforceable.
      
It must be observed, in this respect, that the documents that may be authenticated under Greek law are documents and agreements
         freely entered into by the parties. They decide themselves, within the limits laid down by law, the extent of their rights
         and obligations and choose freely the conditions which they wish to be subject to when they submit a document or agreement
         to the notary for authentication. The notary’s intervention thus presupposes the prior existence of consent or a voluntary
         agreement of the parties. 
      
Furthermore, the notary cannot unilaterally alter the agreement he is called on to authenticate without first obtaining the
         consent of the parties.
      
The activity of authentication entrusted to notaries does not therefore, as such, involve a direct and specific connection
         with the exercise of official authority within the meaning of the first paragraph of Article EC.
      
The fact that some documents and agreements are subject to mandatory authentication, in default of which they are void, cannot
         call that conclusion into question. It is normal for the validity of various documents to be subject, in national legal systems
         and in accordance with the prescribed rules, to formal requirements or even compulsory validation procedures. That fact cannot,
         therefore, be sufficient to support the position maintained by the Hellenic Republic.
      
The obligation of notaries to ascertain, before carrying out the authentication of a document or agreement, that all the conditions
         required by law for drawing up that document or agreement have been satisfied and, if that is not the case, to refuse to perform
         the authentication cannot call that conclusion into question either.
      
It is true that the notary’s ascertainment of those facts pursues an objective in the public interest, namely to guarantee
         the lawfulness and legal certainty of documents entered into by individuals. However, the mere pursuit of that objective cannot
         justify the powers necessary for that purpose being reserved exclusively to notaries who are nationals of the Member State
         concerned. 
      
Acting in pursuit of an objective in the public interest is not, in itself, sufficient for a particular activity to be regarded
         as directly and specifically connected with the exercise of official authority. It is not disputed that activities carried
         out in the context of various regulated professions frequently, in the national legal systems, involve an obligation on the
         persons concerned to pursue such an objective, without falling within the exercise of official authority.
      
However, the fact that notarial activities pursue objectives in the public interest, in particular to guarantee the lawfulness
         and legal certainty of documents entered into by individuals, constitutes an overriding reason in the public interest capable
         of justifying restrictions of Article EC deriving from the particular features of the activities of notaries, such as the
         framework within which notaries act as a result of the procedures by which they are appointed, their limited number and the
         restriction of their territorial jurisdiction, or the rules governing their remuneration, their independence, their disqualification
         from holding other office and their protection against removal, provided that those restrictions enable those objectives to
         be attained and are necessary for that purpose. 
      
It is also the case that a notary must refuse to authenticate a document or agreement which does not satisfy the conditions
         laid down by law, regardless of the wishes of the parties. However, following such a refusal, the parties remain free to remedy
         the unlawfulness, amend the conditions in the document or agreement, or abandon the document or agreement. 
      
As to the probative force and the enforceability of notarial acts, those indisputably endow such acts with significant legal
         effects. However, the fact that an activity includes the drawing up of acts with such effects does not suffice for that activity
         to be regarded as directly and specifically connected with the exercise of official authority within the meaning of the first
         paragraph of Article EC. 
      
Thus, in particular, as far as the probative force of notarial acts is concerned, it must be pointed out that that force derives
         from the rules on evidence laid down by law in the legal system in question. The probative force conferred by law on a particular
         document thus has no direct effect on whether the activity which includes the drawing up of the document is in itself directly
         and specifically connected with the exercise of official authority, as required by the case-law (see, to that effect, Thijssen, paragraph 8, and Commission v Spain, paragraph 35).
      
It cannot moreover be argued that a notarial act, because of its probative force, unconditionally binds a court exercising
         its power of assessment, since, as is not disputed, the judge decides in accordance with his own firm conviction in the light
         of all the facts and evidence collected in the judicial proceedings. 
      
As regards the enforceability of an authentic instrument, it must be observed, as the Hellenic Republic submits, that that
         enforceability enables the obligation embodied in the instrument to be enforced without the prior intervention of the court.
      
The enforceability of an authentic instrument does not, however, derive from powers possessed by the notary which are directly
         and specifically connected with the exercise of official authority. So, while the notary’s endorsement of the enforcement
         clause on the authentic instrument does give it enforceable status, that status is based on the intention of the parties to
         sign a document or agreement, after its conformity with the law has been checked by the notary, and confer enforceability
         on it.
      
It must also be determined whether the other activities entrusted to the notary in the Greek legal system and to which the
         Hellenic Republic refers entail a direct and specific connection with the exercise of official authority.
      
First, as regards tasks entrusted to a notary in connection with enforcement, it must be observed that the notary’s main responsibility
         is to carry out the auction and, in cases of compulsory sale, to draw up the bidding papers, which contain the assignment
         of prices to creditors, and to establish, when necessary, the list of creditors.
      
It is however evident, first, that a notary does not himself have the power to attach the object which is to be sold to enforce
         payment. Second, challenges to the validity of the enforcement order, the enforcement procedure or the debt must be brought
         before a court in accordance with Article et seq. of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
      
The tasks entrusted to notaries in relation to enforcement are therefore subject to the supervision of the court, to which
         the notary must refer any legal challenges and which, moreover, makes the ultimate decision. Consequently, those tasks cannot
         be regarded, in themselves, as directly and specifically connected with the exercise of official authority (see, to that effect,
         Thijssen, paragraph 21; Case 395/Commission v Austria, paragraphs and 42; Commission v Germany, paragraphs and 44, and Commission v Portugal, paragraphs and 41).
      
The same conclusion must be reached, moreover, in relation to the activities carried out by a notary in the special liquidation
         of companies in difficulty, since those activities are comparable, as the Hellenic Republic itself acknowledges, to those
         carried out by a notary in enforced auctions. 
      
It must further be added, as regards the notarial activities mentioned in paragraphs to of this judgment, that, as
         was stated in paragraph above, professional services involving assistance, even when obligatory, to the operation of courts
         or tribunals do not thereby constitute a connection with the exercise of official authority (Reyners, paragraph 51).
      
Second, as regards the notary’s involvement in cases of non‑acceptance or non‑payment of bills or cheques, it must be observed,
         as expressly acknowledged by the Hellenic Republic, that that intervention, consisting of noting a protest, constitutes the
         preparatory stage of either an enforcement or proceedings before the courts. However, preparatory activities for the exercise
         of official authority are, in accordance with settled case-law, excluded from the derogation laid down in the first paragraph
         of Article EC (see, to that effect, Thijssen, paragraph 22; Commission v Spain, paragraph 38; Servizi Ausiliari Dottori Commercialisti, paragraph 47; Commission v Germany, paragraph 38, and Commission v Portugal, paragraph 36).
      
Third, as regards transactions and acts, such as the constitution and transfer of real rights in immoveable property, gifts
         of immoveable property, voluntary acknowledgement of paternity and bequests, which must be executed using a notarial act,
         in default of which they are void, reference is made to the considerations set out in paragraphs to of this judgment.
         
      
Fourth, the same considerations apply in relation to acts constituting companies and trusts, where those must be drawn up
         using an authentic instrument, in default of which they are void. It must moreover be added in that regard that the constitution
         of those bodies is subject to the approval of the competent authority and those bodies acquire their status as legal persons
         by means of entering in the appropriate register, and publishing in the official journal, their articles of association, their
         founding documents and the decision approving the articles of association. 
      
As regards the particular status of notaries in the Greek legal system, it need only be recalled that, as follows from paragraphs
         and of this judgment, it is by reference to the nature of the relevant activities themselves, not by reference to that
         status as such, that it must be ascertained whether those activities fall within the exception in the first paragraph of Article
         EC. 
      
Two points must be made here, however. In the first place, it is not disputed that, apart from the cases in which a notary
         is appointed by law, every party can choose a notary freely. While notaries’ fees are indeed fixed by law, the quality of
         the services they provide may vary from one notary to another, depending in particular on their professional capabilities.
         It follows that, within the geographical boundaries of their office, notaries practise their profession, as the Advocate General
         observes in point of his Opinion, in conditions of competition, which is not characteristic of the exercise of official
         authority. 
      
It must in the second place be observed, as argued by the Commission without contradiction on that point by the Hellenic Republic,
         that notaries are directly and personally liable to their clients for harm or loss resulting from any fault committed in the
         exercise of their activities. 
      
As regards the Hellenic Republic’s argument based on Colegio de Oficiales de la Marina Mercante Española, it must be stated that the case giving rise to that judgment related to the interpretation of Article 39(4) EC and not the
         interpretation of the first paragraph of Article EC. Further, it is evident from paragraph of that judgment that when
         the Court held that the duties entrusted to masters and chief mates of ships constituted participation in the exercise of
         rights under powers conferred by public law, the Court had in mind all the duties performed by those persons. The Court therefore
         did not examine the single notarial power entrusted to masters and chief mates of ships, namely responsibility for the receipt
         of wills, their safekeeping and their dispatch to the authorities, separately from their other powers, such as, inter alia,
         their powers of coercion or punishment.
      
Further, the objection pleaded by the Hellenic Republic contending that this head of claim is vitiated by a contradiction
         because the Commission complains that it simultaneously infringed both Article EC and the first paragraph of Article EC must be rejected. In that regard, it is evident from the application, looked at overall and in context, that the Commission’s
         complaint is that the defendant Member State infringed Article EC, and that that infringement cannot be justified in the
         light of the first paragraph of Article EC. Those two provisions of the Treaty must be examined together, as is obvious
         from all the foregoing considerations, since Article EC constitutes the rule to which the first paragraph of Article EC provides an exception. 
      
In those circumstances, it must be concluded that the activities of a notary, as they are defined currently in the Greek legal
         system, are not connected with the exercise of official authority within the meaning of the first paragraph of Article EC. 
      
It must consequently be declared that the nationality requirement imposed by the Greek legislation as a requirement for access
         to the profession of notary constitutes discrimination on grounds of nationality prohibited by Article EC. 
      
In the light of all the foregoing considerations, it must be held that the first head of claim is well founded. 
      
 The second head of complaint
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission complains that the Hellenic Republic did not transpose Directive 89/in respect of the profession of notary.
         According to the Commission, that profession cannot be excluded from the scope of that directive, since a notary has no direct
         and specific connection with the exercise of official authority. 
      
The Commission states that Directive 89/enables Member States to prescribe either the taking of an aptitude test or completion
         of an adaptation period, either being capable of ensuring that notaries have the high level of qualifications required. Moreover,
         the application of that directive would not have the effect of preventing the recruitment of notaries by competition but only
         of giving nationals of other Member States access to that competition. Such an application would also have no impact on the
         procedure for the appointment of notaries. 
      
Further, the fact that the question of whether that directive was applicable to the profession of notary was never discussed
         when that directive was being worked on and that no sectoral directive in relation to that profession has been adopted is
         not a legally valid argument. 
      
Likewise, the fact that the European Union legislature has excluded certain activities from the scope of a Union measure cannot
         in itself imply that Directive 89/is not applicable to the activities at issue. Both Article 1(5)(d) of Directive 2000/31/EC
         of the European Parliament and of the Council of June on certain legal aspects of information society services, in
         particular electronic commerce, in the Internal Market (‘Directive on electronic commerce’) (OJ L 178, p. 1) and recital
         of the preamble to Directive 2005/exclude from the scope of those directives notarial activities only to the extent
         that they involve a direct and specific connection with the exercise of official authority. That is therefore no more than
         a reservation which has no effect on the interpretation of the first paragraph of Article EC. As regards Article 2(2)(l)
         of Directive 2006/123/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of December on services in the internal market
         (OJ L 376, p. 36), which excludes notarial activities from the scope of that directive, the Commission states that the
         fact that the European Union legislature chose to exclude a specific activity from the scope of that directive does not mean
         that the first paragraph of Article EC applies to that activity. 
      
Council Directive 77/249/EEC of March to facilitate the effective exercise by lawyers of freedom to provide services
         (OJ L 78, p. 17) and Directive 98/5/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of February to facilitate
         practice of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the qualification was
         obtained (OJ L 77, p. 36) are not relevant either because they exclude notarial activities from their scope in order
         to enable certain Member States with a distinct legal tradition, such as the United Kingdom, not to allow lawyers from other
         Member States to pursue activities which are typically notarial, although those activities are pursued, in the United Kingdom,
         by a specific category of lawyers, namely solicitors. 
      
As regards the resolution of the European Parliament of March on the legal professions and the general interest in
         the functioning of legal systems (OJ C 292E, p. 105, ‘the resolution’), that is a purely political measure, the
         content of which is ambiguous, since on the one hand, in point of that resolution, the European Parliament asserted that
         Article EC must be applied to the profession of civil-law notary, whereas, on the other hand, in point thereof, it confirmed
         the position set out in its resolution of January on the state and organisation of the profession of notary in the
         Member States of the Community (OJ C 44, p. 36, ‘the resolution’), where it expressed the wish that the nationality
         requirement for access to the profession of notary laid down in the legislation of several Member States be removed.
      
The Hellenic Republic’s preliminary observation is that this action is concerned solely with Directive 89/and not with
         Directive 2005/36, although the latter repealed the former prior to the bringing of this action. 
      
The Hellenic Republic considers, first, that Directive 89/is not applicable to the profession of notary, as is apparent
         from the 12th recital of its preamble. Further, the possible application of that directive to that profession was never discussed
         when that directive was being worked on. Further, there is no sectoral directive applicable to that profession, although other
         professions are subject to such directives. That interpretation is supported by various measures of secondary legislation,
         such as those referred to in paragraphs and of this judgment, which exclude the profession of notary from their scope.
         In addition, the and resolutions, mentioned in paragraph of this judgment, are evidence that the European Union
         legislature considers that that profession falls under the first paragraph of Article EC.
      
Secondly, the Hellenic Republic contends that the Commission did not set out, clearly and exhaustively, all the facts and
         points of law on which the alleged infringement of Directive 89/is based.
      
 Findings of the Court
–       Admissibility
It is settled case-law that, in the context of proceedings under Article EC, the existence of a failure to fulfil obligations
         must be assessed in the light of the European Union legislation in force at the close of the period prescribed by the Commission
         for the Member State concerned to comply with its reasoned opinion (see, inter alia, Case C‑365/Commission v Italy [1999] ECR I‑7773, paragraph 32; Case C‑275/Commission v Belgium [2006] ECR I‑9883, paragraph 34; and Case C‑270/Commission v Germany [2009] ECR I‑1983, paragraph 49).
      
In the present case, that period expired on December 2006. On that date Directive 89/was still in force, since Directive
         2005/did not repeal Directive 89/until October 2007. Consequently, an action based on a failure to transpose Directive
         89/is not devoid of purpose (see, by analogy, the judgment of June in Case C‑327/Commission v France, paragraph 23).
      
The objection pleaded by the Hellenic Republic must therefore be rejected.
      
–       Substance
The Commission complains that the Hellenic Republic has not transposed Directives 89/in respect of the profession of notary.
         The Court must therefore examine whether that directive applies to that profession.
      
In that regard, the legislative context of that directive must be taken into account.
      
Thus, it must be noted that the legislature expressly stated in the 12th recital in the preamble to Directive 89/that the
         general system for the recognition of higher‑education diplomas introduced by that directive is ‘entirely without prejudice
         to the application of … [Article EC]’. That reservation reflects the legislature’s intention to leave activities covered
         by the first paragraph of Article EC outside the scope of that directive.
      
At the time of adoption of that directive, the Court had not yet had occasion to rule on whether the activities of notaries
         were covered by the first paragraph of Article EC. 
      
Moreover, in the years following the adoption of Directive 89/48, the Parliament, in its and resolutions mentioned
         in paragraph of this judgment, asserted on the one hand that the first paragraph of Article EC should be fully applied
         to the profession of notary as such, while expressing the wish on the other hand that the nationality requirement for access
         to that profession should be removed.
      
Moreover, when adopting Directive 2005/36, which replaced Directive 89/48, the European Union legislature was careful to state,
         in recital in the preamble to the directive, that it was without prejudice to the application of Article EC ‘concerning
         notably notaries’. By expressing that reservation, the European Union legislature did not adopt a position on the applicability
         of the first paragraph of Article EC, and hence of Directive 2005/36, to the activities of notaries.
      
That is shown in particular by the legislative history of Directive 2005/36. In its legislative resolution on the proposal
         for a European Parliament and Council directive on the recognition of professional qualifications (OJ C 97E, p. 230),
         adopted on first reading on February 2004, the Parliament had proposed that it should be expressly stated in the text of
         Directive 2005/that it did not apply to notaries. Although that proposal was not taken up in the amended proposal for a
         Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the recognition of professional qualifications (COM(2004) final)
         or in Common Position (EC) No 10/of December adopted by the Council, acting in accordance with the procedure
         referred to in Article of the Treaty establishing the European Community, with a view to adopting a directive of the European
         Parliament and of the Council on the recognition of professional qualifications (OJ C  58E, p. 1), that was not because
         the proposed directive was to apply to the profession of notary but because, in particular, a ‘derogation from the principle
         of freedom of establishment and the freedom to provide services for activities that involve direct and specific participation
         in the exercise of official authority [was] provided for by the first paragraph of Article EC. 
      
In view of the particular circumstances of the legislative procedure and the situation of uncertainty which resulted, as may
         be seen from the legislative context described above, it does not appear possible to conclude that, at the end of the period
         prescribed in the reasoned opinion, there existed a sufficiently clear obligation for the Member States to transpose Directive
         89/with respect to the profession of notary.
      
The second head of claim must therefore be rejected.
      
In the light of all the foregoing considerations, it must be held that, by imposing a nationality requirement for access to
         the profession of notary, the Hellenic Republic failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC and the action must be
         dismissed as to the remainder.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(3) of the Rules of Procedure, where each party succeeds on some and fails on other heads, the Court may order
         that the costs be shared or that the parties bear their own costs. Since the Commission’s application has been upheld only
         in part, each party must be ordered to bear its own costs.
      
Under the first subparagraph of Article 69(4) of the Rules of Procedure, Member States which intervene in the proceedings
         are to bear their own costs. The Czech Republic, the French Republic, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Slovenia,
         the Slovak Republic and the United Kingdom must therefore bear their own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by imposing a nationality requirement for access to the profession of notary, the Hellenic Republic failed
            to fulfil its obligations under Article EC;
2.      Dismisses the action as to the remainder;
3.      Orders the European Commission, the Hellenic Republic, the Czech Republic, the French Republic, the Republic of Lithuania,
            the Republic of Slovenia, the Slovak Republic and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to bear their own
            costs. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Greek.
      
Top  
 