
Avis juridique important
|
61998JJudgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber) of June 1999.  -  Commission of the European Communities v Kingdom of Belgium.  -  Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations - Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) - Freedom of establishment - Requirement for there to be Belgian members in order for an association to be granted legal personality.  -  Case C-172/98.  
European Court reports Page I-Summary
Parties
Grounds
Decision on costs
Operative part
Keywords
Community law - Principles - Equal treatment - Discrimination on grounds of nationality - Rules making the grant of legal personality to an association conditional upon the nationality of the members - Not permissible - Failure to fulfil obligations (EC Treaty, Art. (now, after amendment, Art. EC)) 
Summary
 $$A Member State which, in order for the legal personality of an association to be recognised, requires that one of the members of the administration of the association possess the nationality of that State - or that a minimum, and majority, presence of members hold that nationality - fails to fulfil its obligations under Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC). Such rules regulating the right to form associations with legal personality, which apply to nationals of the other Member States, affect one of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty and accordingly infringe Article thereof by imposing a discriminatory nationality requirement. 
Parties
In Case C-172/98, Commission of the European Communities, represented by Maria Patakia, of its Legal Service, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of Carlos Gómez de la Cruz, of its Legal Service, Wagner Centre, Kirchberg, applicant, v Kingdom of Belgium, represented by Jan Devadder, General Adviser in the Directorate-General for Legal Affairs of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, External Trade and Cooperation with Developing Countries, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Belgian Embassy, Rue des Girondins, defendant, APPLICATION for a declaration that by requiring the presence of a Belgian member in the administration of an association or a minimum, and majority, presence of members of Belgian nationality in order for the legal personality of an association to be recognised, the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC), THE COURT (Sixth Chamber), composed of: P.J.G. Kapteyn, President of the Chamber, J.L. Murray and H. Ragnemalm (Rapporteur), Judges, Advocate General: G. Cosmas, Registrar: R. Grass, having regard to the Report of the Judge-Rapporteur, after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 1999, gives the following Judgment 
Grounds
By application lodged at the Court Registry on May 1998, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action under Article EC (ex Article 169) for a declaration that by requiring the presence of a Belgian member in the administration of an association or a minimum, and majority, presence of members of Belgian nationality in order for the legal personality of an association to be recognised, the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC). Article of the Belgian Law of October conferring legal personality on international associations which pursue philanthropic, religious, scientific, artistic or pedagogical objectives (`the Law of 1919') provides that `legal personality may be granted by royal decree, under the conditions and within the limits of this Law, to associations open to Belgians and foreign nationals which have as executive organ an institution or committee whose administration includes at least one Belgian member and pursue a philanthropic, religious, scientific, artistic or pedagogical non-profit-making objective'. Article of the Law of June conferring legal personality on non-profit-making associations and on institutions promoting the public interest (`the Law of 1921') provides that `... the association may not rely on its legal personality against third parties ... unless three fifths of the members are of Belgian nationality'. By letter of March the Commission pointed out to the Kingdom of Belgium that the above two Laws appeared to be contrary to Article of the Treaty and asked it to submit its observations within two months. On August the Belgian Government informed the Commission that it intended to amend the Laws at issue in order to comply with the observations set out in the letter of March 1996.  On February it forwarded to the Commission two preliminary draft Laws for the amendment of the abovementioned Laws. On June the Commission, having established that the provisions in question were still in force, sent a reasoned opinion to the Kingdom of Belgium, calling on it to adopt, within a period of two months from notification thereof, the measures necessary in order to comply with Article of the Treaty. The Belgian Government then sent to the Commission, by letter of August 1997, the text of a draft Law amending the Law of and, by letter of February 1998, of a preliminary draft Law relating to the Law of 1919. However, since the Commission received no information regarding the actual adoption of measures amending the provisions in question, it brought this action. In its application, the Commission states that the Law of and the Law of contain provisions which discriminate on grounds of nationality; they fall within the scope of the EC Treaty inasmuch as they affect freedom of establishment and are accordingly contrary to Article thereof. The Belgian Government indicates in its defence that a preliminary draft law has been drawn up on which the Conseil d'État (Council of State) must give an opinion before its submission for parliamentary approval. It should be noted first of all that, under the first paragraph of Article of the Treaty, any discrimination on grounds of nationality within the scope of application of the Treaty is prohibited. The Belgian Laws at issue regulate the right to form, in Belgium, associations with legal personality and nationals of the other Member States are among the persons to whom they apply.  Those Laws thus affect one of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty and accordingly fall within its field of application. Article of the Law of and Article of the Law of require there to be a minimum number of members of Belgian nationality in order for such associations to be set up, thereby imposing a condition which discriminates on grounds of nationality, contrary to Article of the Treaty. It must accordingly be held that by requiring the presence of a Belgian member in the administration of an association or a minimum, and majority, presence of members of Belgian nationality in order for the legal personality of an association to be recognised, the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of the Treaty. 
Decision on costs
Costs Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party's pleadings.  Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Kingdom of Belgium has been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs. 
Operative part
On those grounds, THE COURT (Sixth Chamber) hereby: 1. Declares that, by requiring the presence of a Belgian member in the administration of an association or a minimum, and majority, presence of members of Belgian nationality in order for the legal personality of an association to be recognised, the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC); 2. Orders the Kingdom of Belgium to pay the costs. 
Top  
 