
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Joined Cases C-480/to C-482/00, C-484/00, C-489/to C-491/and C‑497/to C-499/Azienda Agricola Ettore Ribaldi and Others
v
Azienda di Stato per gli interventi nel mercato agricolo (AIMA) and Others
(References for a preliminary ruling from the Tribunale amministrativo regionale del Lazio)
(Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Milk and milk products – Additional levy on milk – Regulations (EEC) Nos 3950/and 536/– Reference quantities – Ex post correction – Notification of producers)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Member States – Obligations – Implementation of Community law – Application of the procedural and substantive rules of national
            law – Conditions
(EC Treaty, Art. (now Art. EC))
2.        Agriculture – Common agricultural policy – Objectives – Rational development of milk production and ensuring of a fair income
            for producers – Introduction of an additional levy on milk – Whether lawful
(Council Regulation No 3950/92, Art. 10; Commission Regulation No 536/93, Arts and 4)
3.        Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Milk and milk products – Additional levy on milk – Regulations Nos 3950/and 536/– Reference quantities – Ex post correction and recalculation of levies after the final date for payment of those
            levies – Whether permissible – Breach of the principle of the protection of legitimate expectations – None
(Council Regulation No 3950/92, Arts and 4; Commission Regulation No 536/93, Arts and 4)
4.        Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Milk and milk products – Additional levy on milk – Regulations Nos 3950/and 536/– Reference quantities – Ex post correction – Obligation to notify producers – The national court to determine
            whether that obligation has been fulfilled, having regard to the principle of legal certainty
(Council Regulation No 3950/92; Commission Regulation No 536/93)
1.        According to the general principles on which the Community is based and which govern relations between the Community and the
         Member States, it is for the latter, under Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC), to ensure that Community rules
         are implemented within their territories. In so far as Community law, including its general principles, does not include common
         rules to that effect then, when the national authorities implement Community rules, they are to act in accordance with the
         procedural and substantive rules of their own national law.
      
Nevertheless, when adopting measures to implement Community legislation, national authorities must exercise their discretion
         in compliance with the general rules of Community law, which include the principles of proportionality, legal certainty and
         the protection of legitimate expectations.
      
(see paras 42-43)
2.        The purpose of the system of the additional levy on milk is to re-establish, by limiting milk production, the balance between
         supply and demand in the milk market, which is characterised by structural surpluses. This measure, therefore, is within the
         ambit of the objectives of rational development of milk production and, by contributing to a stabilisation of the income of
         the agricultural community affected, that of ensuring a fair standard of living for the agricultural community.
      
It follows that the additional levy is not to be regarded as a penalty analogous to those provided for under Articles and
         of Regulation No 536/laying down detailed rules on the application of the additional levy on milk and milk products.
         The additional levy on milk amounts to a restriction arising from market policy rules or structural policy.
      
Moreover, as Article of Regulation No 3950/establishing an additional levy in the milk and milk products sector clearly
         shows, the additional levy is to be considered to be intervention to stabilise agricultural markets and is to be used to finance
         expenditure in the milk sector. It follows that, apart from its obvious aim of requiring milk producers to observe the reference
         quantities allocated to them, the additional levy has an economic objective too, in that it is intended to bring to the Community
         the funds necessary for disposal of milk produced by producers in excess of their quotas.
      
(see paras 57-59)
3.        On a proper construction of Articles and of Regulation No 3950/establishing an additional levy in the milk and milk
         products sector and of Articles and of Regulation No 536/laying down detailed rules on the application of the additional
         levy on milk and milk products, it is not contrary to those provisions for a Member State, after checks have been carried
         out, to correct the individual reference quantities allocated to each producer and, after the unused reference quantities
         have been reallocated, to recalculate in consequence the additional levies payable, after the final date for payment of those
         levies for the milk marketing year concerned.
      
First, in so far as the individual reference quantity to which a producer can lay claim actually corresponds to the quantity
         of milk marketed by that producer during the reference year, that producer, who is as a rule aware of how much milk he has
         produced, can have no legitimate expectation that an inaccurate reference quantity will be continued.
      
Second, no legitimate expectation can be entertained as to the continuation of a situation which is plainly unlawful in the
         light of Community law, namely, the failure to apply the arrangements for the additional levy on milk. Milk producers in the
         Member States cannot legitimately expect, years after the system was introduced, to be able to go on producing milk without
         limit.
      
(see paras 66-68, operative part 1)
4.        Regulation No 3950/establishing an additional levy in the milk and milk products sector and Regulation No 536/laying
         down detailed rules on the application of the additional levy on milk and milk products are to be interpreted as requiring
         that the original allocation of individual reference quantities and any later alteration to them should be notified to the
         producers concerned by the competent national authorities.
      
The principle of legal certainty demands that that communication should be of such a nature as to give the natural or legal
         persons concerned all information relating to the original allocation of their individual reference quantity or later alteration
         to it. It is for the national court to determine, on the basis of the facts before it, whether that is so in the cases in
         the main proceedings.
      
(see para. 87, operative part 2)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)March 2004(1)
(Agriculture  –  Common organisation of the markets  –  Milk and milk products  –  Additional levy on milk  –  Regulations (EEC) Nos 3950/and 536/–  Reference quantities  –  Ex post correction  –  Notification of producers)
 In Joined Cases C-480/to 482/00, C-484/00, C-489/to C-491/and C-497/to C-499/00, 
             REFERENCES to the Court under Article EC by the Tribunale amministrativo regionale del Lazio (Italy) for a preliminary
            ruling in the proceedings pending before that court between 
            
Azienda Agricola Ettore Ribaldi and Azienda di Stato per gli interventi nel mercato agricolo (AIMA),Ministero del Tesoro, del Bilancio e della Programmazione Economica,
            
 intervener:Caseificio Nazionale Novarese Soc. coop. arl (C-480/00),
            
 on the interpretation and validity of Articles 1, and of Council Regulation (EEC) No 3950/of December establishing
            an additional levy in the milk and milk products sector (OJ L 405, p. 1), and of Articles and of Commission Regulation
            (EEC) No 536/of March laying down detailed rules on the application of the additional levy on milk and milk products
            (OJ L 57, p. 12),
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
 composed of: V. Skouris (Rapporteur), acting for the President of the Sixth Chamber, C. Gulmann, J.-P. Puissochet, F. Macken
            and N. Colneric, Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: P. Léger, Registrar: L. Hewlett and H.A. Rühl, Principal Administrators, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
–
 Azienda Agricola Ettore Ribaldi, by E. Ermondi, avvocatessa, 
               
–
 D. Buttiglione and Others, by G.R. Notarnicola and M. de Stasio, avvocati, 
               
–
 Azienda Agricola Ettore Raffa and Others, by C. Verticale, M. Condinanzi and B. Nascimbene, avvocati, 
               
–
 C. Balestreri, by C. Verticale, M. Condinanzi and B. Nascimbene, avvocati, 
               
–
 Azienda Agricola ‘Corte delle Piacentine’ and Others, by R. Corradi, avvocato, 
               
–
 Cesare and Michele Filippi ss, by M. Aldegheri, avvocatessa, 
               
–
 Cooperativa Produttori Latte della Lessinia arl, by M. Aldegheri, avvocatessa, 
               
–
 Azienda Agricola Simone e Stefano Gonal di Gonzato, by F. Gabrieli and F. Volpe, avvocati, 
               
–
 Azienda Agricola Gianluigi Cerati e Maria Ceriali ss, by G. Pizzoccaro and S. Bernocchi, avvocati, 
               
–
 N. Musini, acting for Azienda Agricola Tenuta di Fassia, by M. Nicolini, B. Nascimbene and M. Condinanzi, avvocati, 
               
–
 the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by O. Fiumara and G. Aiello, avvocati dello Stato, 
               
–
 the Council of the European Union, by J. Carbery and F. Ruggeri Laderchi, acting as Agents, 
               
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by M. Niejahr and L. Visaggio, acting as Agents, 
               
after hearing the oral observations of Azienda Agricola Ettore Ribaldi, represented by E. Ermondi, of D. Buttiglione and Others,
               represented by G.R. Notarnicola and M. de Stasio, of Azienda Agricola Ettore Raffa and Others, C.Balestreri and N.Musini,
               acting for Azienda Agricola Tenuta di Fassia, represented by M. Condinanzi and B. Nascimbene, of Azienda Agricola ‘Corte della
               Piacentine’ and Others, represented by R. Corradi and M. Tomaselli, avvocato, of Cesare e Michele Filippi ss and Cooperativa
               Produttori Latte della Lessinia arl, represented by M. Aldegheri, of Azienda Agricola Simone e Stefano Gonal di Gonzato, represented
               by F. Volpe, F. Gabrieli and F. Piazza, avvocato, of Azienda Agricola Gianluigi Cerati e Maria Ceriali ss, represented by
               S. Bernocchi, of the Italian Government, represented by O. Fiumara, of the Greek Government, represented by G. Kanellopoulos,
               acting as Agent, of the Council, represented by F. Ruggeri Laderchi, and of the Commission, represented by C. Cattabriga,
               acting as Agent, at the hearing on December 2002,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By judgments of July 2000, received at the Court Registry on December 2000, the Tribunale amministrativo regionale del
         Lazio (the Regional Administrative Court for Lazio) referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling seven questions on the
         interpretation and validity of Articles 1, and of Council Regulation (EEC) No 3950/92, of December 1992, establishing
         an additional levy in the milk and milk products sector (OJ L 405, p. 1), and of Articles and of Commission Regulation
         (EEC) No 536/of March laying down detailed rules on the application of the additional levy on milk and milk products
         (OJ L 57, p. 12).
         
            
 Those questions were raised in proceedings between various Italian milk producers and the Azienda di Stato per gli interventi
         nel mercato agricolo (State Agricultural Market Intervention Board, ‘AIMA’) and, in some of the cases, the Ministero del Tesoro,
         del Bilancio e della Programmazione Economica (the Ministry of the Treasury, the Budget and Economic Planning) or the Ministero
         delle Politiche Agricole e Forestali (Ministry of Agricultural and Forestry Policy) concerning the lawfulness of the decisions
         taken in by which the AIMA. corrected the reference quantities allocated for the milk marketing years 1995/and 1996/97,
         to reallocate the unused reference quantities for those years and, in consequence, to recalculate the levies payable by producers
         for those years.
         
The relevant provisions
The provisions of Community law
            
 In 1984, on account of a persistent imbalance between supply and demand in the milk sector, a system of additional levies
         was introduced by Regulation (EEC) No 804/of the Council of June on the common organisation of the market in milk
         and milk products (OJ, English Special Edition (I), p. 176), as amended by Council Regulation (EEC) No 856/of March
         (OJ L 90, p. 10, ‘Regulation No 804/68’), and by Council Regulation (EEC) No 857/of March adopting general
         rules for the application of the levy referred to in Article 5c of Regulation No 804/(OJ L 90, p. 13).  According
         to Article 5c, an additional levy is payable on quantities of milk which exceed a reference quantity to be determined.
         
            
 That additional levy scheme, which was originally intended to last until April 1993, was extended to April by Regulation
         No 3950/92. 
         
            
 Article of that regulation provides: 
         ‘For seven new consecutive periods of twelve months commencing on April 1993, an additional levy shall be payable by producers
         of cows’ milk on quantities of milk or milk equivalent delivered to a purchaser or sold directly for consumption during the
         12-month period in question in excess of a quantity to be determined.
          The levy shall be 115% of the target price for milk.’
         
            
 In accordance with Article of that regulation:
         ‘(1)   The levy shall be payable on all quantities of milk or milk equivalent marketed during the 12-month period in question in
         excess of the relevant quantity referred to in Article 3.  It shall be shared between the producers who contributed to the
         overrun.
          In accordance with a decision of the Member State, the contribution of producers towards the levy payable shall be established,
         after the unused reference quantities have been reallocated or not, either at the level of the purchaser, in the light of
         the overrun remaining after unused reference quantities have been allocated in proportion to the reference quantities of each
         producer, or at national level, in the light of the overrun in the reference quantity of each individual producer.
         …
         (4)     Where the levy is payable and the amount collected is greater than that levy, the Member State may use the excess to finance
         the measures referred to in the first indent of Article and/or redistribute it to producers who fall within priority categories
         established by the Member State on the basis of objective criteria to be determined or who are affected by an exceptional
         situation resulting from a national provision unconnected with this scheme.’
         
            
 Article of Regulation No 3950/92, which lays down the criteria for the calculating of the individual quota available to
         each producer, provides: 
         ‘(1)   The individual reference quantity available on the holding shall be equal to the quantity available on March and shall
         be adjusted, where appropriate, for each of the periods concerned, so that the sum of the individual reference quantities
         of the same type does not exceed the corresponding global quantities referred to in Article 3, taking account of any reductions
         made for allocation to the national reserve provided for in Article 5.
         (2)     Individual reference quantities shall be increased or established at the duly justified request of producers to take account
         of changes affecting their deliveries and/or direct sales.  The increase or establishment of such a reference quantity shall
         be subject to a corresponding reduction or cancellation of the other reference quantity the producer owns. Such adjustments
         may not lead to an increase in the sum of the deliveries and direct sales referred to in Article for the Member State concerned.
          Where the individual reference quantities undergo a definitive change, the quantities referred to in Article shall be adjusted
         in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 11.
         …’
         
            
 Finally, in accordance with Article of that regulation:
         ‘The levy shall be considered as intervention to stabilise agricultural markets and shall be used to finance expenditure in
         the milk sector.’
         
            
 The fifth recital in the preamble to Regulation No 536/states that ‘experience gained has shown that major delays in both
         the transmission of figures on collections or direct sales and payment of the levy, have prevented the arrangements from being
         fully effective’ and that, ‘therefore, lessons should be learned from the past and the necessary conclusions drawn by laying
         down strict requirements as regards notification and payment deadlines and providing for penalties where deadlines are not
         met’.
         
            
 Article of that regulation provides:
         ‘(1)   At the end of each of the periods referred to in Article of Regulation … No 3950/92, the purchaser shall establish a statement
         for each producer showing, opposite the producer’s reference quantity and the representative fat content of his production,
         the quantity and fat content of the milk and/or milk equivalent which he has delivered during the period.
         …
         (2)     Before May each year, the purchasers shall forward to the competent authority of the Member State a summary of the statements
         drawn up for each producer or, where appropriate, by decision of the Member State, the total quantity, the quantity corrected
         in accordance with Article 2(2) and average fat content of the milk and/or milk equivalent delivered to it by producers and
         the sum of the individual reference quantities and the average representative fat content of such producers’ production.
          Where that time-limit is not observed, the purchaser shall be liable to a penalty equal to the amount of the levy due for
         a 0.1% overrun on the quantities of milk and milk equivalent delivered to them by producers. Such penalty may not exceed ECU
         000.
         (3)     Member States may provide that the competent authority shall notify the purchaser of the levies payable by him after reallocating,
         or not, by decision of the Member State, all or part of the unused reference quantities either directly to the producers concerned
         or to purchasers with a view to their subsequent allocation among the producers concerned.
         (4)     Before September each year, the purchaser liable for levies shall pay the competent body the amount due in accordance with
         rules laid down by the Member State.
          Where the time-limit for payment is not met, the sums due shall bear interest at a rate per annum fixed by the Member State
         and which shall not be lower than the rate of interest which the latter applies for the recovery of wrongly paid amounts.’
         
            
 Article of that regulation provides:
         ‘(1)   In the case of direct sales, at the end of each of the periods referred to in Article of Regulation … No 3950/92, the producer
         shall make a declaration summarising by product the quantities of milk and/or other milk products sold directly for consumption
         and/or to wholesalers, cheese maturers and the retail trade. 
         …
         (2)     Before May each year, the producer shall forward declarations to the competent authority of the Member State.
          Where that time-limit is not observed, the producer shall be liable to the levy on all the quantities of milk and milk equivalent
         sold directly in excess of his reference quantity or, where there is no overrun, to a penalty equal to the amount of levy
         due for a 0.% overrun of his reference quantity. Such penalty may not exceed ECU 000.
          Where a declaration is not submitted before July, the second paragraph of Article of Regulation … No 3950/shall apply
         days after the Member State has served notice.
         (3)     The Member State may provide that the competent authority shall notify the producer of the levies payable by him after reallocating,
         or not, by decision of the Member State, all or part of the unused reference quantities to the producers concerned.
         (4)     Before September each year, the producer shall pay the amount due to the competent body in accordance with rules laid down
         by the Member State.
          Where the time-limit for payment is not met, the sums due shall bear interest at a rate per annum fixed by the Member State
         …’
         
            
 Article of Regulation No 536/provides:
         ‘(1)   Where appropriate, Member States shall determine the priority categories of producers as referred to in Article 2(4) of Regulation
         … No 3950/on the basis of one or more of the following objective criteria, in order of priority: 
         …
         
 (b)
the geographical location of the holding, and primarily mountain areas as defined in Article 3(3) of Council Directive 75/268/EEC
               …;
            
…’
         
            
 Under Article of that regulation:
         ‘(1)   Member States shall take all the verification measures necessary to ensure payment of the levy on quantities of milk and milk
         equivalent marketed in excess of any of the quantities referred to in Article of Regulation … No 3950/92.
         …
         (3)     Member States shall physically verify the accuracy of the accounting with regard to the quantities of milk and milk equivalent
         marketed and, to that end, shall check milk transport during collection at farms and shall, in particular, check:
         
(a) 
at the premises of the purchasers, the statements referred to in Article 3(1), the credibility of stock accounts and supplies
               as referred to in paragraph 1(c) and (d) with regard to the commercial documents and other documents proving now the collected
               milk and milk equivalent have been used;
            
(b) 
at the premises of the producers with a reference quantity for direct sales, the credibility of the declaration referred to
               in Article 4(1) and the stock accounts referred to in paragraph 1(f).
            
…’
The provisions of national law
            
 The Italian additional milk levy arrangements were originally implemented by Law No of November (GURI No of
         December 1992, p. 3, ‘Law No 468/92’).  That Law laid down, inter alia, criteria for the allocation of individual reference
         quantities and detailed rules for national adjustment (reallocation of unused reference quantities).  That Law was subsequently
         followed by an abundance of much amended legislation.  The development of the law and regulations included the adoption of,
         on the one hand, Decree-Law No of December (GURI No of December 1994, p. 5, ‘Decree-Law No 727/94’), now
         converted as amended into Law No of February (GURI No of February 1995, p. 3, ‘Law No 46/95’), regulating
         the arrangements for reducing quantities allocated and, on the other, Finance Law No of December (ordinary supplement
         to GURI No of December 1996, 233, ‘Law No 662/96’), Article 2(168) of which defines the criteria for national adjustment.
         
            
 By judgment No of December the Corte costituzionale (Constitutional Court) (Italy), declared invalid Article 2(1)
         of Decree-Law No 727/94, converted as amended into Law No 46/95, in that, in determining the reduction of milk producers’
         individual quotas, it excluded the participation, at least in the form of a reference for an opinion, of the regions concerned.
          In addition, by judgment No of December that court annulled Article 2(168) of Law No 662/on the ground that
         it made no provision for seeking the opinion of the autonomous provinces and regions.
         
            
 In the meantime, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action against the Italian Republic, under Article
         of the EC Treaty (now Article EC), concerning the method laid down in Article of Law No 468/for the reallocation
         of unused individual quantities.  By reasoned opinion of May the Commission challenged the opportunity given, in respect
         of deliveries, of reallocating unused quantities to associations of producers rather than to producers or purchasers as provided
         for by Regulations Nos 3950/and 536/93.  No further steps were subsequently taken in those proceedings, the Italian authorities
         having put an end to the infringement at issue by adopting Law No 662/96, Article 2(166) of which provides that the method
         in question would no longer be applicable as from the milk marketing year 1995/96.
         
            
 In order to put an end to the uncertainty surrounding the determining of actual milk production and caused by a system which
         had not made it possible to produce reliable information, in particular for the milk marketing years 1995/and 1996/97,
         the Italian legislature decided to set up a Government Commission of Inquiry, as provided for by Decree-Law No of January
         (GURI No of January 1997, p. 3), converted as amended into Law No of March (GURI No of April 1997,
         p. 4).  That Commission of Inquiry was entrusted with the task of ascertaining whether there were any irregularities in the
         management of quantities by individuals or public or private bodies and any irregularities in the marketing of milk and milk
         products by producers or in their use by purchasers.
         
            
 In that context and in the light of the conclusions reached by that Government Commission of Inquiry, the Italian legislation
         was again amended by the adoption of Decree-Law No of December (GURI No of December 1997, p. 3, ‘Decree-Law
         No 411/97’), converted as amended into Law No of January (GURI No of January 1998, p. 3, ‘Law No 5/98’), and
         by the adoption of Decree-Law No of March (GURI No of March 1999, p. 8, ‘Decree-Law No 43/99’), converted as
         amended into Law No of April (GURI No of April 1999, p. 4, ‘Law No 118/99’).
         
            
 Article of Law No 5/makes the AIMA responsible for determining, on the basis of, inter alia, the report made by the Government
         Commission of Inquiry and the surveys carried out and notified by the regions, the actual quantities of milk produced and
         marketed during the milk-marketing years 1995/and 1996/97.  According to Article 2(5), the AIMA is to inform producers
         within days of the Decree-Law’s entering into force of the individual reference quantities allocated to them and the quantities
         of milk marketed.  With regard to the quantities determined by the AIMA, producers may seek to have those findings re-examined
         before the regions and autonomous provinces which must give a decision within days of the expiry of the period of days
         prescribed for the lodging of the application.  Article 2(11) provides that, at the outcome of the checks carried out and
         the decisions taken on the applications for re-examination, the AIMA is to make amendments to the forms used and to individual
         reference quantities for the purposes of the operation of national adjustments and the payment of the additional levy. 
         
            
 Article 1(1) of Decree-Law No 43/provides, first, that the AIMA is to make national adjustments for the milk marketing
         years 1995/and 1996/on the basis of the information concerning the milk production which it has determined and, second,
         that it is to calculate the additional levy payable by each producer.  In accordance with that provision, the AIMA is required
         to communicate the results of those calculations to the producers and purchasers, and also to the regions and autonomous provinces,
         within days of the Decree-Law’s coming into force.
         
            
 According to Article 1(12), the results of national adjustments made in accordance with the new legislation are definitive
         for the purposes of payment of the additional levy, related settlements and the release of securities.  According to Article
         1(15), once purchasers have been notified by the AIMA of the levies for the milk marketing years 1995/and 1996/they
         must pay the sums in question within days and pay back any surpluses, informing the autonomous provinces and regions thereof.
         
The disputes in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 By actions brought before the Tribunale amministrativo regionale del Lazio, the applicants in the main proceedings have challenged
         the lawfulness of the AIMA’s decisions to reallocate, pursuant to Article of Decree-Law No 43/99, converted as amended into
         Law No 118/99, unused reference quantities for the milk marketing years 1995/and 1996/97.  In support of their actions,
         they have claimed inter alia that those decisions are unlawful in that they were adopted on the basis of a retroactive determining
         of individual reference quantities.
         
            
 The national court states that, with regard to the disputes in the main proceedings, it must be ascertained generally whether
         national legislation providing for retroactive allocation of individual reference quantities or, in any case, for retroactive
         allocation under an administrative procedure is compatible with the general principles of the Community legal system.  It
         is necessary to ascertain that before settling the disputes in the main proceedings, inasmuch as the answer to be given to
         the points of law raised in the main proceedings depends on that outcome.
         
            
 Against that background, the national court considers that the Member States must be in a position to pursue, even if belatedly,
         the objectives set out in Article EC, which would be irreparably compromised by a rigid interpretation of a rule of Community
         law which did not make it possible to reconcile the principle of the protection of legitimate expectations with those objectives.
          The fact that Community law itself in essence forbids the Member States to take upon themselves the burden of the levies
         militates in favour of an interpretation which, in cases of dispute, permits the operations required in respect of the levies
         to be performed even outside the periods prescribed by Regulations Nos 3950/and 536/93.
         
            
 Those are the legal and factual circumstances in which the Tribunale amministrativo regionale del Lazio decided to stay proceedings
         and to refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
          First question (C-480/to C-482/00, C-484/00, C-489/to C-491/and C-497/to C-499/00)
         ‘May the provisions contained in Articles and of … Regulation … No 3950/… and Articles and of … Regulation … No
         536/be interpreted as meaning that it is possible, in cases of administrative or judicial challenge to the relevant measures,
         to derogate from the time-limits prescribed for the allocation of quotas and the operation of adjustments and levies?’
          Second question (C-480/to C-482/00, C-484/00, C-489/to C-491/and C-497/to C-499/00)
         ‘If not, are the provisions contained in Articles and of … Regulation … No 3950/… and Articles and of … Regulation
         … No 536/… valid, in the light of Article EC (formerly Article of the EC Treaty), in so far as they do not provide
         that derogations may be made from the periods they prescribe for the allocation of individual reference quantities and for
         the operation of adjustments and levies, in cases of administrative or judicial challenge to those measures?’
          Third question (C-480/to C-482/00, C-484/00, C-489/to C-491/and C-497/to C-499/00)
         ‘Are Regulations … Nos 3950/and 536/to be interpreted as meaning that the application of the system introduced by that
         legislation excludes the allocation and official notification to producers of individual reference quantities or that it excludes
         the official redistribution among its producers by the Member State of the global quantity which that State is guaranteed?’
          Fourth question (C-480/to C-482/00, C-484/00, C-489/to C-491/and C-497/to C-499/00)
         ‘May Articles and of Regulation … No 3950/be interpreted as meaning that the Member State need not necessarily give
         official notification of individual reference quantities to producers or that it may allocate reference quantities to those
         producers without notifying them individually?’
          Fifth question (C-484/00)
         ‘May Regulations … Nos 3950/and 536/be interpreted as meaning that the individual reference quantity need not necessarily
         be notified separately to each producer, but may be communicated in other ways such as the publication of bulletins?’
          Sixth question (C-480/00, C-490/and C-491/00)
         ‘May Article 2(1) of Regulation … 3950/and Article 3(3) of Regulation … No 563/be interpreted as leaving the Member
         States free to determine privileged categories of producers who must be compensated in priority to others?’
          Seventh question (C-481/00)
         ‘May Regulations … Nos 3950/and 536/be interpreted as permitting Member States to determine privileged categories of
         producers who must be compensated in priority to others, in particular by placing the “disadvantaged” areas in a secondary
         position in relation to mountain areas?’
         
Concerning the first question
            
 By its first question, the national court seeks in essence to ascertain whether, on a proper construction of Articles and
         of Regulation No 3950/and Articles and of Regulation No 536/93, a Member State is precluded, after checks have been
         carried out, from correcting the individual reference quantities allocated to each producer and, after the unused reference
         quantities have been reallocated, from recalculating in consequence the additional levies payable, after the final date for
         payment of those levies for the production period concerned.
         
Observations submitted to the Court
            
 The applicants in the main proceedings argue that Articles and of Regulation No 536/laid down very precise time-limits
         for the operations that must be carried out by purchasers, producers and the Member State in connection with national adjustments
         and the collection of additional levies.  It is, therefore, obvious that if it is to be possible to observe those time-limits
         prescribed by Community law, the allocation of, and indeed any alterations to, the individual reference quantities must be
         made before the beginning of the marketing year in order to enable producers to plan their undertaking’s activities.
         
            
 According to the applicants in the main proceedings, the mandatory nature of those time-limits is also confirmed by the Court’s
         case-law in relation both to the additional levy on milk (Case C-292/Karlsson [2000] ECR I-2737, paragraph 32, and Case C-356/Molkereigenossenscahft Wiedergelingen [2000] ECR I-5461, paragraphs 38, and 41) and to sugar (Case C-1/Cavarzere Produzioni Industriali and Others [1995] ECR I-2363).
         
            
 In addition, the applicants in the main proceedings maintain that if the time-limits laid down by Regulations Nos 3950/and 536/were not strictly and absolutely required to be observed, the Community legislation in that field could attain
         neither its specific objectives nor the general objectives of the common agricultural policy.
         
            
 Finally, they argue that an interpretation according to which it was permitted to derogate from those time-limits, so authorising
         retroactive allocation of reference quantities, even after the end of the milk-marketing year concerned and, therefore, retroactive
         collection of the additional levies payable, is contrary both to the principle of proportionality and to the principles of
         legal certainty and of the protection of legitimate expectations.
         
            
 With regard to the principle of proportionality, the applicants in the main proceedings maintain that the penalty of the additional
         levy is acceptable only if it does not exceed what is appropriate and necessary in order to attain the end sought by the legislation
         in question.  In their view, it is irrational to make a request for payment of an additional levy after the final date for
         payment of that sum for the milk-marketing year concerned if the reference quantity, on the basis of which the levy is calculated,
         does not reflect actual production during that marketing year.
         
            
 They claim that the principle of protection of legitimate expectations has been infringed because producers could expect to
         be notified in good time of measures affecting investment in the production and marketing of milk.  At the hearing, the applicants
         stressed the point that they were unable to discover the individual reference quantities allocated to them for the milk-marketing
         years concerned, with the result that the corrections made by the Italian authorities in amounted in fact to retroactive
         allocation of quotas.
         
            
 The Italian Government argues that if divergences, errors and disputes appear in the determining of reference quantities the
         entire mechanism is affected, with more or less significant alterations to the permissible reference quantities which can
         be determined only after the event.
         
            
 According to the Italian Government, rational interpretation of the Community regulations gives rise to the consideration
         that retroactive determining of quotas is compatible with the system adopted, since the quotas originally defined have been
         corrected, following amendment of the rules implementing those regulations.
         
            
 In addition, the Italian Government maintains that corrections caused by application of national provisions adopted purely
         in order to make the additional levy payable must by definition have retroactive effect, given that their purpose is to define
         the quantities to be allocated to each producer and, in consequence, the amount of milk in fact produced and marketed.  Likewise,
         the Italian Government’s action, intended to place the burden of the additional levy upon the producers responsible for the
         surpluses, as required by the Commission when initiating infringement proceedings in 1997, must ex hypothesi be founded on retroactive determining of reference quantities.
         
            
 That Government proposes, therefore, that on a proper construction of Articles and of Regulation No 3950/and Articles
         and of Regulation No 536/the time-limits fixed for allocation of quotas and for making adjustments are quite ordinary
         time-limits and it is in consequence possible to derogate from them, where there are disputes, in legal or administrative
         proceedings.
         
            
 As regards the supposed breach of the principle of protection of legitimate expectations, the Italian Government maintains
         that the various traders knew, or ought to have known, the provisions of Community law applicable and the production ceilings
         they set at national level and, consequently, for individuals also, by prohibiting the exceeding, in any circumstances, of
         production for the reference year.  It adds that the determining of individual quantities after the event was done, so far
         as possible, during discussions with the producers in which their views were heard and in which, consequently, they participated.
         
         
            
 The Commission states that Regulations Nos 3950/and 536/brought about no new allocation of individual reference quantities
         as compared with the previous arrangements and prescribed no time-limits for making such allocation.  Likewise, the reallocation
         of unused individual quantities provided for in Articles 3(3) and 4(3) of Regulation No 536/does not amount to a new allocation
         of individual reference quantities to producers.
         
            
 Following its preliminary remarks, the Commission refers to the principle of the Member States’ procedural autonomy.  In its
         view, the fact that neither Regulation No 3950/nor Regulation No 536/expressly takes into consideration the hypothesis
         of making corrections after checks have been carried out shows that it is for the Member State to take the necessary measures
         in accordance with the criteria drawn up under its own domestic law.
         
            
 It argues that it follows that, in order to guarantee that the Community legislation is correctly and efficiently implemented,
         the outcome of checks carried out by the Member States might, but also must, give rise to a measure correcting the reference
         quantity in question and, consequently, the amount of the levies payable, even after the end of the production period to which
         they refer.  The fact that measures correcting the individual reference quantities and recalculating the levies were taken
         after the production periods concerned had come to an end does not relieve either the Member State or the traders concerned
         of the obligation to observe, even in the medium term, the provisions of the relevant regulations.
         
The Court’s answer
            
 It must at the outset be remarked that no provision in Regulation No 3950/or Regulation No 536/provides for the correction
         a posteriori  of individual reference quantities allocated to milk producers or the consequential correction of the additional levies payable
         by them.
         
            
 According to the general principles on which the Community is based and which govern relations between the Community and the
         Member States, it is for the latter, under Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC), to ensure that Community rules
         are implemented within their territories.  In so far as Community law, including its general principles, does not include
         common rules to that effect then, when the national authorities implement Community rules, they are to act in accordance with
         the procedural and substantive rules of their own national law (see, in particular, Case C-285/Dominikanerinnen-Kloster Altenhohenau [1995] ECR I-4069, paragraph 26, and Karlsson and Others, cited above, paragraph 27).
         
            
 Nevertheless, when adopting measures to implement Community legislation, national authorities must exercise their discretion
         in compliance with the general rules of Community law, which include the principles of proportionality, legal certainty and
         the protection of legitimate expectations (see, to that effect, Case C-313/Mulligan and Others [2002] ECR I-5719, paragraphs and 36).
         
            
 It follows that, in order to provide a helpful reply to the first question and, more specifically, to ascertain whether or
         not it is contrary to the relevant provisions of Regulations Nos 3950/and 536/for corrections to be made after the event
         to reference quantities allocated to producers and for the amounts of the additional levies payable by them to be altered
         as a result, it is necessary to examine whether such measures are compatible with the wording and purpose of those provisions,
         with the objectives and general scheme of the legislation concerning the arrangements for the additional levy on milk and
         with the general principles of Community law.
         
            
 As regards the wording of the relevant provisions, that there is nothing in Articles and of Regulation No 3950/and
         Articles and of Regulation No 536/expressly precluding the adoption by national authorities of measures such as those
         at issue in the main proceedings.  The same is true of the provisions of those regulations in their entirety.
         
            
 As to the purpose of those provisions, Articles and of Regulation No 3950/cannot be regarded as providing for a fresh
         allocation of individual reference quantities or, still less, as setting a specific time-limit for such allocation.
         
            
 Regulation No 3950/is intended to extend the additional milk levy scheme introduced by earlier legislation and is based
         on the premiss that milk quotas have already been allocated in all the Member States respectively (see Karlsson and Others,  paragraph 32).
         
            
 The first recital in the preamble to that regulation thus states that the scheme introduced by Regulation No 856/is to
         ‘continue’ and Article provides that the additional levy on milk is payable for seven ‘new’ consecutive periods of months.
          Along the same lines Article 4(1) of Regulation No 3950/provides that the individual reference quantities allocated for
         future production periods are to be determined on the basis of the reference quantities held by the producers on the last
         day on which the previously applicable legislation was in force, namely, March 1993.
         
            
 However, having regard to the fact that it was not the Community legislature’s intention to fix those reference quantities
         definitively for the whole duration of the extension of the additional-milk-levy arrangements, Article 4(2) of Regulation
         No 3950/provides, in essence, that those quantities may be adjusted for each of the milk marketing years concerned, provided
         that the sum of the individual reference quantities for sales to dairies and direct sales does not exceed the guaranteed global
         quantity allocated to the Member State, taking account of any reductions made by the latter in order to supplement its national
         reserve.
         
            
 In those circumstances, Articles and of Regulation No 3950/cannot be interpreted as precluding national authorities
         from correcting inaccurate reference quantities after the end of the marketing year concerned, when the particular purpose
         of those corrections is that production free from the Member State’s additional levies should not exceed the guaranteed global
         quantity allocated to that State.
         
            
 The same is true so far as Articles and of Regulation No 536/are concerned.  In this regard it must be borne in mind
         that it is clear from reading Article 3(2) in conjunction with Article 4(2) that purchasers, on the one hand, and producers
         selling their own output directly, on the other, must send to the competent national authority before May the statement
         of collections or the declaration of production sold during the previous financial year.  It is equally clear from reading
         the third paragraphs of those articles that the Member States may provide that the competent authority is to notify the purchasers,
         or the producers, as the case may be, of the amount of the levy payable by them after reallocating, or not, all or part of
         the unused reference quantities.  Finally, in accordance with the fourth paragraphs of those articles, purchasers or producers,
         as the case may be, must pay the amounts due before the following September.
         
            
 Although the time-limits prescribed by those articles are mandatory (see, to that effect, Molkereigenossenschaft Wiedergeltingen, paragraphs to 40), the fact remains that they do not preclude the competent authorities of a Member State from making
         after-the-event checks and corrections for the purpose of ensuring that that Member State’s production does not exceed the
         guaranteed global quantity allocated to it.
         
            
 On the contrary, the aim both of the time-limits laid down in Articles and of Regulation No 536/and of checks and corrections
         made after the event, such as those carried out by the AIMA, is to ensure that the additional milk levy system is operated
         efficiently and the relevant legislation applied correctly.
         
            
 It ought also at this point to be recalled that, in accordance with the eighth recital in the preamble to Regulation No 536/93,
         the Member States must have suitable means of conducting ex-post checks to verify whether, and if so to what extent, the levy has been collected in accordance with the provisions in force.
          Such checks are provided for by Article of that regulation in order to ensure the accuracy of the statements of collection
         and declarations of direct sales drawn up by purchasers and producers.  It is clear, first, that such checks can be made only
         after the milk-marketing year concerned has ended and, second, that they may result in the correcting of the reference quantities
         allocated and, in consequence, in the recalculating of the levies payable.
         
            
 Furthermore, that interpretation of Articles and of Regulation No 3950/and of Articles and of Regulation No 536/is also supported by the objective pursued by the legislation establishing the additional levy on milk.  As the Advocate General
         made clear in paragraph of his Opinion, the objectives of that legislation would be compromised if, as a result of miscalculation
         of individual reference quantities, a Member State’s milk production were to exceed the guaranteed global quantity allocated
         to that State but that overrun did not give rise to payment of the additional levy due.  In such a case, there would be a
         breach of the joint responsibility on which the arrangements for the additional levy on milk are based, in that producers
         would enjoy the benefits afforded by the setting of a target price for milk without bearing the restrictions by means of which
         such a target price can be maintained.  Producers whose excess production was thus unduly exempted from the additional levy
         would gain an unjustified competitive advantage over the producers of Member States which apply the Community legislation
         correctly.
         
            
 Finally, so far as concerns the compatibility with the general principles of proportionality and the protection of legitimate
         expectations of checking and correcting measures such as those adopted by AIMA in the cases in the main proceedings, the arguments
         of the applicants in those cases cannot be accepted.
         
            
 As regards the principle of proportionality, it must first be noted that the purpose of the additional levy system is to re-establish,
         by limiting milk production, the balance between supply and demand in the milk market, which is characterised by structural
         surpluses.  This measure, therefore, is within the ambit of the objectives of rational development of milk production and,
         by contributing to a stabilisation of the income of the agricultural community affected, that of ensuring a fair standard
         of living for the agricultural community (Case 84/Erpelding [1988] ECR 2647, paragraph 26).
         
            
 It follows that, contrary to the arguments of the applicants in the main proceedings, the additional levy is not to be regarded
         as a penalty analogous to those provided for under Articles and of Regulation No 536/93.  The additional levy on milk
         amounts to a restriction arising from market policy rules or structural policy (see, to that effect, Case C-177/Kühn [1992] ECR I-35, paragraph 13).
         
            
 Then, as Article of Regulation No 3950/clearly shows, the additional levy is to be considered to be intervention to
         stabilise agricultural markets and is to be used to finance expenditure in the milk sector.  It follows that, apart from its
         obvious aim of requiring milk producers to observe the reference quantities allocated to them, the additional levy has an
         economic objective too, in that it is intended to bring to the Community the funds necessary for disposal of milk produced
         by producers in excess of their quotas.
         
            
 It must be added here that, as the Commission said at the hearing, the overrun of production remains long after the milk-marketing
         year in question has ended, in the form inter alia of stocks of milk products.
         
            
 Consequently, with regard to measures such as those taken by the AIMA in the cases in the main proceedings, the question of
         the compatibility of retroactive application of sanctions is not relevant.
         
            
 What is more, it is not disputed that measures such as those at issue in the main proceedings are appropriate for the purpose
         of attaining the objective pursued.
         
            
 As to the question whether such measures do not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve their aim, account must be
         taken of the fact that, as shown in the judgments making the references, the individual reference quantities originally allocated
         by the Italian authorities contained a great number of errors, due in particular to the circumstance that the actual production
         on the basis of which those quantities were allocated had been certified by the producers themselves.  Among the errors so
         identified, the Government Commission of Inquiry found, in particular, that more than farms which reported milk production
         did not possess any cows.
         
            
 That being so, measures such as those taken by the AIMA in the circumstances of the cases in the main proceedings are not
         to be considered disproportionate to the objective pursued.
         
            
 As regards, last, the principle of the protection of legitimate expectations, the applicants in the main proceedings take
         the view that, in adopting the measures at issue, the Italian authorities have disregarded their legitimate expectations in
         that, on the one hand, the corrections to the individual reference quantities and the recalculation of the additional levies
         payable took place two and three years respectively after the marketing years concerned and in that, on the other hand, it
         was not until that the applicants in the main proceedings learned of the reference quantities allocated to them.
         
            
 With regard to the first argument, it must be stated that in so far as a producer’s individual reference quantity actually
         corresponds to the quantity of milk marketed by that producer during the reference year, that producer, who is as a rule aware
         of how much milk he has produced, can have no legitimate expectation that an inaccurate reference quantity will be continued.
         
            
 As to the second argument, it is to be noted that, as is clear from the documents before the Court, it was only in that
         the first legislative provisions designed to implement the system of the additional levy on milk were adopted in Italy.  Furthermore,
         Italian milk producers were not required to pay that levy until the milk marketing year 1995/96.  No legitimate expectation
         can be entertained as to the continuation of a situation which is plainly unlawful in the light of Community law, namely,
         the failure to apply the arrangements for the additional levy on milk.  Indeed, regardless of the specific circumstances of
         the case in point, milk producers in the Member States cannot legitimately expect, years after the system was introduced,
         to be able to go on producing milk without limit.
         
            
 Having regard to all the foregoing considerations, the answer to be given to the first question must be that on a proper construction
         of Articles and of Regulation No 3950/and Articles and of Regulation No 536/93, it is not contrary to those provisions
         for a Member State, after checks have been carried out, to correct the individual reference quantities allocated to each producer
         and, after the unused reference quantities have been reallocated, to recalculate in consequence the additional levies payable,
         after the final date for payment of those levies for the milk marketing year concerned.
         
Concerning the second question
            
 Having regard to the answer given to the first question, there is no need to reply to the second.
         
Concerning the third, fourth and fifth questions
            
 By its third, fourth and fifth questions, which it is appropriate to consider together, the national court seeks in essence
         to ascertain whether Regulations Nos 3950/and 536/are to be interpreted as requiring that individual reference quantities
         should be notified to the producers and, if so, whether every producer must be individually notified or whether notification
         may take other forms, such as the publication of bulletins.
         
Admissibility
            
 The Commission throws doubt on the admissibility of those questions, in that the national court has not explained either what
         place they have in the legal and factual context of the cases in the main proceedings or why a response to those questions
         is relevant to the outcome of the cases before it.
         
            
 On this point it must be borne in mind that it is solely for the national court before which the dispute has been brought,
         and which must assume responsibility for the subsequent judicial decision, to determine in the light of the particular circumstances
         of the case both the need for a preliminary ruling in order to enable it to deliver judgment and the relevance of the questions
         which it submits to the Court.  Consequently, where the questions submitted by the national court concern the interpretation
         of Community law, the Court of Justice is, in principle, bound to give a ruling.  The Court may refuse to rule on a question
         referred for a preliminary ruling by a national court only where it is quite obvious that the interpretation of, or assessment
         of the validity of, a provision of Community law that is sought by the court making the reference bears no relation to the
         actual facts of the main action or its purpose, where the problem is hypothetical, or where the Court does not have before
         it the factual or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions submitted to it (see, inter alia, Case
         C-415/Bosman [1995] ECR I-4921, paragraphs to 61, Case C-36/Idéal tourisme [2000] ECR I-6049, paragraph 20, and Case C-137/Milk Marque and National Farmers’ Union [2003] ECR I-0000, paragraph 37).
         
            
 So far as the requirement that the national court’s decision should contain a sufficient description of the facts and law
         involved in the case is concerned, it is to be noted that its purpose is, first, to enable the Court to arrive at an interpretation
         of Community law which may be of use to the national court (see, inter alia, Joined Cases C-320/90, C-321/and C-322/Telemarsicabruzzo and Others [1993] ECR I-393, paragraph 6) and, second, to give the governments of the Member States and other interested parties the
         opportunity to submit observations pursuant to Article of the EC Statute of the Court of Justice (see, in particular, Case
         C-67/Albany [1999] ECR I-5751, paragraph 40).
         
            
 In this case, although the factual matters presented by the national court are extremely brief, it appears from the references
         for a preliminary ruling that the Italian legislation adopted in provided that bulletins compiled province by province
         should give the list of producers and of milk quotas.  It is also stated that those quotas are divided into two parts and
         allocated on the basis of production during the marketing years 1988/or 1991/92.  It follows that milk quotas allocated
         for the first time to producers in Italy after were published in bulletins.  Moreover, the hearing confirmed that the
         main proceedings also concerned the point whether such notification was in accordance with the requirements of the Community
         law applicable, the applicants maintaining, first, that those bulletins were not accessible and, second, that they had not
         been able to learn what milk quotas had been allocated to them.  In addition, both the Italian Government and the Commission
         were able to submit written and oral observations on this point.
         
            
 In those circumstances, the third, fourth and fifth questions must be declared to be admissible.
         
The substance Observations submitted to the Court
         
            
 The applicants in the main proceedings, the Italian Government and the Commission are ad idem in recognising that individual reference quantities must be notified to producers.
         
            
 With regard to the forms taken by that notification, the applicants maintain that milk quotas must be notified individually
         to the producers concerned.  Failure to notify is, they claim, a breach of the principle of legal certainty and of the fundamental
         right to property.
         
            
 The Italian Government argues that there is no specific requirement on this point in Regulations Nos 3950/and 536/and
         that dissemination by means, in this instance, of bulletins is compatible with Community law.  It stated at the hearing that
         the bulletins had been sent to the competent provincial offices, where each producer might consult them, and that they were
         also published in the Gazzetta ufficiale della Repubblica italiana.
         
            
 The Commission maintains that, if there are no specific provisions of Community law, individual reference quantities must
         be notified in accordance with the rules of national law, it being understood that those rules must be applied in such a way
         as to attain the objectives of the arrangements for the additional levy on milk.  That means that the communication must be
         such as to ensure that producers have actual knowledge of the milk quota allocated to them.  The Commission notes that it
         was satisfied with the form of communication adopted by the Italian authorities for the initial allocation of individual reference
         quantities under the legislation adopted in 1992, namely, notification by registered letter with acknowledgement of receipt.
         
 The Court’s answer
         
            
 First, although no obligation to communicate individual reference quantities to producers is laid down in Regulation No 3950/or Regulation No 536/93, that communication must, both when a reference quantity is originally allocated and whenever that
         quantity is later altered, be regarded as mandatory in the light of the main objective and broad logic of the arrangements
         for the additional levy on milk, on the one hand, and the principle of legal certainty, on the other.
         
            
 It is not in dispute that those arrangements are intended to ensure that production of milk in the Community should not exceed
         a guaranteed global quantity fixed at Community level and divided among producers by the Member States.  Attainment of that
         objective necessarily and logically means that producers must be informed of the share of the guaranteed global quantity which
         has been allocated to them and which they must not exceed.
         
            
 In addition, having regard to the fact that, under those arrangements, a producer whose production exceeds his individual
         reference quantity is obliged to pay an additional levy of 115% of the target price for milk, failure to inform the producer
         concerned of that reference quantity would plainly run counter to the principle of legal certainty.
         
            
 As regards the manner in which that communication is to be made, it is common ground that that principle requires appropriate
         publicity to be given to the national measures adopted pursuant to a Community regulation (Mulligan and Others, paragraph 51).  The communication to the producers concerned of the individual reference quantities being a measure which
         is taken in connection with the application by the competent national authorities of the Community legislation on the additional
         levy on milk, it must be made in compliance with the requirement of adequate publicity.
         
            
 Nevertheless, according to the case-law, the principle of legal certainty does not prescribe any specific form of publicity,
         such as publication of the measures in the official journal of the Member State concerned, communication by means of publication
         in bulletins or individual notification of each producer (see Mulligan and Others, paragraph 51).
         
            
 The reason why the principle of legal certainty, as a general principle of Community law, requires appropriate publicity for
         measures adopted by the Member States in implementation of an obligation under Community law is the obvious need to ensure
         that persons concerned by such measures should be able to ascertain the scope of their rights and obligations in the particular
         area governed by Community law (Mulligan and Others, paragraph 52). 
         
            
 It follows that adequate publicity must be of such a nature as to inform the natural or legal persons concerned of their individual
         reference quantity.  It is not therefore ruled out that communication of individual reference quantities by means of publication
         in bulletins, as in the cases in the main proceedings, may satisfy that condition, having regard to the fact that, as the
         Italian Government has stated, those bulletins were published in the Gazzetta ufficiale della Repubblica italiana.  It is, however, for the national court to determine, on the basis of the foregoing considerations and of the facts before
         it, whether that is so in the cases in the main proceedings. 
         
            
 In the light of the foregoing considerations, the answer to be given to the third, fourth and fifth questions must therefore
         be that Regulations Nos 3950/and 536/are to be interpreted as requiring that the original allocation of individual reference
         quantities and any later alteration to them should be notified to the producers concerned by the competent national authorities.
          The principle of legal certainty demands that that communication should be of such a nature as to give the natural or legal
         persons concerned all information relating to the original allocation of their individual reference quantity or later alteration
         to it.  It is for the national court to determine, on the basis of the facts before it, whether that is so in the cases in
         the main proceedings.
         
Concerning the sixth and seventh questions
            
 By its sixth and seventh questions the national court asks whether Regulations Nos 3950/and 536/93, or certain of their
         provisions, are to be interpreted as leaving it open to the Member States to determine the categories of producers who must
         have priority in the reallocation of unused individual reference quantities and whether, in particular, mountain areas come
         before ‘less-favoured’ areas.
         
            
 The Commission casts doubt on the admissibility of these questions too, in that the national court has not explained either
         what place they have in the legal and factual context of the cases in the main proceedings or why a response to those questions
         is relevant to the outcome of the cases before it.
         
            
 It ought here to be borne in mind that, in accordance with the case-law referred to in paragraphs and above, the Court
         may refuse to give a preliminary ruling on a question submitted by a national court where, inter alia, it does not have before
         it the factual or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions submitted to it.  The purpose of the requirement
         that the national court’s decision should contain a sufficient description of the facts and law involved in the case in the
         main proceedings is, first, to enable the Court to arrive at an interpretation of Community law which may be of use to the
         national court and, second, to give the governments of the Member States and other interested parties the opportunity to submit
         observations pursuant to Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice.
         
            
 In the circumstances of this case, the national court has supplied no information which might make it possible to understand
         the legal and factual context of the sixth and seventh questions.  After repeating word for word the grounds of the judgments
         making the references in each case, the national court contents itself, in the four judgments in which those questions are
         asked, with adding that, of all the other questions which the applicants in the main proceedings had proposed that it should
         submit to the Court of Justice, it had considered it expedient to refer the two questions concerned.
         
            
 Clearly, therefore, the national court has not supplied the factual and legal material necessary for a useful answer to be
         given to those questions.
         
            
 It follows that the sixth and seventh questions must be regarded as inadmissible.
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the Italian Government and by the Council and the Commission, which have submitted observations to the
         Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the actions pending
         before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court.
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
 in answer to the questions referred to it by the Tribunale amministrativo regionale del Lazio by judgments of July 2000,
         hereby rules: 
         
 
1.
On a proper construction of Articles and of Council Regulation (EEC) No 3950/of December establishing an additional
                     levy in the milk and milk products sector, and Articles and of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 536/of March laying
                     down detailed rules on the application of the additional levy on milk and milk products, it is not contrary to those provisions
                     for a Member State, after checks have been carried out, to correct the individual reference quantities allocated to each producer
                     and, after the unused reference quantities have been reallocated, to recalculate in consequence the additional levies payable,
                     after the final date for payment of those levies for the production period concerned. 
                  
 
2.
Regulations Nos 3950/and 536/are to be interpreted as requiring that the original allocation of individual reference
                     quantities and any later alteration to them should be notified to the producers concerned by the competent national authorities.
                  
 
3.
The principle of legal certainty demands that that communication should be of such a nature as to give the natural or legal
                     persons concerned all information relating to the original allocation of their individual reference quantity or later alteration
                     to it.  It is for the national court to determine, on the basis of the facts before it, whether that is so in the cases in
                     the main proceedings.
                  
Skouris
Gulmann 
Puissochet 
Macken
Colneric
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on March 2004.
         
R. Grass
V. Skouris
Registrar
President 
 –
            
Language of the case: Italian.
Top  
 