
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-245/Anheuser-Busch Inc.
v
Budĕjovický Budvar, národní podnik
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Korkein oikeus)
(Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation – Articles 2(1), 16(1) and of the TRIPs Agreement – Trade marks – Scope of the proprietor’s exclusive right to the trade mark – Alleged use of the sign as a trade name)
Summary of the judgment
1.        Reference for a preliminary ruling – Jurisdiction of the Court – Interpretation of an international agreement concluded by
            the Community and the Member States under joint competence and having a bearing on the application by national courts of Community
            provisions – Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs)
(Art. EC; TRIPs Agreement)
2.        International agreements – Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) – Application ratione
            temporis – Application to a conflict between a trade mark and a sign arising before the date of application of that agreement
            and continuing after that date
(TRIPs Agreement, Art. 70(1))
3.        International agreements – Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) – Direct effect – None
            – Obligations of the national courts – Trade mark law – Application of national law in the light of the wording and purpose
            of the relevant provisions of both Directive 89/and the TRIPs Agreement
(TRIPs Agreement; Council Directive 89/104)
4.        International agreements – Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) – Trade mark law – Exclusive
            right of the proprietor of the trade mark to prevent a third party from using a sign – Exceptions – Sign which is identical
            or similar to the trade mark indicating a trade name – Condition – Use of the sign in accordance with honest practices in
            industrial or commercial matters
(TRIPs Agreement, Arts 16(1) and 17)
5.        International agreements – Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) – Trade mark law – Trade
            name in conflict with a trade mark – Trade name right which arose prior to the trade mark – Use of the trade name unable to
            be prohibited by the proprietor of the trade mark
(TRIPs Agreement, Art. 16(1))
1.        Since the Community is a party to the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs Agreement),
         as set out in Annex 1C to the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation, it is under an obligation to interpret
         its trade-mark legislation, as far as possible, in the light of the wording and purpose of that agreement.
      
It follows that the Court has jurisdiction to interpret a provision of the TRIPs Agreement for the purpose of responding to
         the needs of the judicial authorities of the Member States where they are called upon to apply their national rules with a
         view to ordering measures for the protection of rights created by Community legislation which fall within the scope of that
         agreement.
      
(see paras 41-42)
2.        The Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs Agreement), as set out in Annex 1C to the Agreement
         establishing the World Trade Organisation, approved on behalf of the European Community, as regards matters within its competence,
         by Decision 94/800, applies in the event of a conflict between a trade mark and a sign alleged to infringe that trade mark
         where that conflict arose before the date of application of the TRIPS Agreement but continued beyond that date.
      
In particular, the effect of Article 70(1) of that Agreement, which provides that the latter does not create obligations in
         respect of acts which occurred before its date of application for Members, is that the Agreement applies to situations which
         continue after that date.
      
(see paras 49, 53, operative part 1)
3.        The provisions of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property (TRIPs Agreement), as set out in Annex 1C
         to the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation, are not such as to create rights upon which individuals may rely
         directly before the courts by virtue of Community law.
      
However, when called upon to apply national rules with a view to ordering measures for the protection of rights in a field
         in which the TRIPs Agreement applies and in which the Community has already legislated, as is the case with the field of trade
         marks, the national courts are required under Community law to do so, as far as possible, in the light of the wording and
         purpose of the relevant Community provisions of both First Directive 89/relating to trade marks and the TRIPs Agreement.
      
(see paras 54-55, 57)
4.        A trade name may constitute a sign within the meaning of the first sentence of Article 16(1) of the Agreement on Trade-Related
         Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs Agreement), set out in Annex 1C to the Agreement establishing the World Trade
         Organisation. That provision is intended to confer on the proprietor of a trade mark the exclusive right to prevent a third
         party from using a sign if the use in question prejudices or is liable to prejudice the functions of the trade mark, in particular
         its essential function of guaranteeing consumers the origin of the goods.
      
The exceptions to the rights conferred by a trade mark provided for in Article of the TRIPs Agreement are intended, inter
         alia, to enable a third party to use a sign identical or similar to a trade mark to indicate his trade name, provided that
         such use is in accordance with honest practices in industrial or commercial matters.
      
(see para. 85, operative part 2)
5.        A trade name, which is not registered or established by use in the Member State where the mark with which it is alleged to
         conflict is registered and in which protection against the trade name in question is sought may be regarded as an existing
         prior right within the meaning of the third sentence of Article 16(1) of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
         Property Rights (TRIPs Agreement), as set out in Annex 1C to the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation, if the
         proprietor of the trade name has a right falling within the substantive and temporal scope of that agreement which arose prior
         to the trade mark and which entitles him to use a sign identical or similar to that trade mark.
      
It follows that the use of that trade name cannot be prohibited by virtue of the exclusive right conferred by the trade mark
         on its proprietor under the first sentence of Article 16(1) of the said Agreement.
      
(see paras 89, 100, operative part 3)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)November 2004(1)
(Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation  –  Articles 2(1), 16(1) and of the TRIPs Agreement  –  Trade marks  –  Scope of the proprietor's exclusive right to the trade mark  –  Alleged use of the sign as a trade name)
 In Case C-245/02,REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Korkein oikeus (Finland), made by decision of July 2002, received at the Court on July 2002, in the proceedings
            
Anheuser-Busch Inc.
v
Budĕjovický Budvar, národní podnik,
            
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),,
 composed of: V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans (Rapporteur), A. Rosas and R. Silva de Lapuerta (Presidents
            of Chambers), C. Gulmann, R. Schintgen, N. Colneric, S. von Bahr, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues and K. Schiemann, Judges,
            
 Advocate General: A. Tizzano,Registrar: M. Múgica Arzamendi, Principal Administrator,
             having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on April 2004,after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
            
–
 Anheuser-Busch Inc., by R. Hilli, asianajaja, and D. Ohlgart and B. Goebel, Rechtsanwälte,
            
–
 Budĕjovický Budvar, národní podnik, by P. Backström and P. Eskola, asianajajat,
            
–
 the Finnish Government, by T. Pynnä, acting as Agent,
            
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by E. Paasivirta and R. Raith, acting as Agents,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on June 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles 2(1), 16(1) and of the Agreement
         on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (‘the TRIPs Agreement’), as set out in Annex C to the Agreement
         establishing the World Trade Organisation (‘the WTO Agreement’), approved on behalf of the Community, as regards matters within
         its competence, by Council Decision 94/800/EC of December (OJ L 336, p. 1, at p. 214). 
         
            
 The reference has been made in the proceedings between the breweries Anheuser-Busch, Inc. (‘Anheuser-Busch’), established
         in Saint Louis, Missouri (United States), and Budĕjovický Budvar, národní podnik (‘Budvar’), established in Česke Budějovice
         (Czech Republic), concerning the labelling used by Budvar to market its beer in Finland, which, according to Anheuser-Busch,
         infringes the trade marks Budweiser, Bud, Bud Light and Budweiser King of Beers owned by it in that Member State.
         
Legal background
International law
            
 Article of the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property of March 1883, as last revised at Stockholm
         on July 1967, (United Nations Treaty Series, Vol. 828, No 11847, p. 108, ‘the Paris Convention’) provides:
         ‘A trade name shall be protected in all the countries of the Union without the obligation of filing or registration, whether
         or not it forms part of a trade mark.’ 
         
            
 The WTO Agreement, and the TRIPs Agreement which forms an integral part of it, entered into force on January 1995. However,
         according to Article 65(1) of the TRIPs Agreement, the members were not obliged to apply the provisions of that agreement
         before the expiry of a general period of one year, that is to say, before January (‘the date of application’).
         
            
 Article of the TRIPs Agreement, which is entitled ‘Nature and Scope of Obligations’, provides in paragraph 2:
         ‘For the purposes of this agreement, the term “intellectual property” refers to all categories of intellectual property that
         are the subject of Sections through of Part II.’
         
            
 Article of the TRIPs Agreement, which is headed ‘Intellectual Property Conventions’, provides:
         ‘1.     In respect of Parts II, III and IV of this agreement, Members shall comply with Articles through 12, and Article 19, of
         the Paris Convention (1967).
          2.       Nothing in Parts I to IV of this agreement shall derogate from existing obligations that Members may have to each other under
         the Paris Convention, the Berne Convention, the Rome Convention and the Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated
         Circuits.’
         
            
 Article of the TRIPs Agreement, which is headed ‘Protectable Subject-matter’ and is to be found in Section of Part II
         of that agreement, which deals with standards concerning the availability, scope and use of intellectual property rights,
         provides in paragraph 1:
         ‘Any sign, or any combination of signs, capable of distinguishing the goods or services of one undertaking from those of other
         undertakings, shall be capable of constituting a trade mark. Such signs, in particular words including personal names, letters,
         numerals, figurative elements and combinations of colours as well as any combination of such signs, shall be eligible for
         registration as trade marks. …’
         
            
 Article of the TRIPs Agreement, which is headed ‘Rights Conferred’, provides in paragraph 1:
         ‘The owner of a registered trade mark shall have the exclusive right to prevent all third parties not having the owner’s consent
         from using in the course of trade identical or similar signs for goods or services which are identical or similar to those
         in respect of which the trade mark is registered where such use would result in a likelihood of confusion. In case of the
         use of an identical sign for identical goods or services, a likelihood of confusion shall be presumed. The rights described
         above shall not prejudice any existing prior rights, nor shall they affect the possibility of Members making rights available
         on the basis of use.’
         
            
 Under Article of the TRIPs Agreement, which is headed ‘Exceptions’:
         ‘Members may provide limited exceptions to the rights conferred by a trade mark, such as fair use of descriptive terms, provided
         that such exceptions take account of the legitimate interests of the owner of the trade mark and of third parties.’
         
            
 Article of the TRIPs Agreement, which is headed ‘Protection of Existing Subject-matter’, provides:
         ‘1.     This agreement does not give rise to obligations in respect of acts which occurred before the date of application of the Agreement
         for the Member in question.
          2.       Except as otherwise provided for in this agreement, this agreement gives rise to obligations in respect of all subject-matter
         existing at the date of application of this agreement for the Member in question, and which is protected in that Member on
         the said date, or which meets or comes subsequently to meet the criteria for protection under the terms of this agreement.
         …
         …
          4.       In respect of any acts in respect of specific objects embodying protected subject-matter which become infringing under the
         terms of legislation in conformity with this agreement, and which were commenced, or in respect of which a significant investment
         was made, before the date of acceptance of the WTO Agreement by that Member, any Member may provide for a limitation of the
         remedies available to the right-holder as to the continued performance of such acts after the date of application of this
         agreement for that Member. In such cases the Member shall, however, at least provide for the payment of equitable remuneration.
         …’
         
Community law
            
 According to the first recital in the preamble thereto, the purpose of First Council Directive 89/104/EEC of December to approximate the laws of the Member States relating to trade marks (OJ L 40, p. 1) is to approximate the laws of Member
         States in order to remove the existing disparities which may impede the free movement of goods and the freedom to provide
         services and may distort competition within the common market.
         
            
 However, as is apparent from the third recital, Directive 89/is not intended to achieve full-scale approximation of the
         trade-mark laws of the Member States.
         
            
 Article of Directive 89/104, which is principally intended to define the scope of protection conferred by the right to a
         trade mark, provides in paragraphs 1, 2, and 5:
         
‘(1)
The registered trade mark shall confer on the proprietor exclusive rights therein. The proprietor shall be entitled to prevent
               all third parties not having his consent from using in the course of trade:
            
(a)
any sign which is identical with the trade mark in relation to goods or services which are identical with those for which
                     the trade mark is registered; 
                  
(b)
any sign where, because of its identity with, or similarity to, the trade mark and the identity or similarity of the goods
                     or services covered by the trade mark and the sign, there exists a likelihood of confusion on the part of the public, which
                     includes the likelihood of association between the sign and the trade mark.
                  
(2)     Any Member State may also provide that the proprietor shall be entitled to prevent all third parties not having his consent
         from using in the course of trade any sign which is identical with, or similar to, the trade mark in relation to goods or
         services which are not similar to those for which the trade mark is registered, where the latter has a reputation in the Member
         State and where use of that sign without due cause takes unfair advantage of, or is detrimental to, the distinctive character
         or the repute of the trade mark.
         (3)     The following, inter alia, may be prohibited under paragraphs l and 2:
         
(a)
affixing the sign to the goods or to the packaging thereof;
…
         (5)     Paragraphs to shall not affect provisions in any Member State relating to the protection against the use of a sign other
         than for the purposes of distinguishing goods or services, where use of that sign without due cause takes unfair advantage
         of, or is detrimental to, the distinctive character or the repute of the trade mark.’
         
            
 Article of Directive 89/104, which is headed ‘Limitation of the effects of a trade mark’, provides in paragraph 1:
         ‘1.     The trade mark shall not entitle the proprietor to prohibit a third party from using, in the course of trade,
         
(a)
his own name or address; 
…
 provided he uses them in accordance with honest practices in industrial or commercial matters.’
         
National law Trade-mark law
         
            
 Under the first subparagraph of Paragraph of the Tavaramerkkilaki (Law on trade marks) (7/1964) of January (‘the
         Tavaramerkkilaki’):
         ‘Any person may use, in the course of his trade, his name, address or trade name as a trade symbol for his products unless
         use of that symbol might give rise to confusion with the protected trade mark of a third party or with a name, address or
         trade name lawfully used by a third party in his trading activities.’
         
            
 The first subparagraph of Paragraph of the Tavaramerkkilaki provides:
         ‘The right to use a sign for a product under Paragraphs to of this law means that no one other than its proprietor may
         use commercially as a sign for his products a sign liable to be confused therewith, on the product or its packaging, in advertising
         or business documents or otherwise, including also use by word of mouth. …’
         
            
 The first subparagraph of Paragraph of the Tavaramerkkilaki provides:
         ‘Signs are deemed to be liable to be confused with each other under this law only if they refer to identical or similar types
         of products.’
         
            
 Under Paragraph of the Tavaramerkkilaki, where more than one person claims to have an exclusive right to use on his products
         signs which are liable to be confused, priority is to be given to that person who is able to rely on an earlier legal basis,
         provided that the right claimed has not expired as a result of, for example, a lack of use by the proprietor.
         
            
 Under point of the first subparagraph of Paragraph of the Tavaramerkkilaki, marks liable to be confused with the protected
         trade name, secondary sign or trade mark of another economic operator may not be registered.
         
            
 The national court points out that the Finnish legislature took the view that the Tavaramerkkilaki is consistent with the
         TRIPs Agreement and that there was therefore no need to amend it to bring into line with that agreement. Similarly, the Finnish
         legislature considered the provisions of the Tavaramerkkilaki on the likelihood of confusion between marks designating identical
         or similar goods to be compatible with Directive 89/104, so that they could remain unchanged.
         
 The right to trade names
         
            
 Under Paragraph 2(1) of the Toiminimilaki (Law on trade names) (128/1979) of February (‘the Toiminimilaki’), the exclusive
         right to use a trade name is acquired either by registering that name or by establishing it through use.
         
            
 Paragraph 2(3) of the Toiminimilaki provides:
         ‘A trade name is regarded as having been established by use where it is generally well known by the public targeted by the
         activity of the economic operator.’
         
            
 The national court points out that, in its decisions, it has interpreted Article of the Paris Convention as protecting,
         in addition to trade names registered in Finland or established by use there, foreign trade names which have been registered
         in another contracting State to that convention and the ancillary signs contained in that trade name. However, according to
         that case-law, protection of such foreign trade names is subject to the condition that the ‘effective’ element of that trade
         name be, at least to some extent, well known in the relevant Finnish trade circles.
         
The main action and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 Anheuser-Busch is the proprietor in Finland of the trade marks Budweiser, Bud, Bud Light and Budweiser King of Beers, which
         designate beer and were registered between June and August 1992. The first application for registration of those
         marks, that for Budweiser, was filed on October 1980.
         
            
 Budvar registered its trade name in the Czechoslovakian commercial register on February 1967. It was registered in Czech
         (‘Budĕjovický Budvar, národní podnik’), English (‘Budweiser Budvar, National Corporation’) and French (‘Budweiser Budvar,
         Entreprise nationale’). Budvar was, moreover, the proprietor in Finland of the trade marks Budvar and Budweiser Budvar, which
         designate beer and were registered on May and November respectively, but the Finnish courts declared that
         it had forfeited those rights as a result of a failure to use the trade marks.
         
            
 By an action brought before the Helsingin käräjäoikeus (Helsinki District Court) (Finland) on October 1996, Anheuser-Busch
         sought to prohibit Budvar from continuing or recommencing the use in Finland of the trade marks Budĕjovický Budvar, Budweiser
         Budvar, Budweiser, Budweis, Budvar, Bud and Budweiser Budbraü as signs for the marketing and sale of beer produced by Budvar.
         Moreover, Anheuser-Busch sought an order that all labels contrary to that prohibition be removed and that Budvar pay compensation
         for any infringement of its trade-mark rights.
         
            
 Anheuser-Busch argued that the signs used by Budvar could be confused, within the meaning of the Tavaramerkkilaki, with its
         trade marks since those signs and trade marks designate identical or similar types of goods.
         
            
 By the same action, Anheuser-Busch sought a further order prohibiting Budvar from using in Finland, on pain of a fine pursuant
         to the Toiminimilaki, the trade names ‘Budĕjovický Budvar, národní podnik’, ‘Budweiser Budvar’, ‘Budweiser Budvar, national
         enterprise’, ‘Budweiser Budvar, Entreprise nationale’ and ‘Budweiser Budvar, National Corporation’, on the ground that those
         names were liable to be confused with its trade marks.
         
            
 In its defence, Budvar contended that the signs used in Finland to market its beer could not be confused with Anheuser-Busch’s
         trade marks. It also submitted that, with respect to the sign ‘Budweiser Budvar’, the registration of its trade name in Czech,
         English and French conferred on it, pursuant to Article of the Paris Convention, a right in Finland earlier than that conferred
         by Anheuser-Busch’s trade marks and that that earlier right was therefore protected under that article.
         
            
 By its judgment of October 1998, the Helsingin käräjäoikeus held that the beer-bottle labels used by Budvar in Finland and,
         in particular, the dominant sign appearing on that label, ‘Budĕjovický Budvar’, especially when taken as a whole, were so
         different from Anheuser-Busch’s trade marks and labels that the goods in question could not be confused.
         
            
 It further held that the sign ‘BREWED AND BOTTLED BY THE BREWERY BUDWEISER BUDVAR national enterprise’, appearing on the labels
         below the abovementioned dominant sign and in considerably smaller letters, was not used as a mark but merely indicated the
         trade name of the brewery. It found that Budvar was entitled to used that sign since it was the registered English version
         of its trade name, had been registered as such and, according to the statements made by witnesses, was, at least to a certain
         extent, well known in the relevant trade circles when Anheuser-Busch’s trade marks were registered, with the result that it
         was likewise protected in Finland under Article of the Paris Convention.
         
            
 On appeal, the Helsingin hovioikeus (Helsinki Court of Appeal) (Finland), by judgment of June 2000, ruled that the abovementioned
         witness statements did not suffice to prove that the English version of Budvar’s trade name was, at least to some extent,
         well known in the relevant trade circles in Finland before registration of Anheuser-Busch’s trade marks. Accordingly, it set
         aside the judgment given by the Helsingin käräjäoikeus in so far as that court held that the English version of Budvar’s trade
         name enjoyed protection in Finland under Article of the Paris Convention.
         
            
 Both Anheuser-Busch and Budvar then appealed to the Korkein oikeus (Supreme Court) against the judgment given by the Helsingin
         hovioikeus, relying, essentially, on the arguments which they had already put forward at first instance and on appeal.
         
            
 In its order for reference, the Korkein oikeus observes that it follows from paragraph of the judgment in Joined Cases
         C‑300/and C‑392/Dior and Others [2000] ECR I‑that the Court has jurisdiction to interpret a provision of the TRIPs Agreement if it may be applied both
         to situations falling within the scope of national law and to situations falling within the scope of Community law, as is
         the case in the field of trade marks.
         
            
 The national court adds that, in paragraphs to of the judgment in Dior, the Court held that, in the areas to which the TRIPs Agreement applies, a situation falls within the scope of Community
         law where the Community has already adopted legislation in the relevant field but this is not so in the case of a field in
         which the Community has not yet legislated and which, consequently, falls within the competence of the Member States.
         
            
 According to the Korkein oikeus, the provisions of the TRIPs Agreement on trade marks relate to a field in which the Community
         has already adopted legislation and which therefore falls within the scope of Community law. By contrast, the Community has
         not, as yet, adopted legislation relating to trade names.
         
            
 As regards the temporal applicability of the TRIPs Agreement to the main case, the national court observes that it follows
         from paragraphs and of the judgment in Case C‑89/Schieving-Nijstad and Others [2001] ECR I‑that, in accordance with Article 70(1), the TRIPs Agreement is applicable in so far as the infringement
         of intellectual property rights continues beyond the date on which TRIPs became applicable with regard to the Community and
         the Member States.
         
            
 The national court also observes that Article 70(2) of the TRIPs Agreement provides that, save where otherwise provided, that
         agreement gives rise to obligations in respect of all subject-matter existing at the date of application of the TRIPs Agreement
         to the Member in question, which is protected in that Member on that date or which meets or comes subsequently to meet the
         criteria for protection laid down in that agreement.
         
            
 Accordingly, the Korkein oikeus decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary
         ruling:
         
‘1.
If the conflict between a trade mark and a sign alleged to infringe it is situated at a point in time before the entry into
               force of the TRIPs Agreement, do the provisions of the TRIPs Agreement apply to the question of which right has the earlier
               legal basis, when the alleged infringement of the trade mark is said to continue after the date on which the TRIPs Agreement
               became applicable in the Community and the Member States?
            
2.
If the answer to Question is affirmative:
(a)
Can the trade name of an undertaking also act as a sign for goods or services within the meaning of the first sentence of
                     Article 16(1) of the TRIPs Agreement?
                  
(b)
If the answer to Question 2(a) is affirmative, on what conditions may a trade name be regarded as a sign for goods or services
                     within the meaning of the first sentence of Article 16(1) of the TRIPs Agreement?
                  
3.
If the answer to Question 2(a) is affirmative:
(a)
How is the reference in the third sentence of Article 16(1) of the TRIPs Agreement to existing prior rights to be interpreted?
                     May the right to a trade name also be regarded as an existing prior right within the meaning of the third sentence of Article
                     16(1) of the TRIPs Agreement?
                  
(b)
If the answer to Question 3(a) is affirmative, how is the said reference in the third sentence of Article 16(1) of the TRIPs
                     Agreement to existing prior rights to be interpreted in the case of a trade name which is not registered or established by
                     use in the State in which the trade mark is registered and in which protection is sought for the trade mark against the trade
                     name in question, having regard to the obligation under Article of the Paris Convention to afford protection to a trade
                     name regardless of whether it is registered and to the fact that the Permanent Appellate Body of the WTO has regarded the
                     reference in Article 2(1) of the TRIPs Agreement to Article of the Paris Convention as meaning that WTO members are obliged
                     under the TRIPs Agreement to protect trade names in accordance with the latter article? When assessing, in such a case, whether
                     a trade name has a legal basis prior to a trade mark for the purposes of the third sentence of Article 16(1) of the TRIPs
                     Agreement, may it thus be considered as decisive:
                  
(i)
whether the trade name was well known at least to some extent among the relevant trade circles in the State in which the trade
                           mark is registered and in which protection is sought for it, before the point in time at which registration of the trade mark
                           was applied for in the State in question; or
                        
(ii)
whether the trade name was used in commerce directed to the State in which the trade mark is registered and in which protection
                           is sought for it, before the point in time at which registration of the trade mark was applied for in the State in question;
                           or
                        
(iii)
what other factor may decide whether the trade name is to be regarded as an existing prior right within the meaning of the
                           third sentence of Article 16(1) of the TRIPs Agreement?’
                        
The questions referred for a preliminary rulingAdmissibility of the reference for a preliminary ruling
            
 According to Anheuser-Busch, the reference for a preliminary ruling is inadmissible in its entirety since the main case does
         not fall within either the temporal or the substantive scope of the TRIPs Agreement. Accordingly, the Court does not, in the
         present case, have jurisdiction to interpret the relevant provisions of that agreement.
         
            
 It is apparent from its case-law that the Court has jurisdiction to interpret a provision of the TRIPs Agreement for the purpose
         of responding to the needs of the judicial authorities of the Member States where they are called upon to apply their national
         rules with a view to ordering measures for the protection of rights created by Community legislation which fall within the
         scope of that agreement (see, to that effect, Dior, cited above, paragraphs and and the case-law cited there).
         
            
 Since the Community is a party to the TRIPs Agreement, it is indeed under an obligation to interpret its trade-mark legislation,
         as far as possible, in the light of the wording and purpose of that agreement (see, with respect to a situation falling within
         the scope of both a provision of the TRIPs Agreement and Directive 89/104, Case C‑49/Heidelberger Bauchemie [2004] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 20).
         
            
 The Court therefore has jurisdiction to interpret Article 16(1) of the TRIPs Agreement, which is the subject of the second
         and third questions referred for a preliminary ruling.
         
            
 Whether the TRIPs Agreement, and in particular Article thereof, is relevant to the settlement of the dispute in the main
         case depends on what interpretation is to be given to that article, which is precisely the subject of the second and third
         questions referred for a preliminary ruling. It follows that the question of the substantive applicability of the TRIPs Agreement
         is included in the last two questions referred and will be dealt with in the answer to be given to those questions.
         
            
 The question of temporal applicability is the subject of the first question referred.
         
            
 Accordingly, the reference for a preliminary ruling must be declared admissible.
         
The first question
            
 By its first question, the national court asks, essentially, whether the TRIPs Agreement applies in the event of a conflict
         between a trade mark and a sign alleged to infringe that trade mark, where that conflict arose before the date of application
         of the TRIPs Agreement but continued beyond that date.
         
            
 The Court has already held, in paragraphs and of the judgment in Schieving-Nijstad, cited above, that, even if the alleged infringement of a trade mark arose before the date of application of the TRIPs Agreement
         to the Community and the Member States – that is to say, prior to January – this does not necessarily mean that such
         acts ‘occurred’ before that date within the meaning of Article 70(1) of the TRIPs Agreement. The Court stated that, where
         the acts which the third party is alleged to have committed continued up to the date on which a ruling was given – which,
         in the case giving rise to the abovementioned judgment, occurred after the date of application of the TRIPs Agreement – the
         relevant provision of that agreement is temporally relevant to the settlement of the dispute in the main case.
         
            
 The effect of Article 70(1) of the TRIPs Agreement is merely to exclude the imposition of obligations under that agreement
         in respect of ‘acts which occurred’ before its date of application but it does not exclude such obligations in respect of
         situations which continue beyond that date. By contrast, Article 70(2) of the TRIPs Agreement states that the obligations
         arising from that agreement apply in respect of ‘all subject-matter existing … and which is protected’ on the date of application
         of that Agreement to a Member of the World Trade Organisation (‘the WTO’), so that, from that date, such a member is required
         to fulfil all the obligations arising from that agreement in respect of that existing subject-matter (see also, to that effect,
         the Report of the WTO Appellate Body, issued on September 2000, Canada – Term of Patent Protection (AB‑2000‑7), WT/DS170/AB/R,
         paragraphs 69, and 71).
         
            
 Furthermore, Article 70(4) of the TRIPs Agreement applies to acts in respect of specific objects embodying protected subject-matter
         which become infringing under the terms of legislation in conformity with that agreement, and which were commenced, or in
         respect of which a significant investment was made, before the date of acceptance of the WTO Agreement. In such a situation,
         Article 70(4) allows the members to provide for limitations of the remedies available to the holder of the right against continued
         performance of such acts after the date of application of the TRIPs Agreement to the WTO member concerned.
         
            
 In the present case, it is apparent from the decision to refer that the acts which Budvar is alleged to have committed in
         Finland certainly commenced before the date of application of the TRIPs Agreement but that they continued after that date.
         Moreover, it is undisputed that the proceedings alleging infringement concern signs which were protected as trade marks in
         Finland on the date of application of the TRIPs Agreement, that is to say, in respect of that Member State, January 1996,
         and that those proceedings were brought on October 1996, that is to say, after that date.
         
            
 It follows that, in accordance with Article 70(1) and (2), the TRIPs Agreement applies to that situation.
         
            
 Consequently, the answer to the first question must be that the TRIPs Agreement applies in the event of a conflict between
         a trade mark and a sign alleged to infringe that trade mark where that conflict arose before the date of application of the
         TRIPs Agreement but continued beyond that date.
         
The second and third questions Preliminary observations
         
            
 The Court has already held that, having regard to their nature and structure, the provisions of the TRIPs Agreement do not
         have direct effect. Those provisions are not, in principle, among the rules in the light of which the Court is to review the
         legality of measures of the Community institutions under the first paragraph of Article EC and are not such as to create
         rights upon which individuals may rely directly before the courts by virtue of Community law (see, to that effect, Dior, paragraphs to 45).
         
            
 However, it follows from the Court’s case-law that, when called upon to apply national rules with a view to ordering measures
         for the protection of rights in a field to which the TRIPs Agreement applies and in which the Community has already legislated,
         as is the case with the field of trade marks, the national courts are required under Community law to do so, as far as possible,
         in the light of the wording and purpose of the relevant provisions of the TRIPs Agreement (see, to that effect, inter alia,
         Dior, paragraphs to 47).
         
            
 Moreover, according to that case-law, the competent authorities called on to apply and interpret the relevant national law
         must likewise do so, as far as possible, in the light of the wording and the purpose of Directive 89/so as to achieve
         the result it has in view and thereby comply with the third paragraph of Article EC (see, inter alia, Case C‑218/Henkel [2004] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and the case-law cited there).
         
            
 Consequently, in the present case, the relevant provisions of the national trade-mark law must be applied and interpreted,
         as far as possible, in the light of the wording and purpose of the relevant provisions of both Directive 89/and the TRIPs
         Agreement.
         
 The second question
         
            
 By its second question, the national court is asking, essentially, whether and, if so, under what conditions a trade name
         may be regarded as a sign for the purposes of the first sentence of Article 16(1) of the TRIPs Agreement with the result that,
         under that provision, the proprietor of a trade mark has an exclusive right to prevent a third party from using that trade
         name without his consent.
         
            
 First, with respect to Directive 89/104, it follows from the Court’s case-law on the definition of use by a third party, for
         which provision is made in Article 5(1) of that directive, that the exclusive right conferred by a trade mark was intended
         to enable the trade mark proprietor to protect his specific interests as proprietor, that is, to ensure that the trade mark
         can fulfil its functions and that, therefore, the exercise of that right must be reserved to cases in which a third party’s
         use of the sign affects or is liable to affect the functions of the trade mark, in particular its essential function of guaranteeing
         to consumers the origin of the goods (see Case C‑206/Arsenal Football Club [2002] ECR I‑10273, paragraphs and 54).
         
            
 That is the case, in particular, where the use of that sign allegedly made by the third party is such as to create the impression
         that there is a material link in trade between the third party’s goods and the undertaking from which those goods originate.
         It must be established whether the consumers targeted, including those who are confronted with the goods after they have left
         the third party’s point of sale, are likely to interpret the sign, as it is used by the third party, as designating or tending
         to designate the undertaking from which the third party’s goods originate (see, to that effect, Arsenal Football Club, cited above, paragraphs and 57).
         
            
 The national court must establish whether that is the case in the light of the specific circumstances of the use of the sign
         allegedly made by the third party in the main case, namely, in the present case, the labelling used by Budvar in Finland.
         
            
 The national court must also confirm whether the use made in the present case is one ‘in the course of trade’ and ‘in relation
         to goods’ within the meaning of Article 5(1) of Directive 89/(see, inter alia, Arsenal Football Club, paragraphs and 41).
         
            
 Where those conditions are satisfied, it follows from the case-law of the Court that, in the event of identity of the sign
         and the trade mark and of the goods or services, the protection conferred by Article 5(1)(a) of Directive 89/is absolute,
         whereas, in the situation provided for in Article 5(1)(b), the proprietor, in order to enjoy protection, must also prove that
         there is a likelihood of confusion on the part of the public because the signs and trade marks and the designated goods or
         services are identical or similar (see, to that effect, Case C‑292/Davidoff [2003] ECR I‑389, paragraph 28, and Case C‑291/LTJ Diffusion [2003] ECR I‑2799, paragraphs and 49).
         
            
 However, where the examinations to be carried out by the national court, referred to in paragraph of this judgment, show
         that the sign in question in the main case is used for purposes other than to distinguish the goods concerned – for example,
         as a trade or company name – reference must, pursuant to Article 5(5) of Directive 89/104, be made to the legal order of the
         Member State concerned to determine the extent and nature, if any, of the protection afforded to the trade-mark proprietor
         who claims to be suffering damage as a result of use of that sign as a trade name or company name (see Case C‑23/Robelco [2002] ECR I‑10913, paragraphs and 34). 
         
            
 Secondly, with respect to the TRIPs Agreement, it should be observed that the primary objective of that agreement is to strengthen
         and harmonise the protection of intellectual property on a worldwide scale (see Schieving-Nijstad, paragraph and the case-law cited there).
         
            
 According to the preamble, the purpose of the TRIPs Agreement is to ‘reduce distortions and impediments to international trade’
         by ‘taking into account the need to promote effective and adequate protection of intellectual property rights’ while at the
         same time ensuring that ‘measures and procedures to enforce intellectual property rights do not themselves become barriers
         to legitimate trade’.
         
            
 Article of the TRIPs Agreement confers on the proprietor of a registered trade mark a minimum standard of exclusive rights
         agreed at international level which all the members of the WTO must guarantee in their domestic legislation. Those exclusive
         rights protect the proprietor against any infringements of the registered trade mark that may be committed by non-authorised
         third parties (see also the Report of the WTO Appellate Body, issued on January 2002, United States – Section of the
         Omnibus Appropriations Act (AB‑2001‑7) WT/DS/176/AB/R, paragraph 186).
         
            
 Article of the TRIPs Agreement provides, inter alia, that any sign, or any combination of signs, capable of distinguishing
         the goods or services of one undertaking from those of other undertakings, is to be capable of constituting a trade mark.
         
            
 Thus, like Article of Directive 89/104, Article of the TRIPs Agreement lays down a guarantee of origin which is the essential
         function of a trade mark (see, with respect to that directive, inter alia, Arsenal Football Club, paragraph 49).
         
            
 It follows from those factors that the interpretation of the relevant provisions of the national trade-mark law so far as
         possible in the light of the wording and purpose of the relevant provisions of Community law, in the present case those of
         Directive 89/104, is not prejudiced by an interpretation in keeping with the wording and purpose of the relevant provisions
         of the TRIPs Agreement (see paragraph of this judgment).
         
            
 The relevant provisions of national trade-mark law must therefore be applied and interpreted to the effect that the exercise
         of the exclusive right conferred on the proprietor of the trade mark to prevent the use of the sign of which that mark consists
         or of a sign similar to that mark must be reserved to cases in which a third party’s use of the sign prejudices or is liable
         to prejudice the functions of the trade mark, in particular its essential function of guaranteeing to consumers the origin
         of the goods.
         
            
 Such an interpretation is, moreover, supported by the general purpose of the TRIPs Agreement, referred to in paragraph of this judgment, which is to ensure that a balance is maintained between the aim of reducing distortions and impediments
         to international trade and that of promoting effective and adequate protection of intellectual property rights so as to ensure
         that the measures and procedures to enforce intellectual property rights do not themselves become barriers to legitimate trade
         (see, to that effect, Schieving-Nijstad, paragraph 38). That distinction also appears to be appropriate in the light of the specific object of Article of the
         TRIPs Agreement, referred to in paragraph of this judgment, which is to guarantee a minimum standard of exclusive rights
         agreed at international level.
         
            
 Moreover, the conditions laid down in Article of the TRIPs Agreement, in the authentic French, English and Spanish versions,
         that the use must be made ‘in the course of trade’ (‘au cours d'opérations commerciales’, ‘en el curso de operaciones comerciales’)
         and ‘for goods’ (‘pour des produits’, ‘para bienes’) appear to correspond to those laid down in Article 5(1) of Directive
         89/104, which require that the use be made ‘in the course of trade’ (in the French and Spanish versions, ‘dans la vie des
         affaires’ and ‘en el tráfico económico’) and ‘for goods’ (in those other versions, ‘pour des produits’ and ‘para productos’).
         
            
 It should be added that, should it become apparent from the examinations to be carried out by the national court that, in
         the present case, the proprietor of the trade mark may assert his exclusive rights under Article 16(1) of the TRIPs Agreement
         to prevent the use allegedly made by the third party, that agreement contains a further provision which may be relevant in
         resolving the dispute in the main case.
         
            
 It should be remembered that it is for the Court to provide the national court with all the elements of interpretation of
         Community law which may be of assistance in adjudicating on the case pending before it, whether or not that court specifically
         refers to them in its questions (see Case C‑456/Trojani [2004] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and the case-law cited there).
         
            
 More specifically, in the present case, it is appropriate to examine the possible impact of Article of the TRIPs Agreement,
         which allows the members of the WTO to provide for limited exceptions to the rights conferred by a trade mark, for example
         with respect to fair use of descriptive terms, provided that such exceptions take account of the legitimate interests of the
         proprietor of the trade mark and of third parties. Such an exception might cover use of the sign in good faith by a third
         party, particularly if that sign is an indication of that party’s name or address. 
         
            
 With respect to the Community, provision is made for such an exception in Article 6(1)(a) of Directive 89/104, which, essentially,
         allows third parties to use signs to indicate their own name or address, provided that they use them in accordance with honest
         practices in industrial or commercial matters.
         
            
 Certainly, the Council of the European Union and the Commission of the European Communities issued a joint declaration, which
         was recorded in the minutes of the Council when Directive 89/was adopted, that that provision covers only natural persons’
         names.
         
            
 However, the interpretation given in such a declaration cannot be used where no reference is made to its content in the wording
         of the provision in question and that content therefore has no legal significance. The Council and the Commission themselves
         explicitly recognised that limitation in the preamble to their declaration, stating that ‘since the following statements of
         the Council and the Commission are not part of the legal text they are without prejudice to the interpretation of that text
         by the Court of Justice of the European Communities’ (see HeidelbergerBauchemie, cited above, paragraph and the case-law cited there).
         
            
 No reference is made in the wording of Article 6(1)(a) of Directive 89/to the considerable restriction of the meaning
         of ‘name’ resulting from the declaration mentioned in paragraph of this judgment. That declaration therefore has no legal
         significance.
         
            
 A third party may, in principle, rely on the exception provided for in Article 6(1)(a) of Directive 89/in order to be
         entitled to use a sign which is identical or similar to a trade mark for the purpose of indicating his trade name, even if
         that constitutes a use falling within the scope of Article 5(1) of that directive which the trade mark proprietor may prohibit
         by virtue of the exclusive rights conferred on him by that provision.
         
            
 It is also necessary that the use be made in accordance with honest practices in industrial or commercial matters, which is
         the only assessment criterion referred to in Article 6(1) of Directive 89/104. The condition of ‘honest practice’ is, in essence,
         an expression of the duty to act fairly in relation to the legitimate interests of the trade-mark proprietor (see Case C‑100/Gerolsteiner Brunnen [2004] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and the case-law cited there). It is therefore essentially the same condition as that laid
         down by Article of the TRIPs Agreement.
         
            
 In assessing whether the condition of honest practice is satisfied, account must be taken first of the extent to which the
         use of the third party’s trade name is understood by the relevant public, or at least a significant section of that public,
         as indicating a link between the third party’s goods and the trade-mark proprietor or a person authorised to use the trade
         mark, and secondly of the extent to which the third party ought to have been aware of that. Another factor to be taken into
         account when making the assessment is whether the trade mark concerned enjoys a certain reputation in the Member State in
         which it is registered and its protection is sought, from which the third party might profit in selling his goods.
         
            
 It is for the national court to carry out an overall assessment of all the relevant circumstances, which include the labelling
         of the bottle in order to assess, more specifically, whether the producer of the drink bearing the trade name can be regarded
         as unfairly competing with the proprietor of the trade mark (see, to that effect, Gerolsteiner Brunnen, paragraphs and 26). 
         
            
 Accordingly, the second question must be answered as follows:
         
–
a trade name may constitute a sign within the meaning of the first sentence of Article 16(1) of the TRIPs Agreement. That
               provision is intended to confer on the proprietor of a trade mark the exclusive right to prevent a third party from using
               such a sign if the use in question prejudices or is liable to prejudice the functions of the trade mark, in particular its
               essential function of guaranteeing to consumers the origin of the goods;
            
–
the exceptions provided for in Article of the TRIPs Agreement are intended, inter alia, to enable a third party to use
               a sign which is identical or similar to a trade mark to indicate his trade name, provided that such use is in accordance with
               honest practices in industrial or commercial matters.
            
 The third question
         
            
 By its third question, the national court is asking, essentially, whether and, if so, under what conditions a trade name which
         is not registered or established by use in the State in which the trade mark is registered and in which protection against
         the trade name in question is sought may be regarded as an existing prior right within the meaning of the third sentence of
         Article 16(1) of the TRIPs Agreement, having regard in particular to that Member State’s obligations to protect the trade
         name under Article of the Paris Convention and Article 2(1) of the TRIPs Agreement.
         
            
 If it is apparent from the examinations to be carried out by the national court in accordance with the principles set out
         in paragraph of this judgment in response to the second question that the use made of the trade name falls within the scope
         of the first sentence of Article 16(1) of the TRIPs Agreement, the proprietor of the trade mark has an exclusive right to
         prevent such use, subject to the provisions of Article of that agreement.
         
            
 However, the third sentence of Article 16(1) of the TRIPs Agreement provides that that exclusive right must not prejudice
         any ‘existing prior right’.
         
            
 That provision must be understood as meaning that, where the proprietor of a trade name has a right falling within the scope
         of the TRIPs Agreement which arose prior to that conferred by the trade mark with which it is alleged to conflict and which
         entitles him to use a sign identical or similar to that trade mark, such use cannot be prohibited by virtue of the exclusive
         right conferred by the trade mark on its proprietor under the first sentence of Article 16(1) of the TRIPs Agreement.
         
            
 For that provision, thus understood, to be applicable, the third party must first of all be able to rely on a right falling
         within the substantive scope of the TRIPs Agreement.
         
            
 It should be observed that a trade name is a right falling within the scope of the term ‘intellectual property’ within the
         meaning of Article 1(2) of the TRIPs Agreement. Moreover, it follows from Article 2(1) of the TRIPs Agreement that the protection
         of trade names, for which specific provision is made in Article of the Paris Convention, is expressly incorporated into
         that agreement. Therefore, by virtue of the TRIPs Agreement, the members of the WTO are under an obligation to protect trade
         names (see also the Report of the WTO Appellate Body, United States – Section of the Omnibus Appropriations Act, cited
         above, paragraphs to 341).
         
            
 Accordingly, in so far as it is existing subject-matter within the meaning of Article 70(2) of the TRIPs Agreement, as was
         explained in paragraph of this judgment, the trade name in question must be protected under the TRIPs Agreement.
         
            
 The trade name is therefore a right falling within the substantive scope of the TRIPs Agreement, so that the first condition
         laid down by the third sentence of Article 16(1) of that agreement is satisfied.
         
            
 It must, moreover, be an existing right. The term ‘existing’ means that the right concerned must fall within the temporal
         scope of the TRIPs Agreement and still be protected at the time when it is relied on by its proprietor in order to counter
         the claims of the proprietor of the trade mark with which it is alleged to conflict.
         
            
 In the present case, it must therefore be ascertained whether the trade name in question, which the parties agree is neither
         registered nor established by use in the Member State in which the trade mark is registered and in which the protection afforded
         by that mark against the trade name in question is sought, satisfies the conditions set out in the preceding paragraph of
         this judgment.
         
            
 It follows from Article of the Paris Convention, which, as was explained in paragraph of this judgment, must be complied
         with by virtue of the TRIPs Agreement, that the protection of trade names is to be guaranteed and that such protection may
         not be made subject to any registration requirement.
         
            
 As regards any conditions relating to minimum use or minimum awareness of the trade name to which that name may, according
         to the national court, be subject under Finnish law, it should be observed that, in principle, neither Article 16(1) of the
         TRIPs Agreement nor Article of the Paris Convention precludes such conditions.
         
            
 Finally, ‘priority’ of the right in question for the purposes of the third sentence of Article 16(1) of the TRIPs Agreement
         means that the basis for the right concerned must have arisen at a time prior to the grant of the trade mark with which it
         is alleged to conflict. As the Advocate General pointed out in point of his Opinion, that requirement is an expression
         of the principle of the primacy of the prior exclusive right, which is one of the basic principles of trade-mark law and,
         more generally, of all industrial-property law.
         
            
 It should be added that the principle of priority is likewise enshrined in Directive 89/and, more specifically, in Articles
         4(2) and 6(2) thereof.
         
            
 In light of the above, the answer to the third question must be that a trade name which is not registered or established by
         use in the Member State in which the trade mark is registered and in which protection against the trade name in question is
         sought may be regarded as an existing prior right within the meaning of the third sentence of Article 16(1) of the TRIPs Agreement
         if the proprietor of the trade name has a right falling within the substantive and temporal scope of the TRIPs Agreement which
         arose prior to the trade mark with which it is alleged to conflict and which entitles him to use a sign identical or similar
         to that trade mark.
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the Finnish Government and by the Commission in submitting observations to the Court are not recoverable.
         Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court.
         
 On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) rules as follows:
         
 
1.
The Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs Agreement), as set out in Annex C to the Agreement
                     establishing the World Trade Organisation, approved on behalf of the European Community, as regards matters within its competence,
                     by Council Decision 94/800/EC of December 1994, applies in the event of a conflict between a trade mark and a sign alleged
                     to infringe that trade mark where that conflict arose before the date of application of the TRIPs Agreement but continued
                     beyond that date.
                  
 
2.
A trade name may constitute a sign within the meaning of the first sentence of Article 16(1) of the Agreement on Trade-Related
                     Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs Agreement). That provision is intended to confer on the proprietor of a trade
                     mark the exclusive right to prevent a third party from using such a sign if the use in question prejudices or is liable to
                     prejudice the functions of the trade mark, in particular its essential function of guaranteeing to consumers the origin of
                     the goods.
                  
The exceptions provided for in Article of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs
                           Agreement) are intended, inter alia, to enable a third party to use a sign which is identical or similar to a trade mark to
                           indicate his trade name, provided that such use is in accordance with honest practices in industrial or commercial matters.
 
3.
A trade name which is not registered or established by use in the Member State in which the trade mark is registered and in
                     which protection against the trade name in question is sought may be regarded as an existing prior right within the meaning
                     of the third sentence of Article 16(1) of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs Agreement)
                     if the proprietor of the trade name has a right falling within the substantive and temporal scope of that agreement which
                     arose prior to the trade mark with which it is alleged to conflict and which entitles him to use a sign identical or similar
                     to that trade mark.
                  
 Signatures.
      
 –
            
Language of the case: Finnish.
Top  
 