
Case C-39/Commission of the European Communities
v
Kingdom of Spain
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 89/48/EEC – Recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of professional education and training of at least three years’
         duration – National legislation not providing for the recognition of diplomas allowing access to the profession of hospital pharmacist
         – Failure to transpose the directive)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Workers – Recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on
            completion of professional education and training of at least three years’ duration – Scope of Directive 89/(Arts 43, second para., and 47(3) EC; Council Directive 89/48)
2.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Recognition of diplomas and formal qualifications
(Art. 47(3) EC)
1.        A Member State which fails to adopt all the measures necessary to transpose Directive 89/on a general system for the recognition
         of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of professional education and training of at least three years’ duration
         as far as the profession of hospital pharmacist is concerned has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive. 
      
The right to recognition of diplomas is guaranteed as an expression of the fundamental right to freedom of establishment by
         the second paragraph of Article EC. Directive 89/48, which lays down a ‘method of recognition’ of the diplomas which it
         covers, establishes a general system for the recognition of higher-education diplomas enabling the holder to gain access to
         a regulated profession and thus to exercise a right enshrined in the Treaty.
      
Article 47(3) EC cannot be interpreted as precluding a directive designed to implement such a system from being applied to
         the health professions. Such an interpretation would result not only in a failure to apply Directive 89/but more generally
         in precluding the right of Community nationals to recognition of diplomas of specialisations in pharmacy, even though that
         right stems from the second paragraph of Article EC. 
      
Accordingly, the recognition of diplomas giving access to the profession of hospital pharmacist falls within the scope of
         Directive 89/and the Member States must provide for a system allowing for that recognition, under the conditions laid down
         in that directive.
      
 (see paras 37-39, 43-44, operative part)
2.        The objective of Article 47(3) EC is not to restrict the scope of the right to recognition of diplomas, but to avoid the implementation
         of a system for the automatic recognition of diplomas giving access to the health professions in the absence of coordination
         of the provisions governing the exercise of those professions. That provision of the Treaty therefore concerns a system which
         must be designed in such a way as to correspond with the progressive harmonisation of the provisions on the exercise of those
         professions.
      
 (see para. 42)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 89/48/EEC – Recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of professional education and training of at least three years’
         duration – National legislation not providing for the recognition of diplomas allowing access to the profession of hospital pharmacist
         – Failure to transpose the directive)
      
In Case C‑39/07,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on February 2007,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by H. Støvlbæk and R. Vidal Puig, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Kingdom of Spain, represented by M. Muñoz Pérez, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, L. Bay Larsen, P. Kūris, J.‑C. Bonichot and C. Toader (Rapporteur),
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities asks the Court to declare that, by failing to adopt all the
         measures necessary to transpose Council Directive 89/48/EEC of December on a general system for the recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of professional
         education and training of at least three years’ duration (OJ L 19, p. 16), as far as the profession of hospital pharmacist
         is concerned, the Kingdom of Spain has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive.
      
 Legal context 
 Community legislation
 Directives 85/432/EEC and 85/433/EEC
On September 1985, the Council adopted Directive 85/432/EEC concerning the coordination of provisions laid down by law, regulation or administrative action in respect of certain
         activities in the field of pharmacy (OJ L 253, p. 34).
      
Under Article 1(1) of Directive 85/432:
      
‘Member States shall ensure that holders of a diploma, certificate or other university or equivalent qualification in pharmacy
         which meets the conditions laid down in Article shall be entitled at least to access to the activities mentioned in paragraph
         and to pursue such activities subject, where appropriate, to the requirement of additional professional experience.’
      
Article of Directive 85/provides:
      
‘Not more than three years after the expiry of the time-limit laid down in Article 5, the Commission shall submit to the Council
         appropriate proposals on specialisations in pharmacy and in particular hospital pharmacy. The Council shall examine these
         proposals within one year.’
      
On September 1985, the Council adopted Directive 85/433/EEC concerning the mutual recognition of diplomas, certificates
         and other evidence of formal qualifications in pharmacy, including measures to facilitate the effective exercise of the right
         of establishment relating to certain activities in the field of pharmacy (OJ L 253, p. 37). 
      
Article 2(1) of Directive 85/433, as amended by Directive 2001/19/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of May
         (OJ L 206, p. 1), provides: 
      
‘Each Member State shall recognise the diplomas, certificates and other formal qualifications listed in the Annex awarded
         to nationals of Member States by other Member States in accordance with Article of Directive 85/... by giving such qualifications,
         as regards the right of access to and pursuit of the activities referred to in Article 1, the same effect in its territory
         as those diplomas, certificates and other formal qualifications, listed in the Annex, which it itself awards.’
      
The Spanish diploma referred to in that annex is that of degree in pharmacy (‘Título de licenciado en farmacia’).
      
 Directive 89/Article of Directive 89/48, as amended by Directive 2001/19, provides:
      
‘For the purposes of this Directive the following definitions shall apply: 
(a)      diploma: any diploma, certificate or other evidence of formal qualifications or any set of such diplomas, certificates or
         other evidence: 
      
–        which has been awarded by a competent authority in a Member State, designated in accordance with its own laws, regulations
         or administrative provisions;
      
–        which shows that the holder has successfully completed a post-secondary course of at least three years’ duration, or of an
         equivalent duration part-time, at a university or establishment of higher education or another establishment of equivalent
         level and, where appropriate, that he has successfully completed the professional training required in addition to the post-secondary
         course, and
      
–        which shows that the holder has the professional qualifications required for the taking-up or pursuit of a regulated profession
         in that Member State, 
      
provided that the education and training attested by the diploma, certificate or other evidence of formal qualifications were
         received mainly in the Community, or the holder thereof has three years’ professional experience certified by the Member State
         which recognised a third-country diploma, certificate or other evidence of formal qualifications.
      
 …
(c)      a regulated profession: the regulated professional activity or range of activities which constitute this profession in a Member
         State; 
      
(d)      regulated professional activity: a professional activity, in so far as the taking-up or pursuit of such activity or one of
         its modes of pursuit in a Member State is subject, directly or indirectly by virtue of laws, regulations or administrative
         provisions, to the possession of a diploma. The following in particular shall constitute a mode of pursuit of a regulated
         professional activity: 
      
–        pursuit of an activity under a professional title, in so far as the use of such a title is reserved to the holders of a diploma
         governed by laws, regulations or administrative provisions, 
      
…’
Article of Directive 89/provides: 
      
‘This Directive shall apply to any national of a Member State wishing to pursue a regulated profession in a host Member State
         in a self-employed capacity or as an employed person.
      
This Directive shall not apply to professions which are the subject of a separate directive establishing arrangements for
         the mutual recognition of diplomas by Member States.’
      
Article of Directive 89/provides:
      
‘1.      Notwithstanding Article [on the right of nationals of another Member State to take up a regulated profession], the host
         Member State may also require the applicant:
      
 ...
(b)      to complete an adaptation period not exceeding three years or take an aptitude test:
 ...’ 
 National legislation 
 The legislation on specialisations in pharmacy
The legislation relating to specialisations in pharmacy is Royal Decree 2708/regulating specialist studies for and the
         award of the qualification of specialist pharmacist (Real Decreto 2708/1982, por el que se regulan los estudios de especialización
         y la obtención del título de farmacéutico especialista), of October (BOE No of October 1982, p. 29994).
      
Article of that royal decree is worded as follows: 
      
‘Subject to the rights granted to those holding a degree in pharmacy, only the holders of the diploma of specialist pharmacist
         [‘farmacéutico especialista’] issued by the Minister for Education and Science can hold the title of specialist pharmacist,
         can pursue the profession as a specialist or occupy with that title a post in a public or private body.’
      
Article of that royal decree provides: 
      
‘To be awarded the diploma of specialist pharmacist, the person concerned must have satisfied the following conditions: 
(a)      hold the diploma evidencing a degree in pharmacy;
(b)       have followed in full the corresponding specialised training course in accordance with the established study plans and programmes;
         
      
(c)      have passed the relevant assessment exams.’ 
Under Article of Royal Decree 2708/1982:
      
‘The following specialisations shall be recognised as specialisations in pharmacy:
First group. – Specialisations requiring primarily hospital training:
…
–        Hospital pharmacy
…’
 The legislation transposing Directives 85/432, 85/and 89/Directives 85/and 85/were transposed into national law by Royal Decree 1667/of December (BOE No of
         January 1990, p. 217). 
      
Article of that royal decree provides:
      
‘The diplomas, certificates and other evidence of formal qualifications set out in Annex I to this royal decree and awarded
         to nationals of a Member State of the European Economic Community fulfilling the criteria set out in Annex II shall be recognised
         in Spain, for the purposes of access to the profession of pharmacist, as being equivalent to the official university diploma
         evidencing a degree in pharmacy.’
      
The Spanish diploma referred to in Annex I to that royal decree is the same as that listed in the annex to Directive 85/433.
      
Directive 89/was transposed into Spanish law by Royal Decree 1665/of October (BOE No of November 1991,
         p. 37916).
      
Article 2(1) of that royal decree provides:
      
‘The rules set out in this royal decree apply to nationals of a Member State of the European Union who, as holders of a diploma
         awarded in a State of that Union, wish to pursue in Spain, in a self-employed capacity or as an employed person, a regulated
         profession the pursuit of which requires higher education of at least three years’ duration.’
      
Article 3(a) of that royal decree provides that the ‘regulated professions’ are all the professions listed in Annex I to that
         decree. That annex does not refer to the profession of hospital pharmacist. 
      
 Pre-litigation procedure
On December 2005, the Commission sent to the Kingdom of Spain a letter of formal notice concerning that Member State’s
         failure to transpose Directive 89/as regards the profession of specialist pharmacist.
      
In its reply of March 2006, the Kingdom of Spain submitted that Directive 89/was not applicable to the profession of
         hospital pharmacist, that being a specialisation of the profession of pharmacist which is specifically regulated by Directives
         85/and 85/433, which were transposed into Spanish law by Royal Decree 1667/1989.
      
On July 2006, having taken the view that that reply was unsatisfactory, the Commission sent the Kingdom of Spain a reasoned
         opinion, to which that Member State replied on January 2007, that is to say, after the date of expiry of the period laid
         down by the Commission in that reasoned opinion, repeating its arguments to the effect that Directive 89/was not applicable
         to specialist qualifications in the area of pharmacy. 
      
Since it did not find those arguments convincing, the Commission brought the present action.
      
 The action
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission claims that, in so far as Article of Royal Decree 2708/precludes holders of a diploma awarded in a Member
         State and recognised as an equivalent qualification under Article of Directive 85/from holding the title of specialist
         pharmacist and, consequently, pursuing the profession of hospital pharmacist, the defendant Member State has failed to transpose
         the directive as regards that profession.
      
The Commission claims, first, that that title should be treated as a ‘diploma’ within the meaning of Article 1(a) of Directive
         89/48, in so far as it is awarded by the designated competent authority, provides evidence of post-secondary training of more
         than three years and proves that its holder has the qualifications required to pursue the profession of hospital pharmacist
         in Spain. Secondly, the profession reserved to holders of a specialist pharmacist’s diploma is a regulated profession within
         the meaning of Article 1(c) of Directive 89/48. That profession consists in the practice of a regulated activity within the
         meaning of Article 1(d) of that directive, in so far as access to it is subject to the possession of a diploma. 
      
The Commission points out, in this connection, that Directive 89/does not exclude any regulated profession from its scope,
         with the exception of those which are already the subject of a specific directive on mutual recognition. In particular, Directive
         89/does not include any provision which can be interpreted as excluding from its scope the pharmaceutical professions or,
         more generally, the health professions. Including such professions in the general system for the recognition of diplomas is
         not contrary to Article 47(3) EC, which states that the progressive abolition of restrictions on the right of establishment
         must be preceded or accompanied by a correlating coordination of the conditions for the exercise of those professions. The
         objective of that directive is not to establish a system for the automatic recognition of diplomas, but to establish a general
         method to facilitate the recognition of diplomas.
      
In addition, Directives 85/and 85/are not applicable to the profession of hospital pharmacist, since they concern
         only the diploma evidencing a degree in pharmacy. Directive 85/432, which coordinates the training requirements for the award
         of the diploma evidencing a degree in pharmacy, to which the regime for recognition laid down in Directive 85/applies,
         is not directed at specialisations in pharmacy, within the meaning of Article thereof, and in particular the hospital pharmacy
         specialisation. Secondly, the diploma evidencing a degree in pharmacy is the only diploma listed in the annex to Directive
         85/with regard to the Kingdom of Spain.
      
In reply, the Kingdom of Spain contends that the profession of hospital pharmacist, as a specialisation of the profession
         of pharmacist, does not fall within the scope of Directive 89/48. That profession, it argues, can be governed only by specific
         legislation, since Article 47(3) EC inserts an express proviso relating to, inter alia, the abolition of restrictions on the
         exercise of the pharmaceutical professions. Such an abolition of restrictions cannot, as a result, be achieved through the
         general system for the recognition of diplomas laid down by Directive 89/48.
      
That interpretation, it submits further, is borne out by Directives 85/and 85/433, which meet the requirement that special
         rules be laid down for the coordination of legislation relating to certain pharmaceutical activities for the purpose of allowing
         mutual recognition of qualifications and diplomas in pharmacy. By contrast, Directive 89/48, in which the sole condition laid
         down for the recognition of diplomas is a minimum duration of studies, is insufficient to ensure compliance with the obligation
         to provide specific rules laid down in Article 47(3) EC. It follows that, in the absence of any specific legislation adopted
         in that matter pursuant to Article of Directive 85/432, the Commission cannot rely on Directive 89/for the purpose of
         challenging the failure of the national legislation to comply with the general system for the recognition of diplomas.
      
 Findings of the Court
The two parties to the proceedings accept that Directives 85/and 85/do not apply to the diploma of specialist pharmacist
         giving access to the profession of hospital pharmacist. However, they draw two different conclusions from that interpretation.
         The Commission submits that the absence of a specific directive means that that diploma falls within the scope of Directive
         89/48, whereas the Kingdom of Spain submits that, in the absence of such a directive, recognition of that diploma must be
         regarded as being governed neither by Directive 89/nor by any other measure of secondary legislation.
      
In this connection, it should be noted at the outset that the scope of Directive 89/is not restricted according to the
         field or type of the diplomas concerned. It is apparent from Article 1(a) thereof that that directive applies to, inter alia,
         any diploma of higher education awarded on completion of a post-secondary course of at least three years’ duration and allowing
         its holder to take up a regulated profession.
      
In addition, according to settled case-law, a profession is deemed regulated, for the purpose of Directive 89/48, where access
         to the professional activity constituting that profession or its exercise is governed by laws, regulations or administrative
         provisions creating a system under which that professional activity is expressly reserved to those who fulfil certain conditions
         and access to it is prohibited to those who do not fulfil them (see, to that effect, inter alia, Case C‑164/Aranitis [1996] ECR I-135, paragraphs and 19, and Case C-285/Burbaud [2003] ECR I-8219, paragraph 45).
      
In the present case, it must be noted that, on the basis of the relevant national legislation, the diploma of specialist pharmacist
         is a diploma of higher studies giving access to a regulated profession, namely that of hospital pharmacist.
      
Even though it does not dispute such a classification of the diploma and profession at issue, the Kingdom of Spain takes the
         view that, since Directive 89/does not apply to diplomas of specialisations in pharmacy, it is not obliged to provide for
         the option for nationals of other Member States to take up the profession of hospital pharmacist.
      
Such an interpretation of the directive must be rejected. 
      
First of all, the right to recognition of diplomas is guaranteed as an expression of the fundamental right to freedom of establishment
         by the second paragraph of Article EC. Under settled case-law, it stems from that EC Treaty provision that a Member State
         to which an application has been made for authorisation to pursue a profession access to which depends, under national law,
         on the possession of a diploma or professional qualification must take into consideration the diplomas, certificates and other
         evidence of formal qualifications which the person concerned has acquired with the aim of pursuing that profession in another
         Member State by comparing the knowledge so certified with the knowledge and qualifications required by the national rules
         (see Case C-340/Vlassopoulou [1991] ECR I-2357, paragraph 16, and Case C-238/Hocsman [2000] ECR I-6623, paragraph 23).
      
Directive 89/48, as is apparent from the third recital in its preamble, lays down a ‘method of recognition’ of the diplomas
         which it covers. It establishes a general system for the recognition of higher-education diplomas enabling the holder to gain
         access to a regulated profession and thus to exercise a right enshrined in the Treaty.
      
Moreover, as the Commission has pointed out, Directive 89/does not establish a system of automatic recognition. Although
         it recognises the right of access to regulated professions, that directive, under Article 4(b) thereof, allows the host State
         to require an applicant who is a national of another Member State to complete an adaptation period or to take an aptitude
         test, in particular where the matters covered by the education and training he has received differ substantially from those
         covered by the diploma required in the host Member State, or where the profession regulated in the host Member State comprises
         one or more regulated professional activities which are not in the profession regulated in the Member State from which the
         applicant originates or comes and that difference between the professional activities in the two Member States concerned corresponds
         to different specific training.
      
The Kingdom of Spain submits that Article 47(3) EC precludes, in any event, a directive designed to implement a general system
         for the recognition of diplomas from being applied to the health professions, since that article expressly inserts a proviso
         concerning the medical and allied and pharmaceutical professions, restrictions on the access to which cannot be removed in
         the absence of a measure fixing the rules relating to the ‘coordination of the conditions for their exercise in the various
         Member States’.
      
That argument must be rejected. Such an interpretation of Article 47(3) EC would result, in fact, not only in a failure to
         apply Directive 89/but more generally in precluding the right of Community nationals to recognition of diplomas of specialisations
         in pharmacy, even though that right stems from the second paragraph of Article EC.
      
On the contrary, the objective of Article 47(3) EC is not to restrict the scope of the right to recognition of diplomas, but
         to avoid the implementation of a system for the automatic recognition of diplomas giving access to the health professions
         in the absence of coordination of the provisions governing the exercise of those professions. That provision of the Treaty
         therefore concerns a system which must be designed in such a way as to correspond with the progressive harmonisation of the
         provisions on the exercise of those professions.
      
Accordingly, the recognition of diplomas giving access to the profession of hospital pharmacist falls within the scope of
         Directive 89/and the Member States must provide for a system allowing for that recognition, under the conditions laid down
         in that directive.
      
In the light of the foregoing, it must be held that, by failing to adopt all the measures necessary to transpose Directive
         89/48, as far as the profession of hospital pharmacist is concerned, the Kingdom of Spain has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under that directive.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for the Kingdom of Spain to be ordered to
         pay the costs and the latter has been unsuccessful, the Kingdom of Spain must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by failing to adopt all the measures necessary to transpose Council Directive 89/48/EEC of December on a general system for the recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of professional education and training
            of at least three years’ duration, as far as the profession of hospital pharmacist is concerned, the Kingdom of Spain has
            failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive;
2.      Orders the Kingdom of Spain to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Spanish.
      
Top  
 