
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-116/SITA EcoService Nederland BV, formerly Verol Recycling Limburg BVvMinister van Volkshuisvesting, Ruimtelijke Ordening en Milieubeheer(Reference for a preliminary rulingfrom the Raad van State  (Netherlands))
         
«(Environment – Waste – Regulation (EEC) No 259/– Directive 75/442/EEC – Treatment of waste in several stages – Use of waste as fuel in the cement industry and use of incineration residues as raw material in cement manufacture – Classification as a recovery operation or as a disposal operation – Concept of the use of waste principally as a fuel or other means to generate energy)»
Opinion of Advocate General Jacobs delivered on November I - Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber), April I - Summary of the Judgment
1..
Environment – Waste – Directive 75/on waste – Regulation No 259/on the shipment of waste – Classification of an  operation as either disposal or recovery – Dual classification not permissible ( Council Regulation No 259/93; Council Directive 75/442) 
2..
Environment – Waste – Directive 75/on waste – Regulation No 259/on the shipment of waste – Classification of an operation as either disposal or recovery – Treatment of waste in several stages – First operation after shipment taken into account ( Council Regulation No 259/93; Council Directive 75/442) 
3..
Environment – Waste – Directive 75/on waste – Combustion of waste – Classification of an operation as either disposal or recovery – Criteria – Calorific value not relevant ( Council Directive 75/442, Annex IIA, point Dand Annex IIB, point R1) 
4..
Environment – Waste – Directive 75/on waste – Regulation No 259/on the shipment of waste – Classification of an operation as either disposal or recovery – Definition by Member States of distinguishing criteria – Whether permissible – Condition ( Council Regulation No 259/93; Council Directive 75/442) 
1.
 For the purpose of applying Directive 75/on waste, as amended by Directive 91/and Decision 96/350, and Regulation
         No 259/on the supervision and control of shipments of waste within, into and out of the European Community, as amended
         by Regulation No 120/97, it must be possible to classify any waste treatment operation as either disposal or recovery, and
         a single operation may not be classified simultaneously as both a disposal and a recovery operation. see para. 2.
 It follows from Directive 75/on waste, as amended by Directive 91/and Decision 96/350, and from Regulation No 259/on the supervision and control of shipments of waste within, into and out of the European Community, as amended by Regulation
         No 120/97, that where a waste treatment process comprises several distinct stages of recovery or disposal, the process as
         a whole is not to be assessed as a single operation, but each phase must be classified separately for the purpose of implementing
         the Regulation when it constitutes a distinct operation in itself. Accordingly, where a waste treatment process comprises several distinct stages, it must be classified as a disposal operation
         or a recovery operation, within the meaning of Directive 75/442, for the purpose of implementing Regulation No 259/93, taking
         into account only the first operation that the waste is to undergo subsequent to shipment. see paras 41-42, operative part 3.
 The calorific value of waste which is to be combusted is not a relevant criterion for the purpose of determining whether that
         operation constitutes a disposal operation as referred to in point Dof Annex IIA to Directive 75/on waste, as amended
         by Directive 91/and by Decision 96/350, or a recovery operation as referred to in point Rof Annex IIB thereof. In order
         to be considered as use principally as a fuel or other means to generate energy within the meaning of that point, it is both
         necessary and sufficient that the combustion of waste meet the three following conditions: first, the main purpose of the
         operation concerned must be to enable the waste to be used as a means of generating energy; secondly, the conditions in which
         that operation is to take place must give reason to believe that it is indeed a  
         means to generate energy; and thirdly, the waste must be used principally as a fuel or other means of generating energy. see paras 53, 56, operative part 4.
 Regulation No 259/on the supervision and control of shipments of waste within, into and out of the European Community,
         as amended by Regulation No 120/97, does not preclude Member States from laying down, in acts having general scope, criteria
         for distinguishing between a recovery operation and a disposal operation, provided that the criteria comply with those laid
         down in Directive 75/on waste, as amended by Directive 91/and Decision 96/350. see paras 55-56, operative part JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)April (1)
((Environment – Waste – Regulation (EEC) No 259/– Directive 75/442/EEC – Treatment of waste in several stages – Use of waste as fuel in the cement industry and use of incineration residues as raw material in cement manufacture – Classification as a recovery operation or as a disposal operation – Concept of the use of waste principally as a fuel or other means to generate energy))
In Case C-116/01, 
            REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Raad van State (Netherlands) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings
            pending before that court between
            
 SITA EcoService Nederland BV , formerly Verol Recycling Limburg BV
            
and
 Minister van Volkshuisvesting, Ruimtelijke Ordening en Milieubeheer ,
            
on the interpretation of Council Directive 75/442/EEC of July on waste (OJ L 194, p. 39), as amended by Council
            Directive 91/156/EEC of March (OJ L 78, p. 32) and Commission Decision 96/350/EC of May (OJ L 135,
            p. 32),
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),,
composed of: M. Wathelet, President of the Chamber, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. La Pergola (Rapporteur), P. Jann and A. Rosas, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs, Registrar: M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
SITA EcoService Nederland BV, by R.G.J. Laan and B. Liefting-Voogd, advocaten, 
               
─
the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster, acting as Agent, 
               
─
the German Government, by W.-D. Plessing and B. Muttelsee-Schön, acting as Agents, 
               
─
the United Kingdom Government, by G. Amodeo, acting as Agent, and by D. Wyatt QC, 
               
─
the Commission of the European Communities, by G. zur Hausen and H. van Vliet, acting as Agents, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of the Netherlands Government, represented by N.A.J. Bel, acting as Agent;  the United
               Kingdom Government, represented by D. Wyatt; and the Commission, represented by H. van Vliet, at the hearing on September
               2002,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on November 2002,
gives the following
Judgment
            
By judgment of March 2001, received at the Court on March 2001, the Raad van State (Netherlands Council of State) referred
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC four questions on the interpretation of Council Directive 75/442/EEC
         of July on waste (OJ L 194, p. 39), as amended by Council Directive 91/156/EEC of March (OJ L 78,
         p. 32) and Commission Decision 96/350/EC of May (OJ L 135, p. 32), hereinafter  
         the Directive. 
         
            
Those questions were raised in the context of a dispute between SITA EcoService Nederland BV (
         SITA) and the Minister van Volkshuisvesting, Ruimtelijke Ordening en Milieubeheer (Minister for Housing, Spatial Planning and
         the Environment, hereinafter  
         the Minister) concerning the lawfulness of two decisions by which the latter subjected waste shipments which had been notified by SITA
         to certain conditions. 
         
Legal framework
Community legislation
         The Directive
         
            
The essential objective of the Directive is the protection of human health and the environment against harmful effects caused
         by the collection, transport, treatment, storage and tipping of waste. In particular, the fourth recital of the Directive
         states that the recovery of waste and the use of recovered materials should be encouraged in order to conserve natural resources.
         
         
            
In Article 1(e) of the Directive,  
         disposal is defined as  
         any of the operations provided for in Annex IIA, and in Article 1(f)  
         recovery is defined as  
         any of the operations provided for in Annex IIB. 
         
            
Annex IIA of the Directive, headed  
         Disposal operations, states:  NB:  This annex is intended to list disposal operations such as they occur in practice.......
         
DIncineration on land
         ...
         
            
Annex IIB, headed  
         Recovery operations, states:  NB:  This annex is intended to list recovery operations as they occur in practice....
         
RUse principally as a fuel or other means to generate energy
         ...
         
RRecycling/reclamation of organic substances which are not used as solvents (including composting and other biological transformation
         processes) 
         ...
         
RRecycling/reclamation of other inorganic materials 
         
...
RUse of wastes obtained from any of the operations numbered Rto R...
         
            
Article 3(1) of the Directive states: Member States shall take appropriate measures to encourage:
         
(a)
firstly, the prevention or reduction of waste production and its harmfulness ... 
         
(b)
secondly: 
         
(i)
the recovery of waste by means of recycling, re-use or reclamation or any other process with a view to extracting secondary
         raw materials, or 
         
(ii)
the use of waste as a source of energy.
         
            
Article of the Directive provides: 
         
1.
 In order to attain the objectives referred to in Articles 3, and 5, the competent authority or authorities referred to in
         Article shall be required to draw up as soon as possible one or more waste management plans. Such plans shall relate in
         particular to:
         
─
the type, quantity and origin of waste to be recovered or disposed of, 
         
─
general technical requirements, 
         
─
any special arrangements for particular wastes, 
         
─
suitable disposal sites or installations. 
         
Such plans may, for example, cover:
         
─
the natural or legal persons empowered to carry out the management of waste, 
         
─
the estimated costs of the recovery and disposal operations, 
         
─
appropriate measures to encourage rationalisation of the collection, sorting and treatment of waste. 
         
2.
 Member States shall collaborate as appropriate with the other Member States concerned and the Commission to draw up such plans.
         They shall notify the Commission thereof.
         
3.
 Member States may take the measures necessary to prevent movements of waste which are not in accordance with their waste management
         plans. They shall inform the Commission and the Member States of any such measures.
         
Regulation (EEC) No 259/Council Regulation (EEC) No 259/of February on the supervision and control of shipments of waste within, into and
         out of the European Community (OJ L 30, p. 1), as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 120/of January (OJ
         L 22, p. 14, hereinafter  
         the Regulation), lays down rules governing  
          inter alia  the monitoring and control of shipments of waste between Member States. 
         
            
According to Article 2(i) of the Regulation,  
         disposal is  
         as defined in Article 1(e) of Directive 75/442/EEC and, according to Article 2(k),  
         recovery is  
         as defined in Article 1(f) of Directive 75/442/EEC. 
         
            
Title II of the Regulation, entitled  
         Shipments of waste between Member States, contains two separate chapters, one of which (Articles to 5) concerns the procedure applicable to shipments of waste for
         disposal and the other (Articles to 11) the procedure applicable to shipments of waste for recovery. 
         
            
Under Article 6(1) of the Regulation, when a waste producer or holder intends to ship waste for recovery listed in Annex III
         to the Regulation (amber list of waste) from one Member State to another Member State and/or pass it in transit through one
         or several other Member States, he is to notify the competent authority of destination and send copies of the notification
         to the competent authorities of dispatch and transit and to the consignee. 
         
            
According to Article 6(3) of the Regulation, notification is to be effected by means of the consignment note which is issued
         by the competent authority of dispatch. Article 6(5) specifies the information which the notifier is to supply on the consignment
         note, which includes  
          inter alia   information relating to the recovery operations set out in Annex IIB to the Directive (fifth indent of Article 6(5)) and the
         planned method of disposal for the residual waste after recycling has taken place (sixth indent of Article 6(5)). 
         
            
Article 7(2) of the Regulation lays down the time-limits, conditions and procedures which must be observed by the competent
         authorities of destination, dispatch and transit when raising an objection to a notified, planned shipment of waste for recovery.
         That provision provides in particular that objections are to be based on Article 7(4). 
         
            
Article 7(4)(a) of the Regulation provides: The competent authorities of destination and dispatch may raise reasoned objections to the planned shipment:
         
─
in accordance with Directive 75/442/EEC, in particular Article thereof, or 
         
─
if it is not in accordance with national laws and regulations relating to environmental protection, public order, public safety
            or health protection, or 
         
─
if the notifier or the consignee has previously been guilty of illegal trafficking. In this case, the competent authority
            of dispatch may refuse all shipments involving the person in question in accordance with national legislation, or 
         
─
if the shipment conflicts with obligations resulting from international conventions concluded by the Member State or Member
            States concerned, or 
         
─
if the ratio of the recoverable and non-recoverable waste, the estimated value of the materials to be finally recovered or
            the cost of the recovery and the cost of the disposal of the non recoverable fraction do not justify the recovery under economic
            and environmental considerations.
         
National legislation
         
            
The Meerjarenplan Gevaarlijke Afvalstoffen II (second Multi-Year Plan for Hazardous Waste, hereinafter  
         MJP GA II) is a hazardous waste management plan within the meaning of Article of the Directive, which was adopted by the Netherlands
         authorities in June for the period to 2007. 
         
            
Sectoral Plan of the MJP GA II, entitled  
         Incineration of hazardous waste, states that a distinction can be made between recovery by means of recycling, recovery by use principally as a fuel and
         final disposal by incineration.  
         
            
Recovery by means of recycling may consist of the processing of waste or its use in a production process, such as the use
         of combustible waste with a high inorganic content in the production of cement clinker.  
         
            
According to the MJP GA II, since it is not possible to develop reliable general criteria as regards the distinction between
         recovery by means of recycling and final disposal of hazardous waste by incineration, a case-by-case assessment must be carried
         out, on the basis of the characteristics of the batch and the planned means of processing. 
         
            
As regards recovery with use principally as a fuel, the MJP GA II uses calorific value in conjunction with chlorine content
         as a criterion. In order for there to be recovery, the MJP GA II requires a minimum calorific value of kJ/kg for hazardous
         waste with a chlorine content of 1% or less and a minimum calorific value of kJ/kg for hazardous waste with a chlorine
         content of over 1%. 
         
            
Section of the MJP GA II also states that, when assessing a waste shipment notification, it will first be considered whether
         recovery of the waste is possible. When sufficient disposal capacity is available in the Netherlands, it is possible under
         the Plan to raise reasoned objections to a planned shipment of waste for disposal, in accordance with Article 4(3)(b) of the
         Regulation. The maintenance of national elimination capacity is considered extremely important in the light of the principle
         of self-sufficiency. 
         Main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
SITA is a company governed by Netherlands law established in Maastricht (Netherlands), which carries out the collection and
         processing of hazardous and non-hazardous waste. 
         
            
On December and on January 1998, SITA notified the Minister, as the competent authority of dispatch within the meaning
         of the Regulation, of two planned shipments of waste. 
         
            
The first notification (NL 90201) concerned a plan to ship tonnes of a compact mixture of waste glue, sealant, resin
         and paint, as well as waste containing silicon mixed with sawdust, to the undertaking STPI, established in Engis (Belgium),
         between February and January 1999. 
         
            
The second notification (NL 90204) concerned a plan to ship tonnes of organic and inorganic sediments with a low halogen
         content, mixed with sawdust, to the same undertaking, during that same period. 
         
            
Following shipment, the waste at issue was to be used by the Belgian cement industry as fuel in cement kilns and as raw material
         in the production of clinker by cement factories. In that treatment process, known as a  
         combined process, the energy produced from the waste replaces energy produced by raw materials, and ash from incinerated waste in turn replaces
         raw materials. 
         
            
By two decisions adopted on January and February (
         the contested decisions), the Minister, in accordance with Article 7(2) of the Regulation, gave written consent to the waste shipments planned by
         SITA. The Minister nevertheless made authorisation of those shipments subject to certain conditions.  
         
            
The Minister considered that, in the light of the form of processing envisaged, that is, use for the purpose of producing
         cement clinker, the proportion of the waste re-used as a material for the manufacture of cement ─ to 40% and 30%, respectively
         ─ could not be considered recovery by recycling within the meaning of the MJP GA II. 
         
            
The Minister acknowledged, however, that the purpose of the shipments could be considered to be a recovery operation with
         use principally as a fuel, subject to the condition that, for each planned movement of waste with a chlorine content of 1%
         or less the waste to be exported was to have a calorific value of over kJ/kg and that for each planned movement of
         waste with a chlorine content of over 1% the calorific value was to be over kJ/kg. The Minister based that condition
         on the MJP GA II.  
         
            
SITA challenged the decisions in question in so far as they subjected the authorisation to ship the waste concerned to such
         conditions, by means of, first, an application for interim measures made to the President of the legal section of the Raad
         van State and, secondly, a complaint to the Minister. 
         
            
By order of June 1998, the President of the Administrative Appeal Section of the Raad van State rejected the application
         for interim measures. 
         
            
By two decisions of December 1998, the Minister rejected the complaints submitted by SITA against the decisions in question.
         On January 1999, SITA brought an action against each of those decisions before the national court. 
         
            
In the circumstances, the Raad van State, considering that the solution to the dispute before it depends on an interpretation
         of Community law, decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
         
         
(1)
Must the Directive ... be interpreted as permitting a process for treating waste in which more than one operation is performed,
         as described above, to be assessed as a whole? 
         
(2)
If so, does the process concerned constitute recovery within the meaning of R1, Rand Rof Annex IIB to the Directive if
         it results in the complete use of the waste employed therein? 
         
(3)
(a)
If the answer to question is in the negative, is the extent (expressed as calorific value) to which the waste contributes
         to the incineration process or the extent (expressed as the level of material reused) to which the ash residues from that
         waste contribute to the production process relevant as regards the classification of each individual operation as recovery
         or disposal (R1, Rand R5, and D10, respectively)? 
         
(b)
If so, on the basis of which criteria is it necessary to assess whether or not the contribution is sufficient for classification
         as recovery? In the absence of Community criteria in this respect, is it possible to apply national criteria? 
         
(4)
If one operation must be classified as recovery and another operation as disposal, how must the process as a whole be regarded?
         
The first question
            
By its first question, the national court essentially asks whether, in the case where a waste treatment process includes several
         distinct stages, its classification as a disposal operation or recovery operation within the meaning of the Directive must,
         for the purpose of implementing the Regulation, be considered comprehensively, as constituting a single operation, or rather
         by examining each of the stages separately, as distinct operations. 
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
SITA claims that the Directive should be interpreted to mean that, for the purpose of classification, a waste treatment process
         involving more than one operation can be assessed as a whole. In that regard, it states that the treatment process at issue
         in the main proceedings constitutes a single technical process and must therefore be subject to a global assessment, which
         leads to the conclusion that it constitutes a single recovery operation.  
         
            
The Netherlands Government considers that the answer to the first question must be that the Directive allows a waste treatment
         process such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which involves more than one material operation (that is, the incineration
         of waste and the use of the ash in the production of cement clinker) to be considered a single operation within the meaning
         of Annexes IIA and IIB to that directive. 
         
            
The United Kingdom Government states that, where it is claimed that the waste at issue will be used in a cement kiln both
         as fuel and as a raw material for the production of cement clinker, each of those elements must be taken into account and
         a conclusion drawn on the basis of the overall contribution of the waste to the process as a whole. 
         
            
According to the Commission, the Directive should be interpreted to mean that, in the case where waste undergoes a treatment
         process involving several successive operations, it must be established for each of those operations whether the treatment
         in question is a recovery operation or a disposal operation within the meaning of Annexes IIA and IIB of that directive. 
         
            
The Commission points out that, in the case in the main proceedings, the national court observes that, in a first stage, the
         waste is to be used as fuel in cement kilns, where the energy generated by that waste will replace energy normally generated
         by raw materials. In a second stage, after the waste has served as an energy source, the ash from that waste will partially
         replace the raw materials needed to produce clinker in cement works. The fact that the use of waste ash is itself classified
         as disposal or recovery has no effect on the classification of the first treatment which the waste undergoes, which would
         be relevant only if it was necessary to determine the purpose of a waste shipment with a view to implementing the Regulation.
         
         Findings of the Court
         
            
In that regard, it must first be recalled that, for the purpose of applying the Directive and the Regulation, it must be possible
         to classify any waste treatment operation as either disposal or recovery, and a single operation may not be classified simultaneously
         as both a disposal and a recovery operation (Case C-6/ASA  [2002] ECR I-1961, paragraph 63). 
         
            
Nevertheless, while a single operation must be given a single classification in the light of the distinction between a recovery
         operation and a disposal operation, a waste treatment process can in practice include several successive stages of recovery
         or disposal.  
         
            
It follows from the Directive and the Regulation that, in such a case, the treatment process as a whole is not to be assessed
         as a single operation, but each phase must be classified separately for the purpose of implementing the Regulation when it
         constitutes a distinct operation in itself. 
         
            
As is clear from the sixth indent of Article 6(5) and the fifth indent of Article 7(4)(a) of the Regulation, an operation
         classified as waste recovery may be followed by a disposal operation of the non-recoverable fraction of that waste. In such
         a case, the classification of the first operation as a recovery operation is not affected by the fact that it is followed
         by an operation to dispose of the residual waste. 
         
            
Moreover, point Rof Annex IIB to the Directive makes clear that the use of residual waste obtained from any of the operations
         listed in that annex, in points Rto R10, itself constitutes a recovery operation distinct from the recovery operation which
         precedes it. In accordance with the distinction thus laid down in the Annex, it must therefore be determined whether an operation
         falls under operations Rto Rin that annex independently, without taking into account the possible subsequent use of the
         residual wastes obtained from any of those operations ─ a use which is itself covered by a separate operation. 
         
            
As the Commission rightly points out, and as made clear by the Advocate General in paragraph of his Opinion, when the question
         of the classification of a waste treatment operation arises for the purpose of implementing the Regulation, only the classification
         of the first operation which that waste must undergo subsequent to its shipment is relevant in determining the purpose of
         that shipment. 
         
            
When the Regulation refers to the shipment of waste and distinguishes between shipments of waste destined for disposal and
         those destined for recovery, it is directed at the treatment which that waste must undergo when it arrives at its destination,
         not the possible subsequent processing of waste which has been thus treated or to its residues. Moreover, that processing
         may take place in a different treatment plant and following further shipment. 
         
            
In the case in the main proceedings, it appears from the order for reference that the national court is of the view that the
         processing which the waste at issue must undergo comprises two distinct operations, consisting, first, of the combustion of
         that waste and, secondly, of the use of its ash as a raw material in the production of cement clinker. 
         
            
In the light of the foregoing considerations, only the first of the two operations mentioned above should be subject to classification
         with a view to establishing the purpose of the waste shipment in question. 
         
            
The answer to the first question must therefore be that, where a waste treatment process comprises several distinct stages,
         it must be classified as a disposal operation or a recovery operation within the meaning of the Directive, for the purpose
         of implementing the Regulation, taking into account only the first operation that the waste is to undergo subsequent to shipment.
         
         The second question
            
In the light of the reply to the first question, it is not necessary to deal with the second question. 
         The third question
            
In the light of the reply to the first question, the third question must be understood to mean that the national court is
         essentially asking whether the calorific value of the waste which is to be combusted is a relevant criterion for the purpose
         of determining whether that operation constitutes a disposal operation as referred to in point Dof Annex IIA to the Directive
         or a recovery operation as referred to in point Rof Annex IIB to the Directive and, in addition, whether the Member States
         may define distinguishing criteria to that end. 
         
            
First of all, as regards the first part of that question, the Court has already held, in C-228/Commission  v  
          Germany  [2003] ECR I-1439, paragraph 47, that the criterion of the calorific value of waste is not relevant for the purpose of establishing
         whether an operation involving the combustion of waste is a recovery operation as referred to in point Rof Annex IIB to
         the Directive.  
         
            
It is clear from paragraph of that judgment that, in order to be considered use principally as a fuel or other means to
         generate energy, within the meaning of point Rof Annex IIB to the Directive, it is both necessary and sufficient that the
         combustion of waste meet the three conditions set out in paragraphs to of that judgment. First, the main purpose of
         the operation concerned must be to enable the waste to be used as a means of generating energy. Secondly, the conditions in
         which that operation is to take place must give reason to believe that it is indeed a  
         means to generate energy. Thirdly, the waste must be used principally as a fuel or other means of generating energy. 
         
            
It is for the national court to establish whether, in the case in the main proceedings, those conditions are satisfied for
         the purpose of classifying the combustion of the waste at issue in cement kilns as a disposal operation or a recovery operation.
         
         
            
As regards the second part of the third question, it should also be recalled that the Regulation does not preclude Member
         States from laying down, in acts having general scope, criteria for distinguishing between a recovery operation and a disposal
         operation, provided that the criteria comply with those laid down in the Directive (see, to that effect,  
          Commission  v  
          Germany , cited above, paragraphs and 36). 
         
            
In the light of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the third question must be that the calorific value of waste which
         is to be combusted is not a relevant criterion for the purpose of determining whether that operation constitutes a disposal
         operation as referred to in point Dof Annex IIA to the Directive or a recovery operation as referred to in point Rof
         Annex IIB thereof. Member States may establish distinguishing criteria for that purpose, provided that the criteria comply
         with those laid down in the Directive. 
         The fourth question
            
In view of the answer to the first question, from which it follows that a waste treatment process should not be classified
         as a whole for the purpose of implementing the Regulation, there is no need to reply to the fourth question. 
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the Netherlands, German and United Kingdom Governments and by the Commission, which have submitted observations
         to the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings
         pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
in answer to the question referred to it by the Raad van State by judgment of March 2001, hereby rules: 
         
1.
 Where a waste treatment process comprises several distinct stages, it must be classified as a disposal operation or a recovery
            operation within the meaning of Council Directive 75/442/EEC of July on waste, as amended by Council Directive 91/156/EEC
            of March and by Commission Decision 96/350/EC of May 1996, for the purpose of implementing Council Regulation (EEC)
            No 259/of February on the supervision and control of shipments of waste within, into and out of the European Community,
            as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 120/of January 1997, taking into account only the first operation that the
            waste is to undergo subsequent to shipment; 
            
2.
 The calorific value of waste which is to be combusted is not a relevant criterion for the purpose of determining whether that
            operation constitutes a disposal operation as referred to in point Dof Annex IIA to Directive 75/442, as amended by Directive
            91/and by Decision 96/350, or a recovery operation as referred to in point Rof Annex IIB thereof. Member States may
            establish distinguishing criteria for that purpose, provided that those criteria comply with those laid down in the Directive.
            
            
Wathelet
Timmermans 
La Pergola 
Jann
Rosas
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on April 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
M. Wathelet  
Registrar
President of the Fifth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: Dutch.
Top  
 