
Case C-413/European Parliament
v
Council of the European Union
(Directive 2003/54/EC – Common rules for the internal market in electricity – Directive 2004/85/EC – Temporary derogations in favour of Estonia – Legal basis)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Accession of new Member States – Act of Accession – Adaptation of Community acts which have not been adapted by the Act
            of Accession itself – Concept 
(Act of Accession, Art. 57; Council Directive 2004/85)
2.        Accession of new Member States – Czech Republic – Estonia – Cyprus – Latvia – Lithuania – Hungary – Malta – Poland – Slovenia
            – Slovakia – Community acts adopted after signature of the Treaty of Accession – Adoption of temporary derogations in
            favour of new Member States – Appropriate legal basis
(Art. 249(2) and (3) EC and Art. EC; Act of Accession, Art. 2(2) and (3))
3.        Acts of the institutions – Statement of reasons – Obligation – Scope 
(Art. EC; Council Directive 2004/85)
1.        The measures which can be adopted on the basis of Article of the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Czech
         Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic
         of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic and the adjustments
         to the Treaties on which the European Union is founded, providing for the adaptation of acts of the institutions which have
         not been adapted by the act itself, are limited, in principle, to adaptations intended to render earlier Community measures
         applicable in the new Member States, to the exclusion of all other amendments and, particularly, to the exclusion of temporary
         derogations. It follows that such temporary derogations from the application of the provisions of a Community act, whose sole
         object and purpose is to delay temporarily the effective application of the Community act concerned as regards a new Member
         State, cannot, in principle, be described as ‘adaptations’, within the meaning of Article of that act.
      
However, while Directive 2004/85, amending Directive 2003/as regards the application of certain provisions to Estonia,
         is certainly intended to delay temporarily the effective application of certain provisions of Directive 2003/concerning
         common rules for the internal market in electricity and repealing Directive 96/as regards the Republic of Estonia, the
         fact remains that some of the measures which it contains with that in view are also measures of adaptation necessary to ensure
         the full applicability of Directive 2003/as regards that Member State. Such is the case of measures intended to take account,
         within the framework established by Directive 2003/54, of the transitional measure previously accorded to the Republic of
         Estonia by Annex VI to the Act of Accession as regards Directive 96/92. The following considerations justify such a conclusion.
         Thus, in so far as Directive 2004/provided for suspension of the application of Article 21(1)(b) and (c) of Directive 2003/until December 2008, so as to maintain, for the benefit of the Republic of Estonia, the dispensation from opening its electricity
         market before January to which it was entitled under the terms of Annex VI to the Act of Accession, it could validly
         be adopted on the basis of Article of the Act of Accession.
      
However, Directive 2004/must be annulled in so far as it grants Estonia a derogation from the application of Article 21(1)(b)
         and (c) of Directive 2003/54, going beyond December and imposes a corresponding obligation to ensure only partial
         opening of the market representing 35% of consumption on January and an obligation to communicate annually the consumption
         thresholds extending eligibility to final customers. The further derogations constitute measures whose sole object and purpose,
         like most temporary derogations, is to postpone temporarily the effective application of the Community act concerned, and
         whose adoption therefore involves a political assessment. It follows that they could not validly be adopted on the basis of
         Article of the Act of Accession.
      
(see paras 37-40, 51-52, 60-61, 88)
2.        Once the Treaty on the accession of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Cyprus, the Republic
         of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of Poland, the Republic
         of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic to the European Union was signed, and subject to the application of the particular procedures
         for which that Treaty provides for the purposes of deciding on certain types of transitional measures, there is no objection
         in principle to Community measures adopted after that signature and before the entry into force of the Treaty of Accession
         and containing temporary derogations in favour of a future acceding State being adopted directly on the basis of the provisions
         of the EC Treaty. 
      
Such derogations, which are intended to apply only subject to and on the date of actual entry into force of the Treaty
         of Accession, cannot disregard either the second and third paragraphs of Article EC and Article EC, under which the
         acts adopted by the institutions apply to the Member States, or Article 2(2) and (3) of the Treaty of Accession. 
      
First, such specific provisions, like, moreover, the acts in which they are included and/or from which they derogate, will
         apply to the acceding States only on the date on which their accession takes effect, when they acquire the status of Member
         States.
      
Second, the fact that Article 2(2) of the Treaty of Accession provides that the Treaty is not to enter into force until
         May and that Article 2(3) provides that, notwithstanding that principle, certain provisions of that Treaty may be applied
         earlier does not affect the possibility of provision being made, in acts adopted not under that Treaty but on the basis of
         the EC Treaty itself, for the conditions under which such acts adopted between the signature of the Treaty of Accession and
         its entry into force will apply to the future Member States once accession has taken place.
      
Lastly, the application of the normal legislative procedure provided for by the EC Treaty in respect of derogations adopted
         in favour of new Member States during the period between the date of signature of the Treaty of Accession and the date
         when the accession takes effect is confirmed by the existence of mechanisms specific to the accession process allowing those
         new States the opportunity to assert their interests where necessary, such as the information and consultation procedure.
      
(see paras 62-65, 69)
3.        The statement of reasons required by Article EC must be adapted to the nature of the act in question. Whilst that statement
         of reasons must show clearly and unequivocally the reasoning of the Community institution which adopted the measure in such
         a way as to enable the persons concerned to ascertain the reasons for it and the competent court to exercise its power of
         review, the institution is not required to go into every relevant point of fact and law. The question as to whether the statement
         of reasons for a measure satisfies the requirements of Article EC must be assessed with reference not only to the wording
         of the measure but also to its context and to the whole body of legal rules governing the matter in question.
      
The preamble to Directive 2004/85, amending Directive 2003/as regards the application of certain provisions to Estonia,
         which refers to the Republic of Estonia’s request, to the transitional derogation relating to Directive 96/granted to that
         Member State by Annex VI to the Act of Accession, to Declaration No 8, annexed to the final act of the Treaty of
         Accession, to the accelerated opening of the electricity market brought about by Directive 2003/concerning common rules
         for the internal market in electricity and repealing Directive 96/92, and, finally, to the specific features of the Estonian
         oil shale sector and the difficulties which that sector would encounter in the absence of the transitional measures provided
         for by Directive 2004/85, is such as to enable those concerned to ascertain sufficiently the reasons for those transitional
         measures and the competent court to exercise its power of review. In particular, those considerations enable the Court to
         review the validity of the legal basis used by the Community legislature without there being a need for more detailed reasons
         for that choice of legal basis, which was expressly identified in the citation in the preamble to Directive 2004/as being
         Article of the Act of Accession. Nor does the fact that the Council did not adopt the legal basis proposed by the
         Commission call for a more specific statement of reasons in that regard. 
      
(see paras 81-83)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Directive 2003/54/EC – Common rules for the internal market in electricity – Directive 2004/85/EC – Temporary derogations in favour of Estonia – Legal basis)
In Case C‑413/04,
ACTION for annulment under Article EC, brought on September 2004,
European Parliament, represented by A. Baas and U. Rösslein, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
supported by
Commission of the European Communities, represented by J. Sack and P. Van Nuffel, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
intervener,
v
Council of the European Union, represented by A. Lopes Sabino and M. Bishop, acting as Agents,
      
defendant,
supported by
Republic of Estonia, represented by L. Uibo, acting as Agent,
      
Republic of Poland, represented by M. Węglarz, T. Nowakowski and T. Krawczyk, acting as Agents,
      
interveners,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas, K. Lenaerts, R. Schintgen, P. Kūris and E. Juhász, Presidents
         of Chambers, K. Schiemann (Rapporteur), J. Makarczyk, G. Arestis, A. Borg Barthet, A. Ó Caoimh and L. Bay Larsen, Judges,
      
Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed,
Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on March 2006,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on June 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
By its action, the European Parliament seeks the annulment of Council Directive 2004/85/EC of June amending Directive
         2003/54/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the application of certain provisions to Estonia (OJ L 236, p. 10, hereinafter ‘the contested directive’).
      
Directive 96/92/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of December concerning common rules for the internal
         market in electricity (OJ L 27, p. 20) entered into force on February 1997. It was to be transposed into national
         law not later than February 1999. 
      
The Treaty concerning the accession to the European Union of new Member States, including the Republic of Estonia, was
         signed on April (OJ L 236, p. 17, hereinafter ‘the Treaty of Accession’). As provided by Article 1(2) of
         that Treaty, the conditions of that admission and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union is founded,
         entailed by such admission, are set out in the Act annexed to that Treaty and form an integral part of it (hereinafter ‘the
         Act of Accession’).
      
Annex VI to the Act of Accession provides for transitional measures in favour of the Republic of Estonia inter alia as
         regards the application of Directive 96/92.
      
Directive 2003/54/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of June concerning common rules for the internal
         market in electricity and repealing Directive 96/(OJ L 176, p. 37) was adopted on the basis of Articles 47(2) EC,
         EC and EC.
      
For the purposes of delaying, on a temporary basis, the application of certain provisions of Directive 2003/as regards
         the Republic of Estonia, the Council of the European Union adopted the contested directive. It was adopted on the basis of
         Article of the Treaty of Accession. 
      
In support of its action, the European Parliament submits, first, that the contested directive could not validly be adopted
         on the basis of the said Article and, second, that it does not comply with the duty to state reasons laid down in Article
         EC.
      
By orders of the President of the Court of December and March 2005, the Commission of the European Communities,
         the Republic of Estonia and the Republic of Poland were given leave to intervene in these proceedings, the Commission in support
         of the Parliament and the two Member States in support of the Council.
      
 Legal background
 The Treaty of Accession
Article 2(2) and (3) of the Treaty of Accession provides:
      
‘2.      This Treaty shall enter into force on May … .
3.      Notwithstanding paragraph 2, the institutions of the Union may adopt before accession the measures referred to in Articles
         6(2) second subparagraph, 6(6) second subparagraph, … 38, 39, 41, and to of the Act of Accession, Annexes III to
         XIV to that Act … . These measures shall enter into force only subject to and on the date of the entry into force of this
         Treaty.’
      
Article of the Act of Accession provides: 
      
‘The Acts listed in Annex II to this Act shall be adapted as specified in that Annex.’
Article of the Act of Accession reads:
      
‘The adaptations to the acts listed in Annex III to this Act made necessary by accession shall be drawn up in conformity with
         the guidelines set out in that Annex and in accordance with the procedure and under the conditions laid down in Article 57.’
         
      
Article of the Act of Accession provides:
      
‘The measures listed in Annexes V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII, XIII and XIV to this Act shall apply in respect of the new
         Member States under the conditions laid down in those Annexes.’
      
Article of the Act of Accession provides: 
      
‘At the duly substantiated request of one of the new Member States, the Council, acting unanimously on a proposal from the
         Commission, may, before May 2004, take measures consisting of temporary derogations from acts of the institutions adopted
         between November and the date of signature of the Treaty of Accession.’
      
Article of the Act of Accession states: 
      
‘1.      Where acts of the institutions prior to accession require adaptation by reason of accession, and the necessary adaptations
         have not been provided for in this Act or its Annexes, those adaptations shall be made in accordance with the procedure laid
         down by paragraph 2. Those adaptations shall enter into force as from accession.
      
2.      The Council, acting by a qualified majority on a proposal from the Commission, or the Commission, according to which of these
         two institutions adopted the original acts, shall to this end draw up the necessary texts.’
      
It must be pointed out directly that although the French version of Article suggests that adaptations thereunder must be
         made prior to accession – ‘avant l’adhésion’ – that temporal restriction is not in fact, as is clear from the other language
         versions of that provision, placed on recourse to Article but on the date of the acts to be amended (see, to that effect,
         in respect of the identical provision in the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Republic of Austria, the Republic
         of Finland and the Kingdom of Sweden and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union is founded (OJ C 241,
         p. 21, hereinafter ‘the Act of Accession’), Case C‑259/Parliament v Council [1997] ECR I‑5303, paragraphs to 22).
      
Annex VI to the Act of Accession contains a provision that:
      
‘In Estonia, Article 19(2) of Directive 96/92/EC shall not apply until December 2008.’ 
Annexed to the final act of the Treaty of Accession, Joint Declaration No of the Member States entitled ‘Declaration
         on oil shale, the internal electricity market and Directive 96/92/EC … (Electricity Directive): Estonia’ (hereinafter ‘Declaration
         No 8’) states:
      
‘The Union will closely monitor that Estonia fulfils its commitments notably with regard to the further preparation to the
         internal energy market (oil shale sector restructuring, electricity sector restructuring, legislation, strengthening Energy
         Market Inspectorate, etc.).
      
The Union draws Estonia’s attention to the conclusions of the Lisbon and Barcelona European Councils, related to accelerated
         market opening in – among others – the electricity and gas sectors, with the aim of achieving a fully operational internal
         market in these areas, and notes Estonia’s earlier statements made in this regard on May in the context of the accession
         negotiations. Notwithstanding the need for the early implementation of an operational internal electricity market, the Union
         takes note that Estonia reserves its position regarding future legislative developments in this area. The Union recognises
         in this respect the specific situation related to the restructuring of the oil shale sector which will require particular
         efforts until the end of 2012, and the need for gradual opening of the Estonian electricity market for non‑household customers
         until that date.
      
The Union notes that, with a view to limiting the potential distortion of competition in the internal electricity market,
         safeguard mechanisms, such as the reciprocity clause of Directive 96/92/EC, may have to be applied.
      
The Commission will closely monitor the development of the electricity production and the possible changes in the electricity
         market in Estonia and in the neighbouring countries.
      
Without prejudice to the above, any Member State may from onwards request the Commission to assess the development of
         the electricity markets of the Baltic Sea areas. Based on this assessment, with full consideration to the unique character
         of oil shale and social and economic considerations related to the extraction, production and consumption of oil shale in
         Estonia, and taking into account the objectives of the Community regarding the electricity market, the Commission shall report
         to the Council with appropriate recommendations.’
      
 Secondary legislation
Article of Directive 96/provided:
      
‘1.      Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure an opening of their electricity markets, so that contracts under
         the conditions stated in Articles and can be concluded at least up to a significant level, to be notified to the Commission
         on an annual basis.
      
The share of the national market shall be calculated on the basis of the Community share of electricity consumed by final
         consumers consuming more than GWh per year (on a consumption site basis and including autoproduction).
      
The average Community share shall be calculated by the Commission on the basis of information regularly provided to it by
         Member States. The Commission shall publish this average Community share defining the degree of market opening in the Official Journal of the European Communities before November each year, with all appropriate information clarifying the calculation. 
      
2.      The share of the national market referred to in paragraph will be increased progressively over a period of six years. This
         increase will be calculated by reducing the Community consumption threshold of GWh, referred to in paragraph from GWh to a level of GWh annual electricity consumption three years after the entry into force of this Directive and to a
         level of GWh annual electricity consumption six years after the entry into force of this Directive.
      
3.      Member States shall specify those customers inside their territory representing the shares as specified in paragraphs and
         which have the legal capacity to contract electricity in accordance with Articles and 18, given that all final consumers
         consuming more than GWh per year (on a consumption site basis and including autoproduction) must be included in the above
         category.
      
Distribution companies, if not already specified as eligible customers under this paragraph, shall have the legal capacity
         to contract under the conditions of Articles and for the volume of electricity being consumed by their customers designated
         as eligible within their distribution system, in order to supply those customers.
      
4.      Member States shall publish by January each year the criteria for the definition of eligible customers which are able to
         conclude contracts under the conditions of Articles and 18. …’ 
      
Recital in the preamble to Directive 2003/states that ‘[g]iven the scope of the amendments that are being made to Directive
         96/92/EC, it is desirable, for reasons of clarity and rationalisation, that the provisions in question should be recast’.
         
      
The second paragraph of Article of that directive provides in that regard that ‘Directive 96/92/EC shall be repealed from
         July without prejudice to the obligations of Member States concerning the deadlines for transposition and application
         of the said Directive. References made to the repealed Directive shall be construed as being made to this Directive and should
         be read in accordance with the correlation table in Annex B’. According to that correlation table, Article of Directive
         2003/corresponds to Article of Directive 96/92.
      
Article of Directive 2003/is worded as follows: 
      
‘Market opening and reciprocity
1.      Member States shall ensure that the eligible customers are:
(a)      until July 2004, the eligible customers as specified in Article 19(1) to (3) of Directive 96/92/EC. Member States shall
         publish by January each year the criteria for the definition of these eligible customers; 
      
(b)      from July 2004, at the latest, all non-household customers;
(c)      from July 2007, all customers.
…’
Under Article 30(1) of that directive, Member States are to bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions
         necessary to comply with the directive not later than July 2004. 
      
 The contested directive
Referring to Article of the Act of Accession, the Republic of Estonia, by letter of September 2003, lodged with
         the Commission a request for the amendment of Directive 2003/to take account both of the derogation granted to that Member
         State by Annex VI of the Act of Accession as regards Article 19(2) of Directive 96/and of Declaration No 8.
      
On April 2004, the Commission formulated a proposal for a directive aimed at delaying, on a transitional basis, the implementation
         of certain provisions of Directive 2003/as regards the Republic of Estonia (COM/2004/final). That proposal was based
         on Articles 47(2) EC, EC and EC.
      
Although ratifying that proposal, the terms of which it substantially reproduced, the contested directive was adopted by the
         Council, on June 2004, on the basis of Article of the Act of Accession. The Parliament was informed of that adoption
         by the Secretary General of the Council by a letter of July 2004.
      
That letter stated that ‘[in view of] the link between the Treaty of Accession and [this] proposal … and in view of the need
         to adopt [this] measure in time, and in any event before July 2004, … the date on which Directive 2003/is to be implemented,
         the Council decided to use Article of the [Act of Accession] as the legal basis …, a basis which does not require
         the participation of the European Parliament in the legislative process’.
      
Article of the contested directive provides for the addition to Article of Directive 2003/of a paragraph worded
         as follows: 
      
‘Estonia shall be granted a temporary derogation from the application of Article 21(1)(b) and (c) until December 2012.
         Estonia shall take the measures necessary to ensure the opening of its electricity market. This shall be carried out gradually
         over the reference period with the aim of complete opening of the market by January 2013. On January 2009, the opening
         of the market must represent at least 35% of consumption. Estonia shall communicate annually to the Commission the consumption
         thresholds extending eligibility to final customers.’ 
      
Recitals to 4, and in the preamble to the contested directive state:
      
‘(1)      During the accession negotiations, Estonia invoked the specific characteristics of its electricity sector to request a transitional
         period for the application of Directive 96/92/EC … . 
      
(2)      In Annex VI of the [2003] Act of Accession, Estonia was granted a transitional period until December for the application
         of Article 19(2) of Directive 96/92/EC, relating to the gradual opening of the market.
      
(3)      Declaration No … recognised moreover that the specific situation relating to the restructuring of the oil shale sector in
         Estonia was going to require particular efforts until the end of 2012. 
      
(4)      Directive 96/92/EC was replaced by Directive 2003/54/EC which has to be implemented by July and which has the effect
         of speeding up the opening of the electricity market. 
      
…
(7)      Oil shale is the only real indigenous energy resource in Estonia and national production represents almost 84% of world production.
         90% of the electricity produced in Estonia is from this solid fuel. It is therefore of great strategic importance for security
         of supply in Estonia. 
      
(8)      The granting of a further derogation for the period to will guarantee security of investments in generating plants
         and security of supply in Estonia while allowing the serious environmental problems created by those plants to be resolved.’
      
 The action
The Parliament relies on two pleas in law in support of its action, alleging, first, that the legal basis of the contested
         directive is incorrect and, second, breach of the duty to state reasons. 
      
 The first plea in law 
By its first plea in law, the Parliament submits that the contested directive, which introduces transitional derogations as
         regards the application of Directive 2003/54, could not validly be adopted on the basis of Article of the Act of Accession
         and that it should have been adopted in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure prescribed by the EC Treaty, namely,
         in this case, on the basis of Articles 47(2) EC, EC and EC which served as the legal basis for the adoption of Directive
         2003/54. Article in fact allows only adaptations intended to enable acts of the institutions to apply fully to the acceding
         States and not the grant of transitional derogations from them.
      
In that regard, it is appropriate to observe that, as the Parliament pointed out, it follows from the wording of Article of the Act of Accession that that provision authorises the adoption of ‘adaptations’ which are made ‘necessary’ by reason
         of accession but which were not provided for in the Act of Accession or its annexes.
      
As the Commission rightly argued, it is clear from Articles and of the Act of Accession, which together make up
         Title I, entitled ‘Adaptations to acts adopted by the institutions’, of Part Three of that act, itself entitled ‘Permanent
         provisions’, that the ‘adaptations’ to which those articles refer correspond, in principle, to amendments necessary to ensure
         the full applicability of acts of the institutions to the new Member States and which are intended, with that in view, to
         supplement those acts in the long term.
      
Such ‘adaptations’ do not, on the other hand, usually cover temporary derogations from the application of Community acts,
         which are, for their part, the subject of Article of the Act of Accession in Title I, entitled ‘Transitional measures’,
         of Part Four of that act, entitled ‘Temporary provisions’.
      
There is nothing to suggest that the term ‘adaptation’ should be given a different meaning depending on whether it is used
         in the context of Articles and of the Act of Accession or of Article of that act. Article moreover itself
         refers to the provisions of Article as regards the procedure for, and the conditions governing the drawing up of, the adaptations
         for which it provides, whilst Article which refers to adaptations which have ‘not been provided for in this Act or its
         Annexes’ suggests, for its part, that the adaptations to be adopted on the basis of that provision are of the same type as
         those for which, in particular, Articles and of that act provide.
      
Furthermore, the grant of temporary derogations in view of the prospect of imminent accession is, as correctly pointed out
         by the Parliament and the Commission, the specific subject of another provision of the Act of Accession, namely Article
         55, and it is, in that regard, difficult to imagine that the signatories to that act intended to lay down two distinct provisions
         for the purpose of enabling the adoption of the same measure.
      
That is all the more true as Article makes the grant of such temporary derogations subject to conditions markedly more
         restrictive than those which Article prescribes for the adoption of adaptation measures. First, Article authorises derogations
         only as regards Community acts which were adopted between November (the date on which the accession negotiations were
         concluded) and April (the date of signature of the Treaty of Accession). Second, such grant is subject to the
         requirement of unanimity within the Council.
      
It follows from the foregoing that the measures which can be adopted on the basis of Article of the Act of Accession
         are limited, in principle, to adaptations intended to render earlier Community measures applicable in the new Member States,
         to the exclusion of all other amendments (see, by way of analogy, in respect of the identical provision contained in the Act of Accession, Parliament v Council, paragraphs and 19), and, particularly, to the exclusion of temporary derogations.
      
Accordingly temporary derogations from the application of the provisions of a Community act, whose sole object and purpose
         is to delay temporarily the effective application of the Community act concerned as regards a new Member State, cannot, in
         principle, be described as ‘adaptations’, within the meaning of Article of the Act of Accession. 
      
In this case, however, it must be observed that, while the contested directive is certainly intended to delay temporarily
         the effective application of certain provisions of Directive 2003/as regards the Republic of Estonia, the fact remains
         that some of the measures which it contains with that in view are in other respects also measures of adaptation necessary
         to ensure the full applicability of Directive 2003/as regards that Member State. 
      
Such is the case of measures intended to take account, within the framework established by Directive 2003/54, of the transitional
         measure previously accorded to the Republic of Estonia by Annex VI to the Act of Accession as regards Directive 96/92.
         The following considerations justify such a conclusion.
      
On the one hand, as the Estonian Government and the Commission correctly argued, and contrary to the Council’s submission,
         the transitional derogation contained in Annex VI to the Act of Accession as regards Directive 96/did not lapse as
         a result of the repeal of that directive by Directive 2003/54. 
      
It is appropriate to recall, first, that Article of the Act of Accession provides that the application of the Treaties
         and acts adopted by the institutions are, as a transitional measure, to be subject to the derogations provided for in that
         Act. Article of the Act of Accession states, in that regard, that the transitional measures listed in the various
         annexes to which it refers, including Annex VI, are to apply in respect of the new Member States under the conditions laid
         down in those Annexes. For its part, Article of that Act confirms that the Annexes to that Act are to form an integral
         part thereof.
      
The provisions set out in Annex VI to the Act of Accession are thus the subject of an agreement between the Member States
         and the acceding States and constitute provisions of primary law (see, to that effect, Joined Cases 31/and 35/LAISAand CPC España v Council [1988] ECR 2285, paragraph 12). 
      
Secondly, it is clear from recital in the preamble to and Article of Directive 2003/that the latter should be regarded
         as following on from Directive 96/which it recasts because of the scope of the amendments which it makes to that directive
         and for reasons of clarity and rationalisation, without, however, affecting the deadlines for transposition and application
         provided for under Directive 96/92.
      
In view of the foregoing, the transitional derogation provided for in Annex VI to the Act of Accession must be considered,
         as the Estonian Government correctly submitted, to be fully intended to apply equally in the new legislative framework constituted
         by Directive 2003/54.
      
On the other hand, and in those circumstances, the Estonian Government also correctly maintained that, failing adaptation
         of Article of Directive 2003/to take full account of the abovementioned transitional derogation, there would have been
         a risk of a contradiction between the effects of that derogation and the requirements on the Member States resulting from
         the said Article 21.
      
It is clear from Annex VI to the Act of Accession that the Republic of Estonia need not, until December 2008, ensure
         the opening of its electricity market under the conditions laid down in Article 19(2) of Directive 96/92. That means, in particular,
         that under the latter provision the obligation imposed on the Member States to ensure, under the conditions which it lays
         down, a degree of opening of their electricity markets approaching 35% (see, to that effect, the Communication from the Commission
         of December concerning the calculation of the average Community share of electricity market opening, as defined in
         Directive 96/92/EC (OJ C 321, p. 51)) was, as regards the Republic of Estonia, postponed until December 2008. 
      
Since Article 21(1)(a) of Directive 2003/only repeats the requirements already resulting for the Member States from the
         partial market opening produced by Article of Directive 96/92, it is clear that the derogation relating to the latter provision
         granted to the Republic of Estonia by Annex VI to the Act of Accession applies as a matter of law as regards that new
         Article 21(1)(a). 
      
On the other hand, the provisions of Article 21(1)(b) and (c) of Directive 2003/provide that the Member States will also
         be required to open their respective markets from July as regards all non‑household customers and from July as regards all customers. The progressive opening required by the said Article 21(1)(b) and (c) must therefore take place
         prior to January and, as the Estonian Government submitted without being contradicted on that point, that opening moreover
         exceeds substantially on each of the two dates referred to in those provisions 35% of consumption.
      
In those circumstances, it cannot be disputed that the taking into account of the acquis constituted for the Republic of Estonia
         by the transitional derogation relating to Directive 96/92, contained in Annex VI to the Act of Accession, entailed,
         if only for elementary reasons of legal certainty, the adaptation of Article 21(1)(b) and (c) of Directive 2003/in order
         to ensure the coherent application of those provisions to that Member State.
      
Such an adaptation thus required, at the very least, suspension of the application of the provisions of Article 21(1)(b) and
         (c) of Directive 2003/until December as regards the Republic of Estonia, so as to maintain, for the benefit of
         that Member State, the dispensation from opening its electricity market before January to which it was entitled under
         the terms of Annex VI to the Act of Accession.
      
It follows from the foregoing that, in so far as the contested directive provided such a suspension of the application of
         Article 21(1)(b) and (c) of Directive 2003/until December 2008, it could validly be adopted on the basis of Article
         of the Act of Accession. 
      
It must be noted, however, that the contested directive did not confine itself to such a measure. It granted the Republic
         of Estonia an additional transitional period, going beyond December until the end of 2012, as regards the implementation
         of Article 21(1)(b) and (c) of Directive 2003/54, whilst providing, in that regard, that market opening should take place
         gradually, so as to attain 35% of the market on January and a complete opening by the end of 2012, and by introducing,
         for that purpose, a requirement that the Republic of Estonia communicate annually to the Commission the consumption thresholds
         extending eligibility to final customers (hereinafter together, ‘the further derogations introduced by the contested directive’).
         
      
Such further derogations, could not, for their part, be granted on the basis of Article of the Act of Accession.
      
Admittedly, it cannot be maintained, as the Parliament did, that such a grant derogates from the Act of Accession itself
         on the ground that the latter provided, for Estonia, only a transitional period expiring at the end of 2008. 
      
It is quite clear, as the Estonian Government correctly pointed out, that the derogation contained in Annex VI to the Act of Accession occurs in a legislative context in which only a partial opening of the market was envisaged by Directive
         96/92. It is with regard only to such partial opening that the date of December was considered appropriate to take
         account of the requirements arising from the particular situation of the electricity sector of that new Member State, without
         thereby in any way prejudicing provisions which might need to be adopted in relation to those same requirements should that
         legislative context subsequently evolve, in particular, in the direction of complete opening of the market concerned. 
      
It is true, furthermore, that the additional transitional period thus accorded to the Republic of Estonia by the contested
         directive is clearly, as the Estonian Government pointed out, on the same lines as Declaration No 8. That declaration refers
         to impending accelerated market opening in the electricity sector and recognises, in particular, in that perspective, the
         specific situation of that new Member State related to the restructuring of the oil shale sector which will require particular
         efforts until the end of 2012.
      
However, the fact remains that such a statement of position contained in a joint declaration of the Member States of the Union
         annexed to the final act of the Treaty of Accession cannot, contrary to the Estonian Government’s submission, be determinative
         of the legal basis to which recourse must be had for the grant of derogations such as the further derogations introduced by
         the contested directive.
      
It must be pointed out that those further derogations do not come within the meaning of ‘adaptation’ as the term is used in
         Article of the Act of Accession and as defined in paragraphs to of this judgment. 
      
The further derogations introduced by the contested directive constitute measures whose sole object and purpose, like most
         temporary derogations, is to postpone temporarily the effective application of the Community act concerned, and whose adoption
         therefore involves a political assessment. Unlike the derogation discussed in paragraphs to of this judgment which is,
         for its part, intended to integrate into the legislative framework specific to Directive 2003/the acquis constituted for
         the Republic of Estonia by the derogation provided for in Annex VI to the Act of Accession, those further derogations
         cannot be regarded as indispensable for the purposes of ensuring the full applicability of that directive as regards that
         new Member State.
      
It follows that the further derogations introduced by the contested directive could not validly be adopted on the basis of
         Article of the Act of Accession.
      
Contrary to the Council’s submission, it does not, however, follow that there is a legal vacuum in that regard. Once the Treaty of Accession was signed, and subject to the application of the particular procedures for which that Treaty provides
         for the purposes of deciding on certain types of transitional measures, such as, for example, those established by Articles
         or of the Act of Accession, there is no objection in principle to Community measures adopted after that signature
         and before the entry into force of the Treaty of Accession and containing temporary derogations in favour of a future
         acceding State being adopted directly on the basis of the provisions of the EC Treaty. 
      
Such derogations, which are intended to apply only subject to and on the date of actual entry into force of the Treaty
         of Accession, cannot, contrary to the Council’s submission, disregard either the second and third paragraphs of Article EC and Article EC, under which the acts adopted by the institutions apply to the Member States, or Article 2(2) and (3)
         of the Treaty of Accession. 
      
First, such specific provisions, like, moreover, the acts in which they are included and/or from which they derogate, will
         apply to the acceding States only on the date on which their accession takes effect, when they acquire the status of Member
         States.
      
Second, the fact that Article 2(2) of the Treaty of Accession provides that the Treaty is not to enter into force until
         May and that Article 2(3) provides that, notwithstanding that principle, certain provisions of that Treaty may be applied
         earlier does not affect the possibility of provision being made, in acts adopted not under that Treaty but on the basis of
         the EC Treaty itself, for the conditions under which such acts adopted between the signature of the Treaty of Accession and
         its entry into force will apply to the future Member States once accession has taken place.
      
Rather, as regards acts that must be thus adopted during the period between the date of signature of the Treaty of Accession
         and the date when the accession takes effect, the Community institutions are fully aware of the imminent accession of new
         Member States whilst the latter have the opportunity to assert their interests where necessary, in particular through the
         information and consultation procedure (see, to that effect, Joined Cases 39/81, 43/81, 85/and 88/Halyvourgikiand Helleniki Halyvourgia v Commission [1982] ECR 593, paragraph 10).
      
It is therefore, in principle, in the framework of that procedure and by making use of the observer status which they have
         in the Council, with the opportunities for dialogue and cooperation which those special mechanisms afford them, that the future
         Member States may, once informed of the future adoption of new Community acts, assert their interest in obtaining the necessary
         transitional derogations; these might be needed, for example, because it would be impossible to ensure immediate application
         of those acts on accession, or because of major socio‑economic problems to which such application might give rise. 
      
It is by means of those mechanisms that the special interests thus invoked can, in particular, be appropriately balanced against
         the general interest of the Community and that the considerations relating to the principles of equality, good faith and solidarity
         among current and future Member States cited by the Polish Government will, where appropriate, be called into play.
      
The existence of those mechanisms specific to the accession process underway confirms therefore that it is, in principle,
         by means of the ordinary legislative procedure under the Treaty and not in the framework of the special procedure under Article
         of the Act of Accession that the further derogations introduced by the contested directive should have been adopted.
      
Likewise, the Court cannot accept the Council’s argument concerning the urgent nature of the adoption of such further derogations
         on the basis of Article prior to the date on which the provisions necessary to comply with Directive 2003/should have
         been implemented, rather than by following the legislative co‑decision procedure which takes much longer, in order to avoid
         creating legal uncertainty and adversely affecting the legitimate interests of operators on the Estonian electricity market.
      
First, as has been pointed out in paragraphs to of this judgment, when the Community envisaged the adoption of a legislative
         act during the period between signature of the Treaty of Accession and its entry into force, the information and consultation
         procedure could lead to the grant of possible transitional derogations in favour of an acceding State as regards application
         of the provisions of the act the adoption of which was so envisaged.
      
On that point, none of the parties has provided evidence to suggest that the information and consultation procedure was not
         properly followed and that the Estonian Government was not in a position to assert its interests as regards the proposal for
         a directive which led to the adoption of Directive 2003/54, as provided for by that procedure (see, by way of analogy, Halyvourgiki and Helleniki Halyvourgia v Commission, paragraph 15). 
      
Second, and as the Parliament observed, once a Commission proposal is before it, the Council has, where appropriate, the opportunity
         to draw the Parliament’s attention to the possible urgency of adopting a particular measure. The co‑decision procedure under
         Article EC in no way precludes a relatively rapid adoption of a legislative text, particularly if there are no significant
         differences of opinion between the Parliament and the Council.
      
As to the legal uncertainty which could arise from the lapse of time inherent in the ordinary legislative procedure, this
         could be remedied, as the Commission rightly maintained, only by giving possible retrospective effect to the requested transitional
         derogation should it be granted.
      
It follows, in that regard, from the Court’s case‑law that although the principle of legal certainty precludes, in general,
         a Community measure from taking effect from a point in time before its publication, it may exceptionally be otherwise where
         the purpose to be achieved so demands and where the legitimate expectations of those concerned are duly respected (see Case
         C‑331/Fedesa and Others [1990] ECR I‑4023, paragraph 45, and Parliament v Council, paragraph 21).
      
It is also appropriate to point out that it is of course possible, as the Polish Government in particular maintained, that
         the lack of a general provision in the Act of Accession enabling transitional derogations to be granted as regards the
         application to the new Member States of acts adopted between the date of signature of the Treaty of Accession and that
         of its entry into force and the mere existence, for such purposes, of the information and consultation procedure appear in
         retrospect to have been insufficient. It is also possible that that circumstance gave rise to the fact that Article of
         the Act concerning the conditions of accession to the European Union of the Republic of Bulgaria and of Romania and the adjustments
         to the Treaties on which the European Union is founded (OJ L 157, p. 203), cited by various parties, the purpose of which
         is similar to that of Article of the Act of Accession, provides expressly that the power of the Council to adopt temporary
         derogations extends also to acts of the institutions adopted between the date of signature of the treaty of accession and
         that of the accession itself. However, the possible imperfections which the Act of Accession harbours in that regard
         cannot authorise recourse to an incorrect legal basis.
      
It follows from all the foregoing that the further derogations introduced by the contested directive referred to in paragraph
         of this judgment could not validly be adopted on the basis of Article of the Act of Accession. 
      
It follows that the first plea in law is well founded in claiming that those further derogations are unlawful.
      
 The second plea in law
Since examination of the first plea in law resulted only in a finding that the contested directive was unlawful in part, the
         second plea in law alleging a defective statement of reasons for the said directive must be examined in order to ascertain
         whether the directive is not entirely vitiated by illegality on that second ground.
      
By that second plea in law, the Parliament claims that the contested directive does not explain whether, and to what extent,
         it is making an adaptation by reason of the accession, or the reasons for recourse to the exceptional legal basis constituted
         by Article of the Act of Accession, which derogates from the normal legislative procedure. It states that the preamble
         to that directive was not, moreover, changed in relation to the preamble to the Commission’s proposal referred to in paragraph
         of this judgment, whilst the latter was based on Articles 47(2) EC, EC and EC, and that no explanation was given
         for that difference.
      
In that regard, it has consistently been held that the statement of reasons required by Article EC must be adapted to
         the nature of the act in question. Whilst that statement of reasons must show clearly and unequivocally the reasoning of the
         Community institution which adopted the measure in such a way as to enable the persons concerned to ascertain the reasons
         for it and the competent court to exercise its power of review, the institution is not required to go into every relevant
         point of fact and law. The question as to whether the statement of reasons for a measure satisfies the requirements of Article
         EC must be assessed with reference not only to the wording of the measure but also to its context and to the whole body
         of legal rules governing the matter in question (see, in particular, Case C-15/Commission v EIB [2003] ECR I‑7281, paragraph 174).
      
In this case, as the Council and the Estonian Government correctly submitted, the preamble to the contested directive, which
         refers to the Republic of Estonia’s request, to the transitional derogation relating to Directive 96/granted to that Member
         State by Annex VI to the Act of Accession, to Declaration No 8, to the accelerated opening of the electricity market
         brought about by Directive 2003/54, and, finally, to the specific features of the Estonian oil shale sector and the difficulties
         which that sector would encounter in the absence of the transitional measures provided for by the contested directive, is
         such as to enable those concerned to ascertain sufficiently the reasons for those transitional measures and the competent
         court to exercise its power of review.
      
In particular, those considerations enable the Court to review the validity of the legal basis used by the Community legislature
         without there being a need for more detailed reasons for that choice of legal basis, which was expressly identified in the
         citation in the preamble to the contested directive as being Article of the Act of Accession. Nor does the fact that
         the Council did not adopt the legal basis proposed by the Commission call for a more specific statement of reasons in that
         regard. 
      
In those circumstances, the second plea in law must be held not to be well founded.
      
 The partial annulment of the contested directive
As follows from paragraphs and of this judgment, the Court partially upholds the first plea in law in so far as the
         further derogations introduced by the contested directive could not validly be adopted on the basis of Article of the Act of Accession.
      
In that regard, it must be borne in mind that, in accordance with settled case-law, partial annulment of a Community act is
         possible only if the elements the annulment of which is sought may be severed from the remainder of the act (see, in particular,
         Case C-244/France v Parliament and Council [2005] ECR I-4021, paragraph 12, and the case‑law there cited). 
      
In this case, the further derogations introduced by the contested directive are severable from the rest of that directive
         which, as is clear from Article thereof, read in the light of recitals and in its preamble, pursues a twofold objective,
         namely, first, to take into account in the framework of the system laid down by Directive 2003/the transitional period
         previously granted to the Republic of Estonia by Annex VI to the Act of Accession in respect of Directive 96/and,
         second, the grant, for the period to 2012, of a further derogation accompanied by an obligation gradually to implement
         Article of Directive 2003/54.
      
It follows that the contested directive must be annulled in so far as it grants Estonia a derogation from the application
         of Article 21(1)(b) and (c) of Directive 2003/54, going beyond December and imposes a corresponding obligation to
         ensure only partial opening of the market representing 35% of consumption on January and an obligation to communicate
         annually the consumption thresholds extending eligibility to final customers. 
      
 The temporal effects of the annulment
Citing the second paragraph of Article EC and the need to avoid a situation of uncertainty for the economic operators
         and investors in the electricity sector in Estonia and for the workers concerned, the Council, supported to that effect by
         the Estonian Government and by the Commission, requested the Court, should it annul the contested directive, to maintain its
         effects until a new directive is adopted.
      
Stressing that its action does not concern the substantive justification for the Republic of Estonia’s request for a derogation,
         but solely the legal basis on which the contested directive was adopted, the Parliament indicated that it did not wish to
         express a view on the Council’s request.
      
In that regard, it is appropriate to note that the request was made in the light of the possibility that the Court would annul
         the contested directive in its entirety.
      
However, the contested directive is, in the event, only being partially annulled to the extent stated in paragraph of this
         judgment, whilst the temporary derogation from Article 21(1)(b) and (c) of Directive 2003/granted by the contested directive
         is to be maintained until December 2008. In those circumstances, there is no need to rule on the Council’s abovementioned
         request. 
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. However, under the first subparagraph of Article 69(3) of those Rules, the
         Court may order that the costs be shared or that the parties bear their own costs where each party succeeds on some and fails
         on other heads. In this case, since the Parliament has applied for its costs and the Council has been substantially unsuccessful,
         it must be ordered to pay the costs. In accordance with the first subparagraph of Article 69(4) of those Rules, the Republic
         of Poland, the Republic of Estonia and the Commission which intervened in the proceedings must bear their own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby:
1.      Annuls Council Directive 2004/85/EC of June amending Directive 2003/54/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
            as regards the application of certain provisions to Estonia, in so far as it grants Estonia a derogation from the application
            of Article 21(1)(b) and (c) of Directive 2003/54/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of June concerning
            common rules for the internal market in electricity and repealing Directive 96/92/EC going beyond December and imposes
            a corresponding obligation to ensure only a partial opening of the market representing 35% of consumption on January and an obligation to communicate annually the consumption thresholds extending eligibility to final customers;
2.      Dismisses the remainder of the action;
3.      Orders the Council of the European Union to pay the costs;
4.      Orders the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Estonia and the Commission of the European Communities to bear their own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 