
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-419/Commission of the European CommunitiesvKingdom of Spain
«(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 91/271/EEC – Article – Urban waste water treatment – Failure to identify sensitive areas)»
Opinion of Advocate General Jacobs delivered on January I - Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), May I - Summary of the Judgment
1..
Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Examination of the merits by the Court – Situation to be taken into consideration – Situation on expiry of the period laid down by the reasoned opinion  (Art. EC) 
2..
Member States – Obligations – Implementation of directives – Failure to fulfil obligations – Justification based on the internal legal order – Not permissible  (Art. EC) 
3..
Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Proof of failure – Burden on Commission – Submission of evidence that the obligation has not been fulfilled  (Art. EC) 
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)May (1)
((Failure by a Member State to fulfil its obligations – Directive 91/271/EEC – Article – Urban waste water treatment – Failure to identify sensitive areas))
In Case C-419/01, 
            
 Commission of the European Communities,  represented by G. Valero Jordana, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, 
v
 Kingdom of Spain,  represented by L. Fraguas Gadea, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
defendant, 
APPLICATION for a declaration that, by identifying sensitive areas in only some regions of its territory, the Kingdom of Spain
            has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of Council Directive 91/271/EEC of May concerning urban waste
            water treatment (OJ L 135, p. 40),
            
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
composed of: J.-P. Puissochet, President of the Chamber, R. Schintgen, C. Gulmann, F. Macken (Rapporteur) and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on October 2001, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         under Article EC for a declaration that, by identifying sensitive areas in only some regions of its territory, the Kingdom
         of Spain has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of Council Directive 91/271/EEC of May concerning urban
         waste water treatment (OJ L 135, p. 40, hereinafter  
         the Directive).  
         
Legal framework
            
According to Article 1, the Directive concerns the collection, treatment and discharge of urban waste water and the treatment
         and discharge of waste water from certain industrial sectors. Its objective is to protect the environment from the adverse
         effects of waste water discharges. 
         
            
Article of the directive defines  
         urban waste water as  
         domestic waste water or the mixture of domestic waste water with industrial waste water and/or run-off rain water. 
         
            
Article 5(1) and (2) of the Directive provides: 
         
1.
 For the purposes of paragraph 2, Member States shall by December identify sensitive areas according to the criteria
         laid down in Annex II.
         
2.
 Member States shall ensure that urban waste water entering collecting systems shall before discharge into sensitive areas
         be subjected to more stringent treatment than that described in Article 4, by December at the latest for all discharges
         from agglomerations of more than p.e. [population equivalent].
         
            
Under Article 19(1) of the Directive, the Member States were to bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions necessary to comply with it no later than June and forthwith inform the Commission thereof. 
         Pre-litigation procedure
            
By letter of April 1997, the Commission requested the Spanish Government to inform it of the measures taken to comply with
         the obligations in Articles 5, and of the Directive. Having received no reply, the Commission sent it a letter of formal
         notice on August 1997. 
         
            
The Spanish Government sent the Commission numerous letters between November and July in which it stated that
         the designation of sensitive areas located in continental waters belonging to intercommunal catchment areas came under State
         jurisdiction, while the Autonomous Communities were proceeding to designate sensitive waters situated both in intracommunal
         continental waters and in coastal waters. It also communicated various information concerning both the implementation of certain
         provisions of the Directive and the date when that implementation was to be carried out in the various Autonomous Communities.
         
         
            
Since it considered that, notwithstanding that information, the Kingdom of Spain had not adopted all the measures necessary
         to ensure compliance with the obligations laid down in Articles 5, and of the Directive, the Commission sent the Spanish
         Government a reasoned opinion on December 1998, allowing it two months to comply with the Directive. 
         
            
The Spanish Government replied to the reasoned opinion on June 1999, stating that four Autonomous Communities(Galicia, the
         Balearic Islands, Catalonia and Andalusia) had already identified sensitive areas in coastal regions, that two others (Asturia
         and the Canary Islands) had no sensitive areas and that the Autonomous Communities of Valencia and the Basque Country would
         identify them shortly. 
         
            
Since it considered that there was a continuing failure to comply with Article 5, the Commission brought the present action,
         in which it claims that the Court should grant the application and order the Kingdom of Spain to pay the costs. The Spanish
         Government contends that the application should be dismissed and the Commission be ordered to pay the costs. 
         Substance
            
The Commission points out that its application concerns only the infringement of Article of the Directive, which requires
         Member States to identify sensitive areas by December at the latest, and no longer, as in the pre-litigation procedure,
         the infringement of Articles and of that directive. 
         
            
It states that, according to the information provided by the Spanish authorities, the identification of sensitive areas in
         Spain can fall to either the State or to the Autonomous Communities. The designation of sensitive areas located in continental
         waters belonging to intercommunal catchment areas comes under State jurisdiction, while the Autonomous Communities designate
         sensitive areas situated both in intracommunal continental waters and in coastal waters.  
         
            
According to the Commission, identification of the waters which come under State jurisdiction was carried out by a decision
         of May 1998, published in the BOE No of June 1998, p. 21761, which was notified to it by letter of July 1998.
         
         
            
In addition, the Commission states that the Autonomous Communities of Andalusia, Murcia, Galicia and Cantabria have identified
         their sensitive areas, published them in their official gazette and notified it of them.  
         
            
By contrast, other Autonomous Communities have failed to designate areas located in waters within their jurisdiction. 
         
            
First, as regards intracommunal continental waters, the Commission states that the Autonomous Community of Catalonia has not
         identified sensitive areas in the intracommunal catchment area within its jurisdiction. 
         
            
Secondly, as regards coastal waters, the Commission maintains that the Autonomous Communities of Catalonia, the Balearic Islands,
         the Basque Country, Valencia, Asturia and the Canary Islands and the autonomous cities of Ceuta and Melilla have not identified
         sensitive areas for the purpose of Article of the Directive.  
         
            
Accordingly, the Commission considers that, by failing to identify the sensitive areas on the Spanish coast, with the exception
         of those of the Autonomous Communities of Andalusia, Murcia, Galicia and Cantabria, the Kingdom of Spain has infringed Article
         of the Directive. 
         
            
The Spanish Government identifies the Autonomous Communities which include parts of the coast: they are the Autonomous Communities
         of Galicia, Asturia, Cantabria, the Basque country, Catalonia, Valencia, Murcia, Andalusia, the Balearic Islands, the Canary
         Islands and the autonomous cities of Ceuta and Melilla. 
         
            
The Spanish Government points out that the Commission has acknowledged that the Autonomous Communities of Andalusia, Murcia,
         Galicia and Cantabria have designated the sensitive areas located in their coastal waters. 
         
            
The Spanish Government in essence states that the sensitive areas should soon be designated by the Autonomous Communities
         of the Basque Country, Catalonia, Valencia, the Balearic Islands and the Canary Islands and the autonomous city of Ceuta.
          
         
            
It is sufficient to point out that, according to settled case-law, the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil
         its obligations must be determined by reference to the situation prevailing in the Member State at the end of the period laid
         down in the reasoned opinion and that a Member State cannot rely on provisions, practices or circumstances in its own legal
         order to justify failure to implement a directive within the prescribed period (Case C-392/Commission  v  
          Spain   [2002] ECR I-11111, paragraph 9). 
         
            
In those circumstances, the application must be granted as regards the Autonomous Communities referred to in paragraph of the present judgment and the autonomous city of Ceuta. 
         
            
On the other hand, the Spanish Government disputes the claim put forward as regards the autonomous city of Melilla and the
         Autonomous Community of Asturia, on the ground that the authorities of Melilla have no jurisdiction over territorial marine
         waters and that the Autonomous Community of Asturia has no sensitive areas. 
         
            
Since the Commission has not lodged a reply, it is not possible to arrive at a definitive opinion concerning those points.
         
         
            
It is settled case-law that in proceedings under Article EC for failure to fulfil an obligation, it is incumbent upon
         the Commission to prove the allegation that the obligation has not been fulfilled and to place before the Court the information
         needed to enable it to determine whether the obligation has not been fulfilled (see,  
          inter alia , Case C-159/Commission  v  
          France  [1997] ECR I-5815, paragraph 10, and Case C-236/Commission  v  
          Italy  [2001] ECR I-4195, paragraph 27). 
         
            
Therefore, it must be held that, by failing to identify sensitive areas in the intracommunal catchment area of the Autonomous
         Community of Catalonia and the coastal waters of the Autonomous Communities of the Basque Country, Catalonia, Valencia, the
         Balearic Islands and the Canary Islands, and of the autonomous city of Ceuta, the Kingdom of Spain has failed to fulfil its
         obligations under Article of the Directive. The remainder of the application is dismissed. 
         
Costs
            
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party's pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Kingdom of Spain has for
         the most part been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
hereby: 
         
1.
 Declares that, by failing to identify sensitive areas in the intracommunal catchment area of the Autonomous Community of Catalonia
            and the coastal waters of the Autonomous Communities of the Basque Country, Catalonia, Valencia, the Balearic Islands and
            the Canary Islands, and of the autonomous city of Ceuta, the Kingdom of Spain failed to fulfil its obligations under Article
            of Council Directive 91/271/EEC of May concerning urban waste water treatment; 
            
2.
 Dismisses the remainder of the application; 
3.
 Orders the Kingdom of Spain to pay the costs. 
Puissochet
Schintgen 
Gulmann 
Macken
Cunha Rodrigues 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on May 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
J.-P. Puissochet  
Registrar
President of the Sixth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: Spanish.
Top  
 