
         				Ordonnance de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-75/P Territorio Histórico de Álava ─ Diputación Foral de Álava and OthersvCommission of the European Communities
«(Appeal – State aid – Aid in the steel sector – Action for annulment – Article CS – Action brought by an intra-State authority – Appeal manifestly unfounded)»
Order of the Court (Sixth Chamber), March I - Summary of the Order
1..
Actions for annulment – Action based on Article CS – Action brought by an intra-State authority – Inadmissible  (Art. CS) 
2..
Actions for annulment – Action based on the second paragraph of Article CS – Restrictive conditions for admissibility – Limitation offset by flexible rules governing intervention  (Art. 33, second para., CS; ECSC Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 34) 
3..
Actions for annulment – Action based on the second paragraph of Article CS – Interpretation contra legem of the condition relating to the need to have locus standi – Not permissible  (Art. 33, second para., CS) 
1.
 Article CS provides an exhaustive list of the persons entitled to bring an action for a declaration that a measure is void
         and does not mentioned intra-State authorities; the latter cannot therefore validly bring such an action. see para. 2.
 The restrictive conditions for admissibility stemming from the second paragraph of Article CS are offset by flexible rules
         governing intervention. Under Article of the ECSC Statute of the Court of Justice, any natural or legal person and, therefore,
         intra-State authorities, may intervene in an action for annulment brought by a Member State against a decision adopted on
         the basis of the ECSC Treaty, if it can establish an interest in the outcome of the case. see para. 3.
 Although the conditions for bringing an action before the Community judicature must be interpreted in the light of the principle
         of effective legal protection, such an interpretation cannot have the effect of setting aside a condition expressly laid down
         in the ECSC Treaty, such as that of having  
          locus standi  under the second paragraph of Article CS, without going beyond the jurisdiction conferred by the Treaty on the Community
         Courts. see para. ORDER OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)March (1)
((Appeal – State aid – Aid in the steel sector – Action for annulment – Article CS – Action brought by an intra-State authority – Appeal manifestly unfounded))
In Case C-75/P, 
         
 Territorio Histórico de Álava ─ Diputación Foral de Álava, Territorio Histórico de Bizkaia ─ Diputación Foral de Bizkaia, Territorio Histórico de Gipuzkoa ─ Diputación Foral de Gipuzkoa y Juntas Generales de Gipuzkoa and Comunidad Autónoma del País Vasco ─ Gobierno Vasco, represented by R. Falcón y Tella, abogado,
         
appellants, 
APPEAL against the order of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities (Third Chamber, Extended Composition)
         of January in Case T-77/Diputación Floral de Álava and Others   v  
          Commission  [2002] ECR II-81, by which the Court held inadmissible the action for annulment brought by the appellants against Commission
         Decision 2001/168/ECSC of October on Spain's corporation tax laws (OJ L 60, p. 57), seeking to have that order
         set aside,
         
the other party to the proceedings being: 
          Commission of the European Communities , represented by G. Rozet and J.L. Buendía Sierra, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,defendant at first instance, 
         
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
composed of: J.-P. Puissochet (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, C. Gulmann, F. Macken, N. Colneric and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
         
Advocate General: A. Tizzano, Registrar: R. Grass, 
         
after hearing the Advocate General, makes the following 
Order
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on March 2002, the Territorio Histórico de Álava ─ Diputación Foral de Álava,
         the Territorio Histórico de Bizkaia ─ Diputación Foral de Bizkaia, the Territorio Histórico de Gipuzkoa ─ Diputación Foral
         de Gipuzkoa y Juntas Generales de Gipuzkoa and the Comunidad Autónoma del País Vasco ─ Gobierno Vasco brought an appeal pursuant
         to Article of the ECSC Statute of the Court of Justice and Article of the EC Statute of the Court of Justice seeking
         to have set aside the order of the Court of First Instance of January in Case T-77/Diputación Foral de Álava and Others   v  
          Commission  [2002] ECR II-(
         the order under appeal), by which the Court of First Instance dismissed as inadmissible their action for annulment of Commission Decision 2001/168/ECSC
         of October on Spain's corporation tax laws (OJ L 60, p. 57;  
         the contested decision).  
         
Relevant provisions
            
The fourth paragraph of Article EC provides: Any natural or legal person may, under the same conditions, institute proceedings against a decision addressed to that person
         or against a decision which, although in the form of a regulation or a decision addressed to another person, is of direct
         and individual concern to the former.
         
            
The first and second paragraphs of Article CS provide:The Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction in actions brought by a Member State or by the Council to have decisions or recommendations
         of the Commission declared void on grounds of lack of competence, infringement of an essential procedural requirement, infringement
         of this Treaty or of any rule of law relating to its application, or misuse of powers. The Court of Justice may not, however,
         examine the evaluation of the situation, resulting from economic facts or circumstances, in the light of which the Commission
         took its decisions or made its recommendations, save where the Commission is alleged to have misused its powers or to have
         manifestly failed to observe the provisions of this Treaty or any rule of law relating to its application. Undertakings or associations referred to in Article may, under the same conditions, institute proceedings against decisions
         or recommendations concerning them which are individual in character or against general decisions or recommendations which
         they consider to involve a misuse of powers affecting them.
         Facts
            
The historic territories of Álava, Bizkaia and Gipuzkoa, which have independent taxation powers, included in their own tax
         legislation systems the tax credit for export activities contained in Article of Law No 43/of December on
         corporation tax (BOE  No of December 1995). In the historic territory of Álava it is Article of Norma Foral (Provincial
         Act) No 24/of July (
          Boletín Oficial del Territorio Histórico de Álava  No of August 1996),in the historic territory of Bizkaia, Article of Norma Foral No 3/of June (
          Boletín Oficial de Bizkaia   No of July 1996), and in the historic territory of Gipuzkoa, Article of Norma Foral No 7/of July (
          Boletín Oficial de Gipuzkoa   No of July 1996). 
         
            
By letter of August 1997, the Commission, considering that those credits favoured local steel companies, informed the Spanish
         Government that it had decided to initiate proceedings under Article 6(5) of Commission Decision No 2496/96/ECSC of December
         establishing Community rules for State aid to the steel industry (OJ L 338, p. 42). 
         
            
On October 2000, the Commission adopted the contested decision, the operative part of which reads as follows:   Article Any aid granted by Spain under:
         
(a)
Article of Act 43/of December on corporation tax; 
         
(b)
Article of Provincial Act 3/of June on corporation tax adopted by the [Diputación Foral de Bizkaia]; 
         
(c)
Article of Provincial Act 7/of July on corporation tax adopted by the [Diputación Foral de Gipuzkoa] or  
         
(d)
Article of Provincial Act 24/of July on corporation tax adopted by the [Diputación Foral de Álava], 
         to ECSC steel undertakings established in Spain is incompatible with the common market in coal and steel.  Article Spain shall forthwith take appropriate measures to ensure that ECSC steel undertakings established in Spain do not receive
         the aid referred to in Article 1....
         
            
By application lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on March 2001, the appellants brought an action for
         the annulment of the contested decision. 
         
            
By a separate document, lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on July 2001, the Commission raised an objection
         of inadmissibility against that action under Article 114(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance on the
         ground that the appellants, which are intra-State authorities, did not have the standing to bring proceedings before the Community
         judicature for annulment of the contested decision. 
         
            
At the same time, by application lodged at the Registry of the Court of Justice on December under number C-501/00,
         the Kingdom of Spain brought an action before the Court of Justice for the annulment of the contested decision. In that case,
         the President of the Court of Justice, by order of June 2001, gave the appellants in the present case leave to intervene
         in the proceedings in support of the form of order sought by the Kingdom of Spain. 
         The order under appeal
            
By the order under appeal, the Court of First Instance granted the form of order sought by the Commission. It dismissed as
         inadmissible the action brought before it and ordered the appellants to pay the costs of the proceedings. 
         
            
The Court of First Instance made the preliminary point, in paragraph of the order under appeal, that the admissibility
         of the action, which sought the annulment of a decision based on the ECSC Treaty, could be assessed only in the light of its
         provisions.  
         
            
It held, in paragraph of the order under appeal, that the question whether the fiscal measures in issue fell within the
         scope of the ECSC Treaty, even though they applied indiscriminately to steel and non-steel undertakings, or whether the Commission
         had misused its powers by adopting the contested decision, was a matter relating to the substance of the case and did not
         justify the admissibility of an action for the annulment of a decision adopted on the basis of the ECSC Treaty being governed
         by the provisions of Article EC. 
         
            
The Court of First Instance pointed out, first, in paragraphs to of the order under appeal, that the admissibility of
         an action for annulment brought against a decision based on the ECSC Treaty is governed by Article CS, the first paragraph
         of which empowers only the Council and the Member States, not intra-State authorities, to lodge an application before the
         Community judicature. The Court of First Instance noted that the Court of Justice applies that rule strictly (orders in Case
         C-95/Région wallonne  v  
          Commission  [1997] ECR I-1787, paragraph 6, and Case C-180/Regione Toscana  v  
          Commission  [1997] ECR I-5245, paragraph 6). 
         
            
Similarly, in paragraphs to of the order under appeal, the Court of First Instance pointed out that the second paragraph
         of Article CS authorises only undertakings or associations of undertakings ─ in addition to the parties referred to in
         the first paragraph ─ to institute proceedings for annulment. It cited the case-law of the Court of Justice, according to
         which Article CS must be interpreted restrictively (Case 222/Commune de Differdange and Others  v  
          Commission  [1984] ECR 2889, paragraph 8).  
         
            
Secondly, the Court of First Instance pointed out, in paragraphs to of the order under appeal, that the appellants did
         not adduce any evidence to show that the action should be declared admissible in order to ensure uniform application of Community
         law or to safeguard the institutional balance laid down in the ECSC Treaty. 
         
            
Finally, in paragraphs to of the order under appeal, the Court of First Instance rejected the appellants' arguments
         based on the principle of effective legal protection. It held that, although Article CS is more restrictive than Article
         EC, that circumstance is offset by the fact that the rules governing intervention in actions brought under the ECSC Treaty
         are more flexible than those governing intervention in actions brought under the EC Treaty. It pointed out, in that regard,
         that the appellants had been given leave to intervene in Case C-501/brought against the contested decision before the Court
         of Justice by the Kingdom of Spain. 
         The appeal
            
By their appeal, in support of which they raise three pleas, the appellants claim that the Court should: 
         
─
set aside the order under appeal and declare admissible the action brought before the Court of First Instance;  
         
─
refer the case back to the Court of First Instance and order it to give a judgment on the substance, without prejudice to
            the possibility of staying proceedings pending judgment by the Court of Justice in Case C-501/Spain  v  
            Commission; 
         
─
order the Commission to pay the costs of the proceedings at first instance and on appeal. 
         
            
The Commission requests the Court to dismiss the appeal as unfounded and to order the appellants to pay the costs.  
         
            
Under Article of its Rules of Procedure, where an appeal is clearly inadmissible or clearly unfounded, the Court may at
         any time dismiss it by reasoned order, without opening the oral procedure.  
         The first plea
         
            
By their first plea, the appellants maintain that the Court of First Instance, before refusing them the right to bring an
         action under Article EC, should have established whether the contested decision should have been based, as they maintained,
         on the EC Treaty rather than on the ECSC Treaty. They submit that, if the arguments of the Court of First Instance set out
         in paragraphs and of the order under appeal were accepted, the Commission, in order to avoid any action brought by an
         intra-State authority against one of its decisions, would need only to base that decision on the ECSC Treaty, even if it should
         have been based on the EC Treaty. 
         
            
Assuming that the appellants' reasoning is relevant, it is clear from the contested decision that it concerns only aid granted
         by the appellants  
         to ECSC steel undertakings established in Spain. In consequence, the decision can have its legal basis only in the ECSC Treaty and the admissibility of the actions brought
         against it can therefore be assessed only in the light of that Treaty, particularly Article 33.  
         
            
Therefore, the plea alleging that the Court of First Instance was wrong to refuse to consider the admissibility of the action
         in the light of Article EC is manifestly unfounded.  
         The second plea
         
            
By their second plea, the appellants maintain that Article CS, in particular the second paragraph, cannot be interpreted
         literally. They submit that the context of the article needs to be taken into account.  
         
            
Article CS should be interpreted in the light of the EC and ECSC Treaties, in particular, the fourth paragraph of Article
         EC. This last provision confers  
          locus standi  on any person directly and individually concerned by a measure which is not addressed to him. The appellants maintain that
         the restrictions imposed by the second paragraph of Article CS are due only to the fact that the authors of the ECSC Treaty
         had not envisaged that persons other than coal or steel producers could be affected by a measure adopted under that Treaty.
         
         
            
The appellants also claim that, likewise, a literal interpretation should not be given to the word  
         undertaking used in the second paragraph of Article CS, because it is more of an economic term than a legal one. They therefore suggest
         that the word be given the meaning of  
         natural or legal person which carries on a business activity or which finds itself in a similar situation. According to the appellants, regional or territorial authorities which have adopted a measure classified as aid by a Commission
         decision are in a situation comparable to that of the recipient and therefore have  
          locus standi , in view of the fact that they are directly and individually concerned by that decision. 
         
            
The Commission contends that a simultaneous reading of the second paragraph of Article CS and the fourth paragraph of Article
         EC shows unequivocally that  
          locus standi  in connection with an action for annulment is governed differently by those two provisions. Therefore, it is not possible,
         on the pretext of taking a dynamic approach, to attribute to one of those provisions the rules established by the other. 
         
         
            
Contrary to what the appellants claim, there is nothing to justify departing from the wording of the second paragraph of Article
         CS. It is reasonable to think that the authors of the Treaty signed in Rome on March were aware of the ECSC Treaty,
         adopted six years previously, in particular of the content and scope of Article CS, and intentionally gave a different
         scope to the provisions of Article of the EEC Treaty (subsequently, following amendment, Article of the EC Treaty;
         now, following further amendment, Article EC). The Court has consistently held that Article CS provides an exhaustive
         list of the persons entitled to bring an action for a declaration that a measure is void (
          Commune de Differdange and Others  v  
          Commission , paragraph 8).  
         
            
The plea alleging an incorrect interpretation of the second paragraph of Article CS is therefore manifestly unfounded.
         
         The third plea
         
            
By their third plea, the appellants claim that, in any event, their action should have been declared admissible in accordance
         with the principle of effective legal protection. They maintain that the fact that they have been granted leave to intervene
         in an action brought by a Member State does not satisfy the requirements of that principle, since the State could decide not
         to bring an action and, if it does bring it, not to raise the arguments which the regional authority considers relevant or
         to discontinue its action. 
         
            
They also claim that, although the principle of effective legal protection does not mean that any person is entitled to bring
         proceedings before the Court of First Instance in any circumstances, it does require the establishment of an effective appeals
         system, even nationally. However, in the present case, nor do the appellants have such a remedy. 
         
            
The Commission considers that, although it is true that the second paragraph of Article CS does not afford intra-State
         authorities a direct right of action against Commission decisions based on the ECSC Treaty, that does not have the effect
         of denying them all legal protection. It maintains that, particularly in Spain, national coordination schemes enable regional
         authorities to express their views if they disagree with the central State. 
         
            
The Court of First Instance rightly pointed out, in the order under appeal, that the restrictions stemming from the second
         paragraph of Article CS are offset by flexible rules governing intervention. Under Article of the ECSC Statute of the
         Court of Justice, any natural or legal person and, therefore, intra-State authorities, may intervene in an action for annulment
         brought by a Member State against a decision adopted on the basis of the ECSC Treaty, if it can establish an interest in the
         outcome of the case. As the Court of First Instance pointed out, the appellants have also been given leave to intervene in
         Case C-501/00, the action for annulment of the contested decision brought before the Court of Justice by the Kingdom of Spain.
         
         
            
In this instance, those proceedings have indeed afforded the appellants effective legal protection, contrary to what they
         maintain. 
         
            
Besides, although the conditions for bringing an action before the Community judicature must be interpreted in the light of
         the principle of effective legal protection, such an interpretation cannot have the effect of setting aside a condition expressly
         laid down in the ECSC Treaty, without going beyond the jurisdiction conferred by the Treaty on the Community Courts (see,
         to this effect, Case C-50/P
          Unión de Pequeños Agricultores   v  
          Council  [2002] ECR I-6677, paragraph 44). 
         
            
It follows from the above that the plea alleging that the Court of First Instance infringed the principle of effective legal
         protection is manifestly unfounded. 
         
            
In those circumstances, the appeal must be dismissed as manifestly unfounded. 
         
Costs
            
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, which applies to the appeal procedure pursuant to Article 118, the unsuccessful
         party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party's pleadings. Since the Commission
         has applied for costs against the appellants and they have been unsuccessful, they must be ordered to pay the costs.  
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
hereby orders:
         
1.
 The appeal is dismissed. 
            
2.
 The Territorio Histórico de Álava ─ Diputación Foral de Álava,
             the Territorio Histórico de Bizkaia ─ Diputación Foral de Bizkaia, the Territorio Histórico de Gipuzkoa ─ Diputación Foral
               de Gipuzkoa y Juntas Generales de Gipuzkoa and the Comunidad Autónoma del País Vasco ─ Gobierno Vasco shall pay the costs.
Luxembourg, March 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
J.-P. Puissochet  
Registrar
President of the Sixth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: Spanish.
Top  
 