
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-420/Commission of the European Communities
v
Hellenic Republic
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Unlawful deposit of waste at the ‘Pera Galini’ site – Directive 75/442/EEC on waste, as amended by Directive 91/156/EEC – Articles and 9)
Summary of the Judgment
Environment – Waste disposal – Directive 75/442, as amended by Directive 91/– First subparagraph of Article – Obligation
            on Member States to ensure disposal of waste – Scope – Need for the measures to be adopted – Discretion – Limits
(Council Directive 75/442, as amended by Directive 91/156, Art. 4, first subpara.)
Whilst the first subparagraph of Article of Directive 75/on waste, as amended by Directive 91/156, does not specify
         the actual content of the measures which must be taken in order to ensure that waste is disposed of without endangering human
         health and without harming the environment, it is none the less true that it is binding on the Member States as to the objective
         to be achieved, whilst leaving to them a margin of discretion in assessing the need for such measures. 
      
From the fact that a situation is not in conformity with the objectives laid down in the first subparagraph of Article of
         Directive 74/442, as amended, then, the direct inference may not in principle be drawn that the Member State concerned has
         necessarily failed to fulfil its obligations under that provision.  However, if that situation persists and leads in particular
         to a significant deterioration in the environment over a protracted period without any action being taken by the competent
         authorities, it may be an indication that the Member States have exceeded the discretion conferred on them by that provision.
         
      
(see paras 21-22)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)November 2004(1)
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations  –  Unlawful deposit of waste at the ‘Pera Galini’ site  –  Directive 75/442/EEC on waste, as amended by Directive 91/156/EEC  –  Articles and 9)
 In Case C-420/02,ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations,brought on November 2002,
            
Commission of the European Communities, represented by M. Konstantinidis, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant,
v
Hellenic Republic, represented by E. Skandalou, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
defendant,
THE COURT (First Chamber),,
 composed of: P. Jann, President of the Chamber,  R. Silva de Lapuerta (Rapporteur),  K. Lenaerts, S. von Bahr and K. Schiemann,
            Judges,
            
 Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed,greffier: M. Múgica Arzamendi, Principal Administrator,
             having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on June 2004,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on July 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By its application, the Commission of the European Communities requests the Court to declare that, by failing to take the
         necessary measures to ensure that waste deposited at the ‘Pera Galini’ site in the prefecture of Heraklion (Greece) will be
         recovered or disposed of without endangering human health, without risk to water, air, soil, plants and animals and without
         causing a nuisance through noise or odours, and by granting a permit to operate the installation which does not contain the
         necessary information, the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles and of Council Directive
         75/442/EEC of July on waste (OJ L 194, p. 39), as amended by Council Directive 91/156/EEC of March (OJ
         L 78, p. 32) (‘the directive’).
         
Legal framework
            
 Article of the directive provides:
         ‘Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that waste is recovered or disposed of without endangering human
         health and without using processes or methods which could harm the environment, and in particular: 
         
–
without risk to water, air, soil and plants and animals, 
–
without causing a nuisance through noise or odours, 
–
without adversely affecting the countryside or places of special interest. 
 Member States shall also take the necessary measures to prohibit the abandonment, dumping or uncontrolled disposal of waste.’
         
         
            
 Article of the directive provides:
         ‘1. For the purposes of implementing Articles 4, and 7, any establishment or undertaking which carries out the operations
         specified in Annex II A must obtain a permit from the competent authority referred to in Article 6. 
          Such permit shall cover: 
         
–
the types and quantities of waste, 
–
the technical requirements, 
–
the security precautions to be taken, 
–
the disposal site, 
–
the treatment method. 
 2. Permits may be granted for a specified period, they may be renewable, they may be subject to conditions and obligations,
         or, notably, if the intended method of disposal is unacceptable from the point of view of environmental protection, they may
         be refused.’
         
Pre-litigation procedure
            
 Following the submission of petitions to the European Parliament alleging that waste was being deposited unlawfully at the
         ‘Pera Galini’ site in the prefecture of Heraklion, the Commission requested the Greek authorities, by letter of February
         2000, to provide it with information as to the operating conditions of the installation in question and on the progress of
         the waste management plan in that prefecture.
         
            
 In their reply of May 2000, the Greek authorities referred to the implementation, in various areas of the abovementioned
         prefecture, of construction projects for controlled landfill sites.  They indicated that there is such a project for the ‘Pera
         Galini’ site, approval for the location of which was given by a decision dating from March 1995.  They stated that the joint
         ministerial order for approval of the environmental conditions for that project had not yet been adopted.
         
            
 In May 2000, the Commission learned of a decision taken on December by the Heraklion Court of First Instance (several
         judges) which, holding that the installation was being unlawfully operated with resultant risks to the environment and to
         human health, ordered that waste should cease to be deposited at the ‘Pera Galini’ site.
         
            
 At meetings held on and December 2000, the Greek authorities informed the Commission that the waste management plan
         for the prefecture of Heraklion had not yet been adopted and that the environment impact assessment relating to the new installation
         at the ‘Pera Galini’ site had not yet been completed.
         
            
 By a letter of March 2001, they informed the Commission that the first phase of the waste management plan in the region
         of Crete had been completed.  They also referred to an expert’s report examining the operating conditions of the ‘Pera Galini’
         site.  They added that that site was suitable for the construction of the new waste management installation.
         
            
 Since it considered that the Hellenic Republic had failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles and of the directive,
         in a letter of April the Commission gave that Member State formal notice to submit its observations. 
         
            
 In their reply of November 2001, the Greek authorities informed the Commission that, on July 2001, the Crete Regional
         Council had approved the waste management plan for the region of Crete.  They maintained that the implementation of that plan,
         by means of the adoption of a rehabilitation plan for the ‘Pera Galini’ site, would make a decisive contribution to resolving
         the problem.  Furthermore, they pointed to various measures taken at that site to limit the harmful consequences for the environment
         and the risks to public health.   Fencing and a 24-hour security system have been put in place, a fire-break zone has been
         created, the access road to the site has been asphalted to reduce dust, a rainwater drainage ditch has been dug and its drainage
         is checked and content recycled on site, and the site has been covered with sand.  Moreover, according to the Greek authorities,
         the rocks in the region are impermeable.
         
            
 Taking the view that the above measures were not sufficient, on December the Commission issued a reasoned opinion
         calling on the Hellenic Republic to take the measures necessary to comply with it within a period of two months of its notification.
         
            
 In their replies of April and June 2002, the Greek authorities once again referred to the completion of the framework
         for the regional waste management plan for Crete, of which the plan for the prefecture of Heraklion forms a part, and reiterated
         the measures taken at the ‘Pera Galini’ site.  They stated that all the studies carried out by the region of Crete on the
         management of waste were to be completed in July and accordingly the projects could be financed within that year.   The
         plan provides for the establishment and operation, at the ‘Pera Galini’ site, of a controlled landfill installation meeting
         the needs of the prefectures of Heraklion, Rethimnon and Lassithi.
         
            
 The Commission considered that the situation remained unsatisfactory and decided to bring the present action.
         
The actionThe first complaint, alleging infringement of Article of the directive Arguments of the parties
         
            
 The Commission notes that, according to an inspection carried out by the competent authorities on February 1998, the operation
         of the ‘Pera Galini’ landfill site is a source of environmental pollution and entails risks for the health of the local population.
         
            
 It notes that, in their replies to the letter of formal notice and the reasoned opinion, the Greek authorities admit that
         the landfill operations have not been halted.  It submits that the measures taken at the site are not sufficient to ensure
         the proper operation of the landfill and to prevent any risks to the natural and human environment within the meaning of Article
         of the directive.  According to the Commission, the construction of drainage ditches should be accompanied by hydrogeological
         studies and information regarding impermeability.  Furthermore, no protective measures against pollution of the soil and groundwater
         have been proposed, such as the construction of a geological isolating barrier, the implementation of a new system for the
         collection of drainage water and a sealing system, periodic on-site checks, analyses of the quality of water or the collection
         and processing of biogas.
         
            
 Moreover, the Commission points out that, according to a report drawn up on January by the health authority of the
         prefecture of Heraklion, leachate was not contained and flowed into a stream before ending up in the sea.  With regard to
         the impermeability of the rocks underlying the landfill, this was not proven and could not therefore be put forward to justify
         the absence of measures intended to prevent pollution of the soil and groundwater.  Lastly, the measures contained in the
         regional waste management plan for resolving the problem of waste management in Crete were still at the study stage.
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Commission submits that, to the extent that the ‘Pera Galini’ tip has been in use since and
         remains in operation to date, the Hellenic Republic has exceeded the limits of the discretion it enjoys under Article of
         the directive.
         
            
 The Greek Government contends that it has not exceeded the limits of the discretion enjoyed by Member States under Article
         of the directive.  It considers that, having regard to the measures taken at the ‘Pera Galini’ site, the current operation
         of the landfill does not endanger human health or the environment.
         
            
 In that regard, it submits as follows:
         
–
as part of the new waste management plan, the site in question is the subject of a rehabilitation study; 
–
the second phase of the regional waste management plan for Crete has been completed;
–
the plan and the programme for investment and operation of the system for recycling packaging materials, approved by the Minister
               for the Environment, should become operational during 2004;
            
–
an application to the Cohesion Fund for the purposes of  financing the construction of the central controlled landfill site
               and the rehabilitation of the ‘Pera Galini’ site was to be made in 2003.
            
            
 With regard to the report of January referred to by the Commission, the Greek Government submits that this was drawn
         up following an inspection which took place at a time when circumstances were particularly difficult owing to continuous rainfall.
          In addition, the Greek authorities indicate that, according to a report drawn up on March 2003, other than in exceptional
         cases, the drainage water is collected in three watertight cisterns where it is recycled.   Furthermore, the environment impact
         assessment report relating to the rehabilitation of the ‘Pera Galini’ landfill was submitted on February 2003, with approval
         expected in April 2003.  With regard to the impermeability of the rock in the region, this was confirmed in a geological study
         carried out for the purposes of the implementation of the waste management plan.  The Greek authorities also indicate that
         checks on water quality carried out by the competent authorities have never shown the authorised limits to have been exceeded.
          Findings of the Court
         
            
 It should be noted at the outset that whilst the first subparagraph of Article of the directive does not specify the actual
         content of the measures which must be taken in order to ensure that waste is disposed of without endangering human health
         and without harming the environment, it is none the less true that it is binding on the Member States as to the objective
         to be achieved, whilst leaving to the Member States a margin of discretion in assessing the need for such measures (Case C‑365/Commission v Italy [1999] ECR I-7773, paragraph 67).
         
            
 From the fact that a situation is not in conformity with the objectives laid down in the first paragraph of Article of the
         directive, then, the direct inference may not in principle be drawn that the Member State concerned has necessarily failed
         to fulfil its obligations under that provision to take the requisite measures to ensure that waste is disposed of without
         endangering human health and without harming the environment.  However, if that situation persists and leads in particular
         to a significant deterioration in the environment over a protracted period without any action being taken by the competent
         authorities, it may be an indication that the Member States have exceeded the discretion conferred on them by that provision
         (Commission v Italy, cited above, paragraph 68).
         
            
 It must also be recalled that the Court has consistently held that the question whether there has been a failure to fulfil
         obligations must be examined on the basis of the position in which the Member State found itself at the end of the period
         laid down in the reasoned opinion and the Court cannot take account of any subsequent changes (see, inter alia, Case C-455/Commission v Italy [2002] ECR I-9231, paragraph 21, and Case C-348/Commission v Italy [2003] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 7). 
         
            
 The Court must therefore ascertain whether the Commission has established to the requisite legal standard that, on expiry
         of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion, the Hellenic Republic had failed over a protracted period to take the measures
         necessary to ensure that waste deposited at the ‘Pera Galini’ site was recovered or disposed of without endangering human
         health and without using processes or methods which could harm the environment.
         
            
 In that regard, it should be noted that the Greek Government does not dispute the presence at the ‘Pera Galini’ site of waste
         likely to endanger human health and harm the environment.
         
            
 It should also be noted that, as early as 1998, the conclusions of an inspection carried out at the site in question showed
         that the operation of the landfill at the ‘Pera Galini’ site was a source of environmental pollution and entailed risks for
         the health of the local population.
         
            
 In the same year, a decision of the Heraklion Court of First Instance finding that the installation was being operated unlawfully
         and ordering that waste cease to be deposited at the ‘Pera Galini’ site noted the resultant risks to the environment and to
         human health.
         
            
 Furthermore, the inspection report drawn up on January shows that, despite the measures taken by the Greek authorities,
         leachate was not contained by the protective barrier erected for this purpose and flowed into a stream before ending up in
         the sea.
         
            
 That finding cannot be invalidated by the fact that the inspection was carried out at a time of heavy rainfall.  Nor can the
         Greek Government base its argument on the conclusions of the report drawn up following the inspection of March 2003, since
         that took place after the expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion, namely after February 2002.
         
            
 With regard to the plans and studies, relied on by the Greek Government, for improving the treatment of waste in the region
         of Crete, it must be held that they do not constitute the measures necessary to ensure that waste deposited at the ‘Pera Galini’
         site is recovered or disposed of without endangering human health and without using processes or methods which could harm
         the environment.
         
            
 In addition, they do not offer any information to enable it to be determined when operations for the recovery or disposal
         of waste at the site in question are to commence, if at all.  On the contrary, they show that, on expiry of the period laid
         down in the reasoned opinion, those operations had not materialised.
         
            
 Furthermore, as observed by the Advocate General in paragraph of his Opinion, the very existence of those plans and studies
         implies recognition by the Greek authorities of the threat posed by the ‘Pera Galini’ landfill to human health and to the
         environment.
         
            
 The Commission has, therefore, shown to the requisite legal standard that the Greek authorities have failed over a protracted
         period to adopt the necessary measures to ensure that waste deposited at the ‘Pera Galini’ site is recovered or disposed of
         without endangering human health and without using processes or methods which could harm the environment.
         
            
 It follows that the first complaint, alleging infringement of Article of the directive, is well founded.
         
The second complaint alleging infringement of Article of the directive
            
 By its second complaint, the Commission requests the Court to declare that, by granting a permit for operation of the ‘Pera
         Galini’ site which does not contain the necessary information, the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under Article of the directive.
         
            
 The Commission submits that the ‘Pera Galini’ landfill is operating without fulfilling the requirements of the Greek legislation
         in force.  In those circumstances, the Commission considers that it is a fortiori indisputable that the landfill is operating
         without a licence meeting the requirements laid down in Article of the directive.
         
            
 The Greek Government does not dispute that allegation.  Consequently, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary presented
         by the Greek Government, it must be held that the Commission’s second complaint, alleging infringement of Article of the
         directive, is well founded.
         
            
 In the light of the foregoing, it must be held that, by failing to take the necessary measures to ensure that waste deposited
         at the ‘Pera Galini’ site in the prefecture of Heraklion will be recovered or disposed of without endangering human health,
         without risk to water, air, soil, plants and animals and without causing a nuisance through noise or odours, and by granting
         a permit to operate that installation which does not contain the necessary information, the Hellenic Republic has failed to
         fulfil its obligations under Articles and of the directive.
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings.  Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Hellenic Republic has
         been unsuccessful, the Hellenic Republic must be ordered to pay the costs. 
         
 On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby:
         
 
1.
Declares that, by failing to take the necessary measures to ensure that waste deposited at the ‘Pera Galini’ site in the prefecture
                     of Heraklion will be recovered or disposed of without endangering human health, without risk to water, air, soil, plants and
                     animals and without causing a nuisance through noise or odours, and by granting a permit to operate that installation which
                     does not contain the necessary information, the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles and
                     of Council Directive 75/442/EEC on waste, as amended by Council Directive 91/156/EEC;
                  
 
2.
Orders the Hellenic Republic to pay the costs.
 Signatures.
      
 –
            
Language of the case: Greek.
Top  
 