
Avis juridique important
|
61987OOrder of the Third Chamber of the Court of May 1988.  -  Giovanni Santarelli v Commission of the European Communities.  -  Official - Admissibility.  -  Joined cases 78/and 220/87.  
European Court reports Page Summary
Parties
Grounds
Decision on costs
Operative part
Keywords
++++Officials - Actions - Act adversely affecting an official - Preparatory act - Referral to the Invalidity Committee - Inadmissibility  ( Staff Regulations, Arts ( ), ( ) and )  
Summary
Preparatory acts, such as the decision, taken pursuant to Article ( ) of the Staff Regulations, to refer the case of an official for examination by the Invalidity Committee cannot be the subject of an action and it is only in connection with an action directed against the decision taken at the conclusion of the procedure that the applicant can contest the lawfulness of earlier acts which are closely linked to it . 
Parties
In Joined Cases and 220/Giovanni Santarelli, a former official of the Commission of the European Communities, residing at rue des Ménapiens, B-Brussels, represented by Pierre-Paul Van Gehuchten, of the Brussels Bar, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Chambers of J . Loesch, rue Goethe,  applicant,  v  Commission of the European Communities, represented by Peter Kalbe and Joseph Griesmar, Legal Advisers, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of G . Kremlis, a member of the Commission' s Legal Department, Jean Monnet Building, Kirchberg,  defendant,  APPLICATION for the annulment of the appointing authority' s decision of October referring the applicant' s case to the Invalidity Committee and its decision of February retiring him on grounds of invalidity,  THE COURT ( Third Chamber )  composed of : J . C . Moitinho de Almeida, President of Chamber, U . Everling and Y . Galmot, Judges,  Advocate General : C . O . Lenz  Registrar : J.-G Giraud  makes the following  Order  
Grounds
By application lodged at the Court Registry on March 1987, Giovanni Santarelli, a Commission official in Grade B 2, brought two actions under Article ( ) of the Staff Regulations of Officials ( hereinafter referred to as "the Staff Regulations ") for the annulment of the appointing authority' s decision of October to refer his case to the Invalidity Committee and for the annulment of the consequences of that decision including, in particular, the decision of February retiring the applicant on grounds of invalidity .  By an application lodged on July 1987, Mr Santarelli brought an action under Article ( ) of the Staff Regulations also for the annulment of the decision of October and the subsequent measures resulting from that decision .  It appears from the documents before the Court that the appointing authority, finding that the applicant had been absent from his duties for health reasons for a total of days between June and May 1984, decided, pursuant to the fourth subparagraph of Article ( ) of the Staff Regulations, to refer his case to the Invalidity Committee . The Committee declared the applicant fit to carry out his duties, but reserved the right to re-examine him at the end of "if his state of health has not definitively stabilized ". Its conclusions were communicated to the applicant by a memorandum dated October .  On October the appointing authority, which had found that the applicant had been absent for health reasons for a further days during the period between September and October 1986, decided to refer his case back to the Invalidity Committee for it to determine definitively his fitness to carry out his duties normally .  By a letter of January 1987, Mr Santarelli submitted a complaint pursuant to Article ( ) of the Staff Regulations against the decision of October . He stated that the appointing authority had incorrectly calculated the 12-month period of absence which, under Article ( ) of the Staff Regulations, is required for referral to the Invalidity Committee .  By decision of February 1987, the appointing authority, referring to the conclusions of the Invalidity Committee at its meeting on January 1987, according to which the applicant suffered from a permanent invalidity regarded as total and preventing him from carrying out the duties attaching to a post in his career bracket, retired the applicant in accordance with Article of the Staff Regulations .  By documents lodged at the Court Registry on May and October 1987, the Commission raised two objections of inadmissibility pursuant to Article ( ) of the Rules of Procedure .  By an order of May 1988, the Third Chamber of the Court ordered that the two cases be joined . Since the written submissions contained all the information necessary to enable the Court to rule on the admissibility of the two applications, it did not consider it necessary to hear oral argument from the parties .  The Commission contends that the two applications are inadmissible on the grounds that the conditions laid down in Article ( ) of the Staff Regulations for referring the applicant' s case to the Invalidity Committee were satisfied in this instance and that, in any event, that measure is merely a preparatory step to the decision to retire the official concerned and, consequently, cannot constitute an act adversely affecting the applicant which could be the subject of a complaint and an action separate from those which could lie against the decision retiring him .  In the Commission' s view, the application for the annulment of the decision retiring the applicant is also inadmissible because the applicant failed to submit a preliminary complaint to the appointing authority, as required by Article ( ) of the Staff Regulations . The Commission states further that the applications contain no substantive or formal argument relating to that decision .  In the first case ( 78/), the Commission maintains further that having regard to the conditions laid down in Article ( ) of the Staff Regulations, the application is inadmissible inasmuch as it was not accompanied by an application for suspension of the operation of the contested act or for other interim measures .  The applicant submits that the appointing authority' s decision of October was adopted in breach of Article ( ) of the Staff Regulations because the appointing authority calculated incorrectly the duration of the months' sickness leave taken by the applicant over the three-year period preceding the referral of his case to the abovementioned committee . He argues that he has an interest in bringing proceedings against the decision in question because, far from being merely a preparatory measure, it was at the origin of the procedure leading to his retirement and because the unlawfulness of that decision necessarily entails the unlawfulness of all the measures taken to implement it . Furthermore, he claims that a preparatory act is not amenable to review as to its legality only in so far as freedom of decision remains as to the action to be taken in consequence thereof . in this case, the appointing authority could only take a decision in accordance with the conclusions of the Invalidity Committee .  It should be pointed out that the decision to refer the applicant' s case to the Invalidity Committee is a preparatory act which is a step in the procedure for retiring an official . Preparatory acts cannot be the subject of an action ( see, inter alia, the order of the Court of November in Case 141/Macevicius v European Parliament (( )) ECR ) and it is only in connection with an action brought against the decision taken at the conclusion of this procedure that the applicant can contest the legality of earlier steps which are closely linked to it ( see the judgment of December in Case 3/Cesare Alfieri v European Parliament (( )) ECR ).  Finally, it should be noted that the applicant did not submit a complaint in accordance with Article ( ) of the Staff Regulations against the decision retiring him .  It follows from the foregoing that the actions must be dismissed as inadmissible .  
Decision on costs
Costs  Under Article ( ) of the Rules of Procedure the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs . However, under Article of those rules, in proceedings brought by servants of the Communities the institutions are to bear their own costs .  
Operative part
On those grounds,  THE COURT ( Third Chamber ),  after hearing the views of the Advocate General,  hereby orders as follows :  ( ) The applications are dismissed as inadmissible .  ( ) The parties shall bear their own costs .  Luxembourg, May .  
Top  
 