
Case C-327/Hypoteční banka a.s.
v
Udo Mike Lindner
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Okresní soud v Chebu)
(Jurisdiction and the enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters – Mortgage loan contract concluded by a consumer who is a national of one Member State with a bank established in another Member
         State – Legislation of a Member State making it possible, in the case where the exact domicile of the consumer is unknown, to bring
         an action against the latter before a court of that State)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Judicial cooperation in civil matters – Jurisdiction and the enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters – Regulation
            No 44/– Field of application – Determination of international jurisdiction of a court of a Member State
(Council Regulation No 44/2001)
2.        Judicial cooperation in civil matters – Jurisdiction and the enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters – Regulation
            No 44/– Jurisdiction over consumer contracts – Court of the Member State where the consumer was domiciled – Place of
            domicile unknown – Jurisdiction of the court of the place of last known domicile – Conditions
(Council Regulation No 44/2001, Arts 16(2) and 59)
3.        Judicial cooperation in civil matters – Jurisdiction and the enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters – Regulation
            No 44/– Provision of national law enabling proceedings to be brought against a person whose domicile is unknown – Whether
            lawful – Conditions
(Council Regulation No 44/2001)
1.        Regulation No 44/on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters must
         be interpreted as meaning that the application of the rules of jurisdiction it lays down presupposes that the situation at
         issue in the proceedings of which the court of a Member State is seised is such as to raise questions relating to determination
         of the international jurisdiction of that court. Such a situation arises where an action is brought before a court of a Member
         State against a national of another Member State whose domicile is unknown to that court.
      
While it is true that the foreign nationality of one of the parties to the proceedings is not taken into account by the rules
         of jurisdiction laid down by Regulation No 44/2001, a distinction must however be made between, on the one hand, the conditions
         under which the rules of jurisdiction pursuant to that regulation must apply and, on the other, the criteria by which international
         jurisdiction is determined under those rules. It is clear that the foreign nationality of the defendant may raise questions
         relating to the determination of the international jurisdiction of the court seised. 
      
(see paras 31-32, 35, operative part 1)
2.        Regulation No 44/on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters must
         be interpreted as meaning that in a situation in which a consumer who is a party to a long‑term mortgage loan contract, which
         includes the obligation to inform the other party to the contract of any change of address, renounces his domicile before
         proceedings against him for breach of his contractual obligations are brought, the courts of the Member State in which the
         consumer had his last known domicile have jurisdiction, pursuant to Article 16(2) of that regulation, to deal with that action
         when they are unable to determine, pursuant to Article of that regulation, the defendant’s current domicile and have no
         firm evidence either allowing them to conclude that the defendant is in fact domiciled outside the European Union.
      
(see para. 55, operative part 2)
3.        Regulation No 44/on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters must
         be interpreted as not precluding the application of a provision of national procedural law of a Member State which, with a
         view to avoiding a situation in which justice is denied, enables proceedings to be brought against, and in the absence of,
         a person whose domicile is unknown, if the court seised of the matter is satisfied, before giving a ruling in those proceedings,
         that all investigations required by the principles of diligence and good faith have been undertaken with a view to tracing
         the defendant.
      
(see para. 55, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber) 
November (*)
      
(Jurisdiction and the enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters – Mortgage loan contract concluded by a consumer who is a national of one Member State with a bank established in another Member
         State – Legislation of a Member State making it possible, in the case where the exact domicile of the consumer is unknown, to bring
         an action against the latter before a court of that State)
      
In Case C‑327/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Okresní soud v Chebu (Czech Republic), made by decision
         of June 2010, received at the Court on July 2010, in the proceedings
      
Hypoteční banka a.s.
v
Udo Mike Lindner,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of A. Tizzano, President of the Chamber, M. Safjan (Rapporteur), A. Borg Barthet, J.-J. Kasel and M. Berger, Judges,
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: K. Sztranc-Sławiczek, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on May 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Hypoteční banka a.s., by J. Hrouzek, advokát,
–        the Czech Government, by M. Smolek and J. Vláčil, acting as Agents,
–        the Danish Government, by C. Vang, acting as Agent,
–        the French Government, by G. de Bergues and B. Beaupère‑Manokha, acting as Agents,
–        the Hungarian Government, by M.Z. Fehér, K. Szíjjártó and K. Molnár, acting as Agents,
–        the Netherlands Government, by C. Wissels, acting as Agent,
–        the European Commission, by M. Šimerdová and A.‑M. Rouchaud-Joët, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2011,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article TFEU and Articles 16(2), 17.and of
         Council Regulation (EC) No 44/of December on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in
         civil and commercial matters (OJ L 12, p. 1), as well as of Article 6(1) of Council Directive 93/13/EEC of April on unfair terms in consumer contracts (OJ L 95, p. 29). 
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between Hypoteční banka a.s. (‘Hypoteční banka’) and Mr Lindner, whose current
         address is unknown, seeking to secure payment of a sum of approximately 4.million Czech crowns (CZK), corresponding to the
         arrears on a mortgage loan which Hypoteční banka had granted to Mr Lindner. 
      
 Legal context
 European Union legislation
 Regulation No 44/Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 44/states:
      
‘Certain differences between national rules governing jurisdiction and recognition of judgments hamper the sound operation
         of the internal market. Provisions to unify the rules of conflict of jurisdiction in civil and commercial matters and to simplify
         the formalities with a view to rapid and simple recognition and enforcement of judgments from Member States bound by this
         Regulation are essential.’
      
In the words of Article of that regulation: 
      
‘1.      Subject to this Regulation, persons domiciled in a Member State shall, whatever their nationality, be sued in the courts of
         that Member State.
      
2.      Persons who are not nationals of the Member State in which they are domiciled shall be governed by the rules of jurisdiction
         applicable to nationals of that State.’
      
Article of that regulation provides:
      
‘1.      Persons domiciled in a Member State may be sued in the courts of another Member State only by virtue of the rules set out
         in Sections to of this Chapter.
      
2.      In particular the rules of national jurisdiction set out in Annex I shall not be applicable as against them.’
Article of Regulation No 44/reads as follows:
      
‘1.      If the defendant is not domiciled in a Member State, the jurisdiction of the courts of each Member State shall, subject to
         Articles and 23, be determined by the law of that Member State.
      
2.      As against such a defendant, any person domiciled in a Member State may, whatever his nationality, avail himself in that State
         of the rules of jurisdiction there in force, and in particular those specified in Annex I, in the same way as the nationals
         of that State.’
      
Section of Chapter II of Regulation No 44/2001, entitled ‘Jurisdiction over consumer contracts’, comprises Articles to
         of that regulation.
      
Article 16(2) of the regulation states:
      
‘Proceedings may be brought against a consumer by the other party to the contract only in the courts of the Member State in
         which the consumer is domiciled.’
      
Article of Regulation No 44/reads as follows: 
      
‘The provisions of this Section may be departed from only by an agreement:
…
3.      which is entered into by the consumer and the other party to the contract, both of whom are at the time of conclusion of the
         contract domiciled or habitually resident in the same Member State, and which confers jurisdiction on the courts of that Member
         State, provided that such an agreement is not contrary to the law of that Member State.’
      
Article of Regulation No 44/provides: 
      
‘Apart from jurisdiction derived from other provisions of this Regulation, a court of a Member State before which a defendant
         enters an appearance shall have jurisdiction. This rule shall not apply where appearance was entered to contest the jurisdiction,
         or where another court has exclusive jurisdiction by virtue of Article 22.’
      
Section of Chapter II of Regulation No 44/2001, entitled ‘Examination as to jurisdiction and admissibility’, contains Article
         26, paragraphs and of which are worded as follows:
      
‘1.      Where a defendant domiciled in one Member State is sued in a court of another Member State and does not enter an appearance,
         the court shall declare of its own motion that it has no jurisdiction unless its jurisdiction is derived from the provisions
         of this Regulation.
      
2.      The court shall stay the proceedings so long as it is not shown that the defendant has been able to receive the document instituting
         the proceedings or an equivalent document in sufficient time to enable him to arrange for his defence, or that all necessary
         steps have been taken to this end.’
      
Chapter III of Regulation No 44/2001, entitled ‘Recognition and Enforcement’, contains Article 34, paragraph of which provides
         that a judgment is not to be recognised ‘where it was given in default of appearance, if the defendant was not served with
         the document which instituted the proceedings or with an equivalent document in sufficient time and in such a way as to enable
         him to arrange for his defence, unless the defendant failed to commence proceedings to challenge the judgment when it was
         possible for him to do so’.
      
Article of Regulation No 44/provides:
      
‘1.      In order to determine whether a party is domiciled in the Member State whose courts are seised of a matter, the court shall
         apply its internal law.
      
2.      If a party is not domiciled in the Member State whose courts are seised of the matter, then, in order to determine whether
         the party is domiciled in another Member State, the court shall apply the law of that Member State.’
      
 Directive 93/As provided in its Article 1(1), the purpose of Directive 93/is to approximate the laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions of the Member States relating to unfair terms in contracts concluded between a seller or supplier and a consumer.
      
Article 6(1) of Directive 93/states: 
      
‘Member States shall lay down that unfair terms used in a contract concluded with a consumer by a seller or supplier shall,
         as provided for under their national law, not be binding on the consumer and that the contract shall continue to bind the
         parties upon those terms if it is capable of continuing in existence without the unfair terms.’
      
 National legislation
Paragraph 29(3) of the Czech Rules of Civil Procedure (‘the Rules of Civil Procedure’­), in the version in force on June
         2009, provided that, where no other measures apply, the president of the chamber may appoint a guardian ad litem for a party whose domicile is not known, on whom it has not been possible to serve proceedings at a known address abroad,
         who suffers from a mental disorder, who on other health grounds is unable to participate in proceedings even for a temporary
         period, or who is unable to express himself in a comprehensible manner. 
      
The referring court states that, in a judgment of March 2005, the Ústavní soud (Czech Constitutional Court) held as follows
         in regard to the person of a guardian ad litem of a defendant whose domicile was unknown:
      
‘The role of guardian ad litem was established in order to defend the interests of the absent party until the outcome in the same way as such a duty would
         be fulfilled by a contractual representative. Where a party to proceedings has his own chosen representative, that party is
         himself responsible for his choice and for his concrete steps in the proceedings. Where, however, the court appoints a guardian
         ad litem as representative of a party to proceedings, it is responsible to ensure that the guardian ad litem defends the rights and legitimate interests of that party. At the same time, it is under a duty to relieve the guardian ad litem of his functions if it ascertains that he is either virtually not fulfilling his role in the proceedings at all …, or is doing
         so in an entirely unsatisfactory manner.’
      
According to the first sentence of Paragraph 89a of the Rules of Civil Procedure, in the version in force at the time material
         to the main proceedings, parties to a commercial dispute could agree in writing on the local jurisdiction of another first-instance
         court, unless exclusive jurisdiction was provided for by statute.
      
Under Paragraph 173(1) of the Rules of Civil Procedure, a payment order must be served on the defendant personally, and any
         notification served otherwise is to be disregarded.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
On September 2008, Hypoteční banka, a company governed by Czech law and established in Prague (Czech Republic), brought
         an action before the referring court by which it sought an order requiring Mr Lindner, a German national, to pay to it the
         sum of CZK 584.60, plus default interest, by way of arrears on the mortgage loan which was granted to Mr Lindner pursuant
         to a contract between the parties dated August (‘the contract’).
      
In Article VIII, point 8, of the contract, Hypoteční banka and Mr Lindner agreed, with reference to Paragraph 89a of the Rules
         of Civil Procedure, that, ‘in relation to any disputes arising out of this … contract, the local court of the bank, determined
         according to its registered office as entered in the commercial register at the time of the lodging of the claim, shall have
         jurisdiction’.
      
It is apparent from the order for reference that, at the time when the contract was concluded, Mr Linder was deemed to be
         domiciled in Mariánské Lázně (Czech Republic), that is to say, the place where the consumer was domiciled was more than km from Prague, where the ‘local court of the bank’ designated by the parties to the contract is situated.
      
However, according to Hypoteční banka, it brought an action before the ‘court with general jurisdiction over the defendant’
         rather than before the ‘local court of the bank’ since, at the date on which the proceedings were brought, it was unable,
         for reasons beyond its control, to submit the original contract to its local court and thereby fulfil the statutory requirement
         that it bring proceedings before the latter court.
      
On October 2008, the Okresní soud v Chebu (Cheb District Court) granted the application by way of a payment order whereby,
         firstly, the defendant was required to pay to the applicant the sum claimed, plus default interest, and, secondly, the defendant
         was ordered to pay the costs of the proceedings. As that payment order was, however, not able to be served on the defendant
         personally, as required by Paragraph 173(1) of the Rules of Civil Procedure, it was set aside by the referring court by an
         order of September 2009.
      
As the defendant was not staying at any of the addresses known to the referring court, and given that that court was unable
         to establish any other place of residence for the defendant in the Czech Republic, that court, in application of Paragraph
         29(3) of the Rules of Civil Procedure, assigned, by order of June 2009, a guardian ad litem to the defendant, who was considered to be a person whose domicile was unknown.
      
By a deposition of October 2009, which was the first action carried out by the guardian ad litem in the proceedings before the referring court, the guardian ad litem raised factual objections to the part of the claim put forward by Hypoteční banka relating to interest.
      
In those circumstances, the Okresní soud v Chebu decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the
         Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      If one of the parties to court proceedings is a national of a State other than the one in which those proceedings are taking
         place, does that fact provide a basis for the cross-border element within the meaning of Article (formerly Article 65)
         of the Treaty, which is one of the conditions for the applicability of Council Regulation [No 44/2001] …?
      
(2)      Does Regulation [No 44/2001] preclude the use of provisions of national law which enable proceedings to be brought against
         persons of unknown address?
      
(3)      If Question is answered in the negative, can the making of submissions by a court-appointed guardian ad litem of the defendant in the case be regarded on its own as submission by the defendant to the jurisdiction of the local court
         for the purposes of Article of Regulation [No 44/2001], even where the subject-matter of the dispute is a claim arising
         out of a consumer contract and the courts of the Czech Republic would not have jurisdiction under Article 16(2) of that regulation
         to determine that dispute?
      
(4)      Can an agreement on the local jurisdiction of a particular court be regarded as establishing the international jurisdiction
         of the chosen court for the purposes of Article 17.of Regulation [No 44/2001], and, if so, does that apply even if the agreement
         on local jurisdiction is invalid on the ground that it conflicts with Article 6(1) of … Directive [93/13] … on unfair terms
         in consumer contracts?’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred
 The first question
By its first question, the referring court asks, in essence, whether Regulation No 44/must be interpreted as meaning
         that the conditions for application of the rules of jurisdiction laid down by that regulation are met in the case where one
         of the parties to the court proceedings is a national of a Member State other than that in which those proceedings are taking
         place. 
      
In that regard, it must first be pointed out that, like the Convention of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement
         of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters (OJ L 304, p. 36), as amended by the successive conventions relating to
         the accession of new Member States to that convention (‘the Brussels Convention’), the interpretation of which is also valid
         for Regulation No 44/whenever the provisions of those European Union instruments may be regarded as equivalent (Case
         C‑189/Zuid-Chemie [2009] ECR I‑6917, paragraph 18), the application of the rules of jurisdiction of that regulation requires the existence
         of an international element.
      
As the Court has already held in respect of the Brussels Convention, the international nature of a legal relationship may
         derive from the fact that the situation at issue in the proceedings is such as to raise questions relating to the determination
         of international jurisdiction (Case C‑281/Owusu [2005] ECR I‑1383, paragraph 26).
      
It is true that the foreign nationality of one of the parties to the proceedings is not taken into account by the rules of
         jurisdiction laid down by Regulation No 44/2001. However, as the Advocate General has noted in point of her Opinion, a
         distinction must be made between, on the one hand, the conditions under which the rules of jurisdiction pursuant to that regulation
         must apply and, on the other, the criteria by which international jurisdiction is determined under those rules.
      
It is clear that, in circumstances such as those at issue in the main proceedings, the foreign nationality of the defendant
         may raise questions relating to the determination of the international jurisdiction of the court seised. 
      
In a situation such as that in the main proceedings, the courts of the Member State of which the defendant is a national may
         also consider themselves to have jurisdiction even though the place in that Member State where the defendant is domiciled
         is unknown. In those circumstances, application of the uniform rules of jurisdiction laid down by Regulation No 44/to
         replace those in force in the various Member States would be in accordance with the requirement of legal certainty and with
         the purpose of that regulation, which is to guarantee, to the greatest extent possible, the protection of defendants who are
         domiciled in the European Union.
      
Accordingly, it follows that, in a situation such as that in the main proceedings, in which the defendant is a foreign national
         and has no known place of domicile in the State of the court seised, the rules of jurisdiction laid down by Regulation No 44/may be applicable. 
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the first question is that Regulation No 44/must be interpreted as meaning
         that the application of the rules of jurisdiction laid down by that regulation requires that the situation at issue in the
         proceedings of which the court of a Member State is seised is such as to raise questions relating to determination of the
         international jurisdiction of that court. Such a situation arises in a case such as that in the main proceedings, in which
         an action is brought before a court of a Member State against a national of another Member State whose domicile is unknown
         to that court.
      
 The second question
By its second question, the referring court asks whether Regulation No 44/must be interpreted as precluding a provision
         of national law of a Member State which enables proceedings to be brought against persons whose domicile is unknown.
      
In order to answer that question, it must be noted at the outset that the purpose of Regulation No 44/2001, like the Brussels
         Convention, is not to unify the procedural rules of the Member States, but to determine which court has jurisdiction in disputes
         concerning civil and commercial matters in relations between Member States and to facilitate the enforcement of judgments
         (see, to that effect, Case C‑18/DFDS Torline [2004] ECR I‑1417, paragraph 23). 
      
In the absence of an express provision in Regulation No 44/which defines jurisdiction in a case such as that in the main
         proceedings, where the exact domicile of the defendant is unknown, the first matter to be determined is whether, and, if so,
         in accordance with which provision that regulation may none the less be held to be applicable and whether it is possible to
         derive from it a criterion on which to base jurisdiction.
      
In this regard, as the case in the main proceedings concerns an action brought against the consumer by the other party to
         the contract, it must be borne in mind that Article 16(2) of Regulation No 44/provides that such proceedings may be brought
         only in the courts of the Member State in which the consumer is domiciled. 
      
Thus, where proceedings against a consumer are brought before a national court, that court must, first of all, determine whether
         the defendant is domiciled in the Member State of that court by applying, in accordance with Article 59(1) of Regulation No 44/2001,
         that Member State’s own law.
      
Secondly, where, as is the case in the main proceedings, that court concludes that the defendant in the main proceedings is
         not domiciled in the Member State of that court, it must then examine whether he is domiciled in another Member State. To
         this end it applies, in accordance with Article 59(2) of Regulation No 44/2001, the national law of that other Member State.
      
Lastly, where the national court, on the one hand, is still unable to identify the place of domicile of the consumer and,
         on the other hand, also has no firm evidence to support the conclusion that the defendant is in fact domiciled outside the
         European Union, a situation in which Article of Regulation No 44/may be applicable, it is necessary to examine whether
         Article 16(2) of that regulation may be interpreted as meaning that, in a case such as that envisaged, the rule on jurisdiction
         of the courts of the Member State in which the consumer is domiciled, laid down in the latter provision, also covers the consumer’s
         last known domicile.
      
Such an approach appears to be based on the logic of that regulation and is in keeping with the system established by it.
      
It is, above all, in accordance with the objective, pursued by Regulation No 44/2001, of strengthening the legal protection
         of persons established in the European Union, by enabling the applicant to identify easily the court in which he may sue and
         the defendant reasonably to foresee before which court he may be sued (see, inter alia, Joined Cases C‑509/and C‑161/eDate Advertising and Others [2011] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 50).
      
Such a solution, while promoting the application of the uniform rules laid down by Regulation No 44/as opposed to that
         of divergent national rules, then enables a situation to be avoided in which the fact that it is not possible to identify
         the current domicile of the defendant precludes determination of the court having jurisdiction, thereby depriving the applicant
         of his right to bring proceedings. Such a situation may arise, inter alia, in a case such as that in the main proceedings,
         in which a consumer who, pursuant to Article 16(2) of that regulation, ought to be sued in the courts of the Member State
         in which he is domiciled, renounced his domicile before the proceedings against him were brought.      
      
Lastly, for the purpose of applying Article 16(2) of Regulation No 44/2001, the criterion of the consumer’s last known domicile
         ensures a fair balance between the rights of the applicant and those of the defendant precisely in a case such as that in
         the main proceedings, in which the defendant was under an obligation to inform the other party to the contract of any change
         of address occurring after the long-term mortgage loan contract had been signed. 
      
In the light of the foregoing, it must therefore be held that, in a situation such as that in the main proceedings, in which
         a consumer who is a party to a long-term mortgage loan contract, which includes an obligation to inform the other party to
         the contract of any change of address, renounces his domicile before the proceedings against him for breach of his contractual
         obligations are brought, the courts of the Member State in which the consumer has his last known domicile have jurisdiction,
         pursuant to Article 16(2) of Regulation No 44/2001, to deal with those proceedings in the case where they have been unable
         to determine, in accordance with Article of that regulation, the defendant’s current domicile and also do not have any
         firm evidence allowing them to conclude that the defendant is in fact domiciled outside the European Union.
      
In that regard, so far as concerns the requirements to be complied with during the subsequent proceedings, it must be borne
         in mind that all the provisions of Regulation No 44/express the intention to ensure that, within the scope of that regulation’s
         objectives, proceedings leading to the delivery of judicial decisions take place in such a way that the rights of the defence
         are observed (see Case 125/Denilauler [1980] ECR 1553, paragraph 13, and Case C‑394/Gambazzi [2009] ECR I‑2563, paragraph 23). 
      
However, the requirement that the rights of the defence be observed, as laid down also in Article of the Charter of Fundamental
         Rights of the European Union, must be implemented in conjunction with respect for the right of the applicant to bring proceedings
         before a court in order to determine the merits of its claim.
      
In this respect, the Court held, in paragraph of the judgment in Gambazzi, that fundamental rights, such as respect for the rights of the defence, do not constitute unfettered prerogatives and may
         be subject to restrictions. Such restrictions must, however, in fact correspond to the objectives of public interest pursued
         by the measure in question and must not constitute, with regard to the aim pursued, a disproportionate interference with the
         rights thus guaranteed. 
      
In that regard, it must be borne in mind that the Court has already held that the objective of avoiding situations of denial
         of justice, which the applicant would face should it not be possible to determine the defendant’s domicile, constitutes such
         an objective of public interest (see, to that effect, Gambazzi, paragraphs to 33), it being a matter for the referring court to determine whether that objective is in fact pursued by
         the national provision at issue. 
      
As regards the requirement relating to the need to avoid a disproportionate interference with the rights of the defence, it
         must be pointed out that this applies in particular for the interpretation of Article 26(2) of Regulation No 44/2001. That
         provision must be understood as meaning that a court having jurisdiction pursuant to that regulation may reasonably continue
         proceedings, in the case where it has not been established that the defendant has been enabled to receive the document instituting
         the proceedings, only if all necessary steps have been taken to ensure that the defendant can defend his interests. To that
         end, the court seised of the matter must be satisfied that all investigations required by the principles of diligence and
         good faith have been undertaken to trace the defendant.  
      
It is true that, even if those conditions are satisfied, the possibility of taking further steps in the proceedings without
         the defendant’s knowledge by means, as in the case in the main proceedings, of notification of the action served on a guardian
         ad litem appointed by the court seised constitutes a restriction of the defendant’s rights of defence. That restriction is, however,
         justified in the light of an applicant’s right to effective protection, given that, in the absence of such proceedings, that
         right would be meaningless.
      
In contrast to the situation of the defendant, who, when deprived of the opportunity to defend himself effectively, will have
         the opportunity to ensure respect for the rights of the defence by opposing, in accordance with Article 34(2) of Regulation
         No 44/2001, recognition of the judgment issued against him (see, to that effect, Case 49/Debaecker and Plouvier [1985] ECR 1779, paragraph 11), the applicant runs the risk of being deprived of all possibility of recourse.
      
The answer to the second question is therefore that Regulation No 44/must be interpreted as meaning that:
      
–        in a situation such as that in the main proceedings, in which a consumer who is a party to a long-term mortgage loan contract,
         which includes the obligation to inform the other party to the contract of any change of address, renounces his domicile before
         proceedings against him for breach of his contractual obligations are brought, the courts of the Member State in which the
         consumer had his last known domicile have jurisdiction, pursuant to Article 16(2) of that regulation, to deal with proceedings
         in the case where they have been unable to determine, pursuant to Article of that regulation, the defendant’s current domicile
         and also have no firm evidence allowing them to conclude that the defendant is in fact domiciled outside the European Union;
      
–        that regulation does not preclude the application of a provision of national procedural law of a Member State which, with
         a view to avoiding situations of denial of justice, enables proceedings to be brought against, and in the absence of, a person
         whose domicile is unknown, if the court seised of the matter is satisfied, before giving a ruling in those proceedings, that
         all investigations required by the principles of diligence and good faith have been undertaken with a view to tracing the
         defendant. 
      
In the light of the answers given to the first and second questions, it is unnecessary to reply to the third and fourth questions.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Council Regulation (EC) No 44/of December on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in
            civil and commercial matters must be interpreted as meaning that the application of the rules of jurisdiction laid down by
            that regulation requires that the situation at issue in the proceedings of which the court of a Member State is seised is
            such as to raise questions relating to determination of the international jurisdiction of that court. Such a situation arises
            in a case such as that in the main proceedings, in which an action is brought before a court of a Member State against a national
            of another Member State whose domicile is unknown to that court.
2.      Regulation No 44/must be interpreted as meaning that:
–        in a situation such as that in the main proceedings, in which a consumer who is a party to a long-term mortgage loan contract,
            which includes the obligation to inform the other party to the contract of any change of address, renounces his domicile before
            proceedings against him for breach of his contractual obligations are brought, the courts of the Member State in which the
            consumer had his last known domicile have jurisdiction, pursuant to Article 16(2) of that regulation, to deal with proceedings
            in the case where they have been unable to determine, pursuant to Article of that regulation, the defendant’s current domicile
            and also have no firm evidence allowing them to conclude that the defendant is in fact domiciled outside the European Union;
–        that regulation does not preclude the application of a provision of national procedural law of a Member State which, with
            a view to avoiding situations of denial of justice, enables proceedings to be brought against, and in the absence of, a person
            whose domicile is unknown, if the court seised of the matter is satisfied, before giving a ruling in those proceedings, that
            all investigations required by the principles of diligence and good faith have been undertaken with a view to tracing the
            defendant.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Czech.
      
Top  
 