
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Joined Cases C-473/P and C-474/P
Procter & Gamble Company
v
Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade marks and Designs) (OHIM)
(Appeal – Community trade mark – Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation (EC) No 40/– Three-dimensional tablets for washing machine or dishwashers – Absolute ground for refusal to register – Distinctive character)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Community trade mark – Definition and acquisition of the Community trade mark – Absolute grounds for refusal – Trade marks
            devoid of any distinctive character – Three-dimensional marks consisting of the shape of the product – Distinctive character
            – Criteria by reference to which such character assessed
(Council Regulation No 40/94, Art. 7(1)( b))
2.        Appeals – Pleas in law – Review by the Court of Justice of the assessment of matters of fact submitted to the Court of First
            Instance – Excluded unless the sense of the evidence has been distorted – Application to the present cases of the criteria
            by reference to which the distinctive character of Community trade marks is assessed
(Art. EC; EC Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 51)
1.        The criteria for assessing the distinctive character, within the meaning of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/on the
         Community trade mark, of three-dimensional shape-of-products marks are no different from those applicable to other categories
         of trade mark. None the less, for the purpose of applying those criteria, the relevant public’s perception is not necessarily
         the same in relation to a three-dimensional mark consisting of the shape and colours of the product itself as it is in relation
         to a word or figurative mark consisting of a sign which is independent from the appearance of the products it denotes. Average
         consumers are not in the habit of making assumptions about the origin of products on the basis of their shape or the shape
         of their packaging in the absence of any graphic or word element and it could therefore prove more difficult to establish
         distinctiveness in relation to such a three-dimensional mark than in relation to a word or figurative mark.
      
In those circumstances, the more closely the shape for which registration is sought resembles the shape most likely to be
         taken by the product in question, the greater the likelihood of the shape being devoid of any distinctive character. Only
         a trade mark which departs significantly from the norm or customs of the sector and thereby fulfils its essential function
         of indicating origin, is not devoid of any distinctive character for the purposes of that provision.
      
(see paras 36-37)
2.        The Court of First Instance has exclusive jurisdiction to make findings of fact, save where a substantive inaccuracy in its
         findings is attributable to the documents submitted to it, and to appraise those facts. That appraisal thus does not, save
         where the clear sense of the evidence produced to it has been distorted, constitute a point of law which is subject, as such,
         to review by the Court of Justice on appeal.
      
The actual application to the present cases of the criteria for assessing the distinctive character of Community trade marks,
         for the purposes of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94, involves findings of a factual nature and, more specifically,
         the finding that, as regards everyday consumer products, the level of attention paid by the average consumer to the shape
         and pattern of washing-machine and dishwasher tablets is not high.
      
(see paras 39, 53)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)April 2004(1)
(Appeal  –  Community trade mark  –  Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation (EC) No 40/–  Three-dimensional tablets for washing machine or dishwashers  –  Absolute ground for refusal to register  –  Distinctive character)
 In Joined Cases C-473/P and C-474/P,
            
Procter & Gamble Company, established in Cincinnati (United States), represented by C. van Nispen and G. Kuipers, advocaten,
            
appellant,
 TWO APPEALS against the judgments of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities (Second Chamber) of September
            in Case T-128/Procter & Gamble v OHIM (square tablet with inlay) [2001] ECR II-and Case T-129/Procter & Gamble v OHIM (rectangular tablet with inlay) [2001] ECR II-2793, seeking to have those judgments set aside in part,
            
 the other party to the proceedings being:
            Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM), represented by  D. Schennen and C. Røhl Søberg, acting as Agents, 
            defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
 composed of: V. Skouris, acting as the President of the Sixth Chamber, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, J.-P. Puissochet, R. Schintgen
            and F. Macken (Rapporteur), Judges,  
            
 Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer, Registrar: M. Múgica Arzamendi, Principal Administrator,
            
 after hearing oral argument from the parties at the hearing on October 2003, at which Procter & Gamble Company was represented
            by C. van Nispen and G. Kuipers, and the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM)
            by D. Schennen and A. von Mühlendahl, acting as Agent,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on November 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By applications lodged at the Court Registry on December 2001, Procter & Gamble Company (‘Procter & Gamble’) appealed pursuant
         to Article of the EC Statute of the Court of Justice against the judgments of the Court of First Instance of September
         in Case T-128/Procter & Gamble v OHIM (Square tablet with inlay) [2001] ECR II-(‘Case T-128/00’) and Case T‑129/Procter & Gamble  v OHIM (Rectangular tablet with inlay) [2001] ECR II-(‘Case T‑129/00’), (together hereinafter referred to as ‘the judgments under appeal’), by which the Court
         of First Instance partially dismissed its actions for annulment of the decisions of the Third Board of Appeal of the Office
         for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (‘OHIM’) of March (Cases R‑506/1999‑and R‑508/1999‑1),
         which had rejected its appeals against the refusal to register as Community trade marks three-dimensional tablets for washing
         machines or dishwashers (‘the contested decisions’).
         
            
 By order of the President of the Court of Justice of March 2003, Cases C‑473/P and C‑474/P were joined for the purposes
         of the oral procedure and the judgment.
         
Legal framework
            
 Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 40/of December on the Community trade mark (OJ L 11, p. 1) provides:
         ‘A Community trade mark may consist of any signs capable of being represented graphically, particularly words, including personal
         names, designs, letters, numerals, the shape of goods or of their packaging, provided that such signs are capable of distinguishing
         the goods or services of one undertaking from those of other undertakings.’
         
            
 Article of the regulation provides:
         ‘1.     The following shall not be registered:
         
(a)
signs which do not conform to the requirements of Article 4; 
(b)
trade marks which are devoid of any distinctive character; 
(c)
trade marks which consist exclusively of signs or indications which may serve, in trade, to designate the kind, quality, quantity,
               intended purpose, value, geographical origin or the time of production of the goods or of rendering of the service, or other
               characteristics of the goods or service; trade marks which consist exclusively of signs or indications which have become customary
               in the current language or in the bona fide and established practices of the trade;
            
…
          3.       Paragraph 1(b), (c) and (d) shall not apply if the trade mark has become distinctive in relation to the goods or services
         for which registration is requested in consequence of the use which has been made of it.’
         
Facts of the case
            
 On October Procter & Gamble applied to OHIM for registration as Community trade marks of the three-dimensional shapes
         of two tablets, one square and the other rectangular, with chamfered edges, bevelled or slightly rounded corners, speckles
         and inlays on the upper surface.
         
            
 The products in respect of which registration is sought are in class of the Nice Agreement concerning the International
         Classification of Goods and Services for the Purpose of the Registration of Marks of June 1957, as revised and amended,
         and correspond to the description: ‘washing and bleaching preparations and other substances for laundry use; cleaning, polishing,
         scouring and abrasive preparations; preparations for the washing, cleaning and care of dishes; soaps; perfumery, essential
         oils, cosmetics, hair lotions; dentifrices’.
         
            
 By decisions of June 1999, the OHIM examiner refused the applications on the ground that the trade marks for which registration
         was sought were devoid of distinctive character and for that reason could not be registered on account of Article 7(1)(b)
         of Regulation No 40/94.
         
            
 By the contested decisions, the Third Board of Appeal of OHIM upheld the examiner’s decisions finding that each of the marks
         for which registration was sought was devoid of any distinctive character for the purposes of that provision.
         
            
 The Board of Appeal pointed out, first, that it is clear from Article of Regulation No 40/that the shape of a product
         may be registered as a Community trade mark, provided that the shape displays certain features that are sufficiently unusual
         and arbitrary to enable the relevant consumers to recognise the product, purely on the basis of its appearance, as emanating
         from a specific undertaking. Given the advantages offered by products put up in tablet form for washing laundry and dishes,
         the Board of Appeal went on to point out that Procter & Gamble’s competitors must also remain free to make such products using
         the simplest geometrical shapes. The basic geometric shapes (square, round or rectangular) were the most obvious shapes for
         such tablets and there was nothing arbitrary or fanciful about selecting a square tablet for the manufacture of solid detergents.
         Finally, the Board of Appeal held that the use of ‘shouldered’ corners, bevelled edges, concave centres and colours did not
         confer distinctive character on the trade marks for which registration is sought.
         
Procedure before the Court of First Instance and the judgments under appeal
            
 By applications lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on May 2000, Procter & Gamble brought two actions
         for annulment of the contested decisions.
         
            
 In Case T-129/00, the Court of First Instance held that the Board of Appeal of OHIM had rightly found that the three-dimensional
         trade mark for which registration is sought was devoid of any distinctive character within the meaning of Article 7(1)(b)
         of Regulation No 40/94, and did so on the following grounds
         
‘As regards household goods, it is clear from Article of Regulation No 40/that a product’s shape falls among the signs
               which may constitute a Community trade mark. However, the fact that a category of signs is, in general, capable of constituting
               a trade mark does not mean that signs belonging to that category necessarily have distinctive character for the purposes of
               Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/in relation to a specific product or service. 
            
According to Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94, “trade marks which are devoid of any distinctive character” are not to
               be registered. A mark which enables the goods or services in respect of which registration of the mark has been sought to
               be distinguished as to their origin is to be considered as having distinctive character. It is not necessary for that purpose
               for the mark to convey exact information about the identity of the manufacturer of the product or the supplier of the services.
               It is sufficient that the mark enables members of the public concerned to distinguish the product or service that it designates
               from those which have a different trade origin and to conclude that all the products or services that it designates have been
               manufactured, marketed or supplied under the control of the owner of the mark and that the owner is responsible for their
               quality (see, to that effect, Case C-39/Canon [1998] ECR I-5507, paragraph 28). 
            
It is clear from the wording of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/that a minimum degree of distinctive character is sufficient
               to render the ground for refusal set out in that article inapplicable. It is therefore appropriate to ascertain – in an a priori  examination not involving any consideration of the use made of the sign within the meaning of Article 7(3) of Regulation No 40/– whether the mark applied for will enable the members of the public targeted to distinguish the products concerned from those
               having a different trade origin when they come to select a product for purchase. 
            
Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/does not distinguish between different categories of trade marks. The criteria for
               assessing the distinctive character of three-dimensional trade marks consisting of the shape of the product itself are therefore
               no different from those applicable to other categories of trade marks. 
            
Nevertheless, when those criteria are applied, account must be taken of the fact that the perception of the relevant section
               of the public is not necessarily the same in relation to a three-dimensional mark consisting of the shape and the colours
               of the product itself as it is in relation to a word mark, a figurative mark or a three-dimensional mark not consisting of
               the shape of the product. Whilst the public is used to recognising the latter marks instantly as signs identifying the product,
               this is not necessarily so where the sign is indistinguishable from the appearance of the product itself. 
            
It is appropriate to point out that the household goods in respect of which the trade mark was sought in the present case
               are widely used consumer goods. The public concerned, in the case of these goods, is all consumers. Therefore, in any assessment
               of the distinctive character of the mark for which registration is sought, account must be taken of the presumed expectations
               of an average consumer who is reasonably well informed and reasonably observant and circumspect (see, by analogy, Case C-210/Gut Springenheide and Tusky [1998] ECR I-4657, paragraphs to 32). 
            
The way in which the public concerned perceives a trade mark is influenced by the average consumer’s level of attention, which
               is likely to vary according to the category of goods or services in question (see Case C‑342/Lloyd Schuhfabrik Meyer [1999] ECR I-3819, paragraph 26). The level of attention given by the average consumer to the shape and pattern of washing
               machine and dishwasher tablets, being everyday consumer goods, is not high. 
            
In order to ascertain whether the combination of the shape of the tablet at issue and its pattern may be perceived by members
               of the public as an indication of origin, the overall impression produced by that combination must be analysed (see, by analogy,
               Case C-251/SABEL [1997] ECR I‑6191, paragraph 23). That is not incompatible with an examination of each of the product’s individual features
               in turn.
            
Since the applicant has not claimed colour in the present case, the mark applied for cannot enable the products to be identified
               by reference to their origin unless the average consumer, when he sees a rectangular tablet with chamfered edges, speckles
               and a triangular inlay, will recognise it irrespective of its colour and associate all products presented in that way with
               the same origin. 
            
The three-dimensional shape for which registration has been sought … is one of the basic geometrical shapes and is an obvious
               one for a product intended for use in washing machines or dishwashers. The slightly rounded corners of the tablet are dictated
               by practical considerations and are not likely to be perceived by the average consumer as a distinctive feature of the shape
               claimed, capable of distinguishing it from other washing machine or dishwasher tablets. Likewise, the chamfered edges are
               a barely perceptible variant on the basic shape and have no impact on the overall impression made by the tablet. 
            
As regards the presence of speckles and a darker triangular inlay in the centre of the tablet, it is appropriate to examine,
               first, the applicant’s claim that the Board of Appeal failed to consider the speckles. Although it is the case that the Board
               of Appeal did not specifically consider them in the contested decision, it nevertheless remarked, when dealing with the …
               inlay, that the use of different colours was commonplace for the goods in question … That statement demonstrates that the
               Board of Appeal took the view that the speckles were not capable of rendering the mark applied for distinctive, since what
               was involved was a commonplace feature. The contested decision is therefore sufficiently reasoned in that regard. 
            
Further, the public concerned is used to seeing light and dark features in detergent preparations. Powder, the form in which
               such products are traditionally presented, is usually very light grey or beige and appears almost white. As the applicant
               itself explained at the hearing, powder often contains particles of one or more colours, which may be darker or lighter than
               the product’s basic colour. The advertising carried out by the applicant and other manufacturers of detergents tends to highlight
               the fact that those particles indicate the presence of various active ingredients. Those particles thus suggest certain qualities,
               although that does not mean that they can be regarded as a descriptive indication in terms of Article 7(1)(c) of Regulation
               No 40/94. However, it does not follow from the fact that that ground of refusal is inapplicable that light and dark features
               necessarily confer a distinctive character on the mark applied for. Where, as in the present case, the target sector of the
               public sees the presence of light and dark features as a suggestion that the product has certain qualities, and not as an
               indication of its origin, there is no distinctive character. 
            
As regards the fact that, as well as the speckles, the tablet at issue features a[n] … inlay in the centre of its upper surface,
               the Board of Appeal’s finding that the presence of such an inlay is not sufficient for the tablet’s appearance to be perceived
               as indicative of the product’s origin is justified. Where various ingredients are to be combined in a washing machine or dishwashing
               product in tablet form, adding an inlay to the middle of the tablet is one of the most obvious solutions. The fact that the
               inlay consists of a slight depression in the tablet’s centre does not change the tablet’s appearance significantly and is
               therefore not likely to influence consumers’ perception. 
            
Nor is the fact that a … shape has been selected for the inlay sufficient to confer distinctiveness on the mark applied for.
               Associating two basic geometric shapes in such a way as is seen in the tablet at issue is one of the most obvious variations
               on the get-up of the product concerned. In the absence of any additional features, capable of having an impact on consumers’
               perception, that combination of shapes does not enable the public concerned to distinguish the products presented in that
               way from those having a different trade origin. 
            
The fact that consumers may nevertheless get into the habit of recognising the product from such a combination of shapes is
               not enough, on its own, to preclude the ground for refusal based on Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94. Such a development
               in the public’s perception of the sign, if proved, may be taken into account only for the purposes of Article 7(3) of Regulation
               No 40/94. 
            
It does not matter in that regard that the specific combination of geometric shapes mentioned above is not currently used
               for washing machine or dishwasher products. …
            
Given the overall impression created by the combination of the shape and pattern of the tablet in question, the mark applied
               for does not enable consumers to distinguish the products concerned from those having a different trade origin when they come
               to select a product for purchase. 
            
It should be added that the inability of the mark applied for to indicate, a priori  and irrespective of the use made of it within the meaning of Article 7(3) of Regulation No 40/94, the product’s origin is
               not affected by how many similar tablets are already on the market. Consequently, it is not necessary to decide here whether
               the distinctive character of the mark should be assessed by reference to the date on which the application for registration
               is filed or the date of actual registration.
            
…
It follows that the Board of Appeal was right to hold that the three‑dimensional mark applied for is devoid of any distinctive
               character as regards products falling within class of the Nice Agreement and corresponding to the following description:
               “washing and bleaching preparations and other substances for laundry use; cleaning, polishing, scouring and abrasive preparations;
               preparations for the washing, cleaning and care of dishes; soaps”.’
            
            
 The Court of First Instance reached the same conclusion in Case T‑128/00. Paragraphs to of that judgment are couched
         in essentially the same terms as paragraphs to of the judgment in Case T-129/00, which are set out in the preceding
         paragraph.
         
            
 Therefore, by the judgments under appeal the Court of First Instance partially dismissed the actions brought by Procter &
         Gamble against the contested decisions.
         
The appeals
            
 In its appeals Procter & Gamble claims that the judgments under appeal should be set aside in part and that OHIM should be
         ordered to pay the costs.
         
            
 OHIM contends that the appeals should be dismissed and that Procter & Gamble should be ordered to pay the costs.
         
            
 In support of its appeals, Procter & Gamble maintains that the Court of First Instance made an error of law in its interpretation
         of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94. That single plea in law is subdivided, in essence, into five parts relating to:
         
–
the distinctive character of the trade marks for which registration is sought;
–
the need to consider the trade mark as a whole;
–
the assessment of the average consumer’s level of attention;
–
the date by reference to which the distinctive character of the trade marks should be assessed; and
–
the criterion concerning use of a trade mark.
            
 OHIM contends that in the judgments under appeal the Court of First Instance did not make an error of law in its interpretation
         and application of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94.
         
The first part of the plea: the distinctive character of a trade mark Arguments of the parties
         
            
 By the first part of its plea, Procter & Gamble submits that the question whether the geometrical shape of the product is
         an obvious one is not relevant. Nor is it relevant whether the slightly rounded corners or bevelled edges of the tablets in
         question are likely to be perceived by the average consumer as a distinctive feature of the shape for which registration as
         a trade mark is sought, capable of distinguishing them from other washing machine or dishwasher tablets. The right question
         is whether the shape of the tablets, their slightly rounded corners, their bevelled edges or their chamfered sides were, at
         the material time, already part of the usual get-up of tablets on the market and, if they were not, whether the difference
         was perceptible, rendering it apt to confer distinctive character on the marks.
         
            
 As regards more specifically the speckles, Procter & Gamble claims that even if the speckles, taken as an individual feature,
         do not give an indication of the tablets’ origin, they are part of the overall get-up and contribute to the distinctive character
         of the marks. Procter & Gamble maintains that, contrary to the finding of the Court of First Instance, the square or triangular
         inlays on the upper surface of these tablets are not obvious solutions but perceptibly alter the tablets’ appearance and therefore
         at least play a part in influencing the way in which the consumer perceives them.
         
            
 The Court of First Instance held that the inability of the trade marks for which registration is sought to indicate the product’s
         origin was not affected by how many similar tablets were already on the market. Procter & Gamble submits, however, that if
         there were no similar tablets on the market at the material time, the get-ups of the tablets concerned were perceptibly different
         and were therefore distinctive.
         
            
 OHIM contends that the Court of First Instance correctly applied the criteria in Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/for
         assessing whether a trade mark is distinctive, both as regards the relevant public and as regards the products in question,
         since distinctive character must be assessed by reference to the specific nature of the product. The Court of First Instance
         also examined each mark as a whole, with due regard to each of its components, its function and the way in which it would
         be perceived by the relevant consumers. Furthermore, OHIM submits that the Court of First Instance rightly refused to take
         into account whether Procter & Gamble, or its competitors, actually used the same or similar washing machine or dishwasher
         tablets at the date on which the trade-mark applications were filed.
         
            
 As regards distinctive character, OHIM maintains that a trade mark has distinctive character if it allows the products or
         services claimed to be distinguished as to their trade origin and not as to their properties or characteristics. That interpretation
         of distinctiveness, which was adopted by the Court of First Instance, is the only interpretation which is compatible both
         with the wording of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/and with the meaning and function of a trade mark.
         
            
 For OHIM, the Court of First Instance’s finding that the perception of the relevant public is not necessarily the same in
         relation to a three-dimensional trade mark consisting of the shape of the product itself as it is in relation to a word mark
         is of particular importance in this instance. Whilst the public is used to recognising word marks instantly as signs identifying
         the product, the same is not necessarily true where the sign is indistinguishable from the appearance of the product itself.
         
            
 The mere shape of the product, in the absence of other elements which typically are used as signs – such as engraved words
         – will not, as a general rule, be perceived by the average consumer from the outset as being a trade mark, unless the shape
         has some striking feature. It is therefore necessary to define what the striking feature is which confers distinctiveness
         on the shape of a product, and to do so by reference to the functions performed by trade marks. A positive definition could
         be that the shape must be sufficiently fanciful, arbitrary or unusual. A negative definition would be that commonplace, obvious
         or unremarkable shapes and/or combinations of shapes and colours are devoid of any distinctive character.
         
            
 In this instance, the overall impression given by the tablets at issue is, in each of the cases culminating in the judgments
         under appeal, of a non-distinctive sign. None of these tablets possesses distinctive features which would allow an average
         consumer to associate it with a particular manufacturer, unless there were massive advertising and/or use, in other words
         unless Article 7(3) of Regulation No 40/applied.
         
            
 The test proposed by Procter & Gamble – by virtue of which it is necessary, first, to ascertain what is the usual get-up of
         the relevant product on the market and, second, to determine whether, from the consumer’s point of view, the shape of the
         trade mark for which registration is applied is perceptibly different – means in effect that a three-dimensional mark should
         be registered if it meets just one condition, namely that it is different from any other shape, which is contrary to Article
         7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94.
         
            
 That test in fact amounts to imposing, for the registration of trade marks, the same conditions as those which must be met
         if a design is to be registered. Although OHIM acknowledges that one and the same item may be protected under different systems
         of industrial property law, it is of the utmost importance to apply the definitions and conditions corresponding to the protection
         pertaining to each of those systems separately.
         
 Findings of the Court
         
            
 Under Article of Regulation No 40/a Community trade mark may consist of any signs capable of being represented graphically,
         provided that such signs are capable of distinguishing the products or services of one undertaking from those of other undertakings.
         
         
            
 It is clear from Article that both a product’s shape and its colours fall among the signs which may constitute a Community
         trade mark. Therefore, a sign consisting of the three-dimensional shape of a square or rectangular tablet for washing machines
         or dishwashers, with chamfered edges, bevelled or slightly rounded corners, speckles and an inlay on the upper surface may,
         in principle, constitute a trade mark, provided that the two conditions mentioned in the preceding paragraph are met.
         
            
 However, as the Court of First Instance rightly pointed out in paragraph of the judgments under appeal, the fact that a
         sign is, in general, capable of constituting a trade mark within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 40/does not
         mean that the sign necessarily has distinctive character for the purposes of Article 7(1)(b) of the regulation in relation
         to a specific product or service.
         
            
 Under the last-mentioned provision, trade marks which are devoid of any distinctive character are not to be registered.
         
            
 For a trade mark to possess distinctive character for the purposes of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94, it must serve
         to identify the product in respect of which registration is applied for as originating from a particular undertaking, and
         thus to distinguish that product from those of other undertakings (see, in relation to Article 3(1)(b) of First Council Directive
         89/104/EEC of December to approximate the laws of the Member States relating to trade marks (OJ L 40, p. 1),
         a provision which is identical to Article 7(1)(b), Joined Cases C-53/to C‑55/Linde and Others [2003] ECR I-3161, paragraph 40).
         
            
 That distinctive character must be assessed, first, by reference to the products or services in respect of which registration
         has been applied for and, second, by reference to the perception of the relevant public, which consists of average consumers
         of the products or services in question, who are reasonably well informed and reasonably observant and circumspect (see, inter
         alia, Linde, paragraph 41, and Case C‑363/KoninklijkeKPN Nederland [2004] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 34).
         
            
 It is apparent from the grounds of the judgments under appeal that the Court of First Instance did not make an error of law
         in its interpretation of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94.
         
            
 The Court of First Instance, in accordance with the settled case-law of the Court of Justice, assessed whether the trade marks
         at issue were devoid of any distinctive character by reference, first, to the products or services in respect of which their
         registration was sought, and, second, by reference to the perception of the relevant public, which consists, in this case,
         of all consumers.
         
            
 The Court of First Instance was also correct in stating that the criteria for assessing the distinctive character of three-dimensional
         shape-of-products marks are no different from those applicable to other categories of trade mark. It none the less observed
         that, for the purpose of applying those criteria, the relevant public’s perception is not necessarily the same in relation
         to a three-dimensional mark consisting of the shape and colours of the product itself as it is in relation to a word or figurative
         mark consisting of a sign which is independent from the appearance of the products it denotes. Average consumers are not in
         the habit of making assumptions about the origin of products on the basis of their shape or the shape of their packaging in
         the absence of any graphic or word element and it could therefore prove more difficult to establish distinctiveness in relation
         to such a three-dimensional mark than in relation to a word or figurative mark (see, to that effect, Linde, paragraph 48, and Case C‑218/Henkel [2004] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 52).
         
            
 In those circumstances, the more closely the shape for which registration is sought resembles the shape most likely to be
         taken by the product in question, the greater the likelihood of the shape being devoid of any distinctive character for the
         purposes of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94. Only a trade mark which departs significantly from the norm or customs
         of the sector and thereby fulfils its essential function of indicating origin, is not devoid of any distinctive character
         for the purposes of that provision (see, in relation to the identical provision in Article 3(1)(b) of First Directive 89/104,
         Henkel, paragraph 49).
         
            
 It follows that, in holding that the trade marks for which registration is sought are devoid of any distinctive character
         for the purposes of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/94, the Court of First Instance did not make an error of law in relation
         to either that provision or the relevant case-law of the Court of Justice.
         
            
 The actual application by the Court of First Instance of those criteria to these cases involves findings of a factual nature.
         The Court of First Instance has exclusive jurisdiction to make findings of fact, save where a substantive inaccuracy in its
         findings is attributable to the documents submitted to it, and to appraise those facts. That appraisal thus does not, save
         where the clear sense of the evidence produced to it has been distorted, constitute a point of law which is subject, as such,
         to review by the Court of Justice on appeal (see Case C-104/P DKV v OHIM [2002] ECR I-7561, paragraph 22).
         
            
 In this instance, there is nothing in the findings made by the Court of First Instance to suggest that the evidence produced
         to it was distorted.
         
            
 In view of the foregoing, the first part of the plea, which relates to the distinctive character of a trade mark, must be
         rejected as unfounded.
         
The second part of the plea: the need to consider the trade mark as a whole Arguments of the parties
         
            
 By the second part of its plea, Procter & Gamble submits that, in assessing whether the combination of the shapes and constituent
         features of the tablets concerned may be perceived by the relevant public as an indication of the tablets’ origin, the Court
         of First Instance did not actually analyse the overall impression produced by that combination, as the case-law requires it
         to do. It comprehensively examined each of those features and based its subsequent conclusions on that examination but it
         did not really analyse the overall impression produced by the specific combinations concerned.
         
            
 OHIM challenges this part of the plea, maintaining that the Court of First Instance correctly considered the trade marks in
         question as a whole, although it confirmed, also quite correctly, that that approach does not preclude starting with a separate
         analysis of each of the individual components of the marks. OHIM, which itself carries out an analysis of that kind, contends
         that the overall impression given by each of the trade marks concerned is of a sign which is not distinctive.
         
 Findings of the Court
         
            
 As the Court has consistently held, the average consumer normally perceives a mark as a whole and does not proceed to analyse
         its various details (see SABEL, paragraph 23, and Lloyd Schuhfabrik Meyer, paragraph 25). Thus, in order to assess whether or not a trade mark has any distinctive character, the overall impression
         given by it must be considered (see SABEL, paragraph 23, and, in relation to a word mark, DKV v OHIM, paragraph 24).
         
            
 That does not mean, however, that the competent authority, responsible for ascertaining whether the trade mark for which registration
         is sought – in this instance the graphic representation of a combination of the shape of a washing machine or dishwasher tablet
         and its constituent features – is capable of being perceived by the public as an indication of origin, may not first examine
         each of the individual features of the get-up of that mark in turn. It may be useful, in the course of the competent authority’s
         overall assessment, to examine each of the components of which the trade mark concerned is composed.
         
            
 In this instance, the Court of First Instance, having examined each of those components separately, then assessed – as is
         clear from paragraphs to of the judgments under appeal – the overall impression deriving from the shape and other component
         features of the tablets concerned, as described in paragraph above, in the way required by the case-law referred to in
         paragraph of this judgment.
         
            
 It follows that there is nothing in the judgments under appeal to suggest that the Court of First Instance failed to base
         its assessment of the distinctive character of the trade marks for which registration is sought on the overall impression
         which they produce.
         
            
 Therefore, the second part of the plea, which relates to the need to consider the trade mark as a whole, must be rejected.
         
The third part of the plea: the assessment of the average consumer’s level of attention Arguments of the parties
         
            
 By the third part of its plea, Procter & Gamble recalls that, at the date on which the relevant trade-mark applications were
         filed, dishwasher tablets and, more particularly, washing machine tablets were not everyday consumer products and that at
         that time they were at the top end of the market concerned. In those circumstances, Procter & Gamble maintains that, contrary
         to the Court of First Instance’s finding, the level of attention paid by the average consumer of those products to their get-up
         was high.
         
            
 In any event, Procter & Gamble adds that it does not understand why the consumer’s level of attention should not be ‘high’
         in relation to everyday consumer products. The everyday use of such products continually draws the consumer’s attention to
         their get-up and hence is conducive to their receiving a high level of attention.
         
            
 OHIM contends that in the judgments under appeal the Court of First Instance defined the relevant public as consisting of
         average consumers, who are reasonably well informed and reasonably observant and circumspect, and described the products in
         question as everyday consumer products. In that regard, OHIM submits that what is important is that washing machine or dishwasher
         tablets are intended to be used every day by any consumer whatsoever. The fact that the tablets concerned are more expensive
         than washing or dishwashing products in powder form and that they are products new to the market does not mean that they are
         products at the top end of the market, to which consumers pay great attention.
         
            
 Furthermore, OHIM submits that it is important to be aware of how the tablets concerned are sold, how they differ from other
         forms of washing or dishwashing products, what their advantages are as against those other products, and how they are actually
         used in the washing process. At no point in the tablets’ application will the consumer feel the need or the urge to ask himself
         further questions about their shape or external appearance.
         
 Findings of the Court
         
            
 On this point, the Court of First Instance’s finding in paragraph of the judgments under appeal that, since washing machine
         and dishwasher tablets are everyday consumer products, the level of attention paid by the average consumer to their shape
         and pattern is not high is a finding of fact, which, as has been recalled in paragraph of this judgment, is not subject
         to review by the Court of Justice on appeal where, as in this instance, it does not entail a distortion of the factual evidence
         produced to the Court of First Instance.
         
            
 In those circumstances, the third part of the plea, which relates to the assessment of the average consumer’s level of attention,
         must also be rejected. 
         
The fourth part of the plea: the date by reference to which the distinctive character of a trade mark must be assessed  Arguments of the parties
         
            
 By the fourth part of its plea, Procter & Gamble claims that the Court of First Instance was wrong not to adjudicate on the
         question concerning the date by reference to which it is appropriate to assess the distinctive character of the trade marks
         for which registration is sought. In its submission, it is appropriate in this case to ascertain what was the usual get-up
         of washing-machine and dishwasher tablets on the market at the date on which the various trade-mark applications were filed
         and to determine whether, from the consumer’s point of view, the get-up of the trade marks for which registration is applied
         is perceptibly different.
         
            
 OHIM argues that in the judgments under appeal the Court of First Instance did not find it necessary to adjudicate on this
         point because, even at the date on which the applications for registration were filed, the trade marks in question lacked
         distinctiveness. In any event, the conditions for registration of a Community trade mark must, in its submission, be met both
         at the date of filing and again at the date of registration.
         
 Findings of the Court
         
            
 As is clear from paragraph of this judgment, a trade mark has distinctive character for the purposes of Article 7(1)(b)
         of Regulation No 40/if it serves to distinguish the products or services in respect of which registration is applied from
         those of other undertakings.
         
            
 In this case, the Court of First Instance was correct in finding, in paragraph of the judgments under appeal, that it was
         not necessary to decide which was the relevant date for the assessment of whether the trade marks had distinctive character
         for the purposes of that provision, since it had found that the marks for which registration was sought were not capable of
         identifying the origin of the products concerned and that that finding was not affected by how many similar tablets were already
         on the market.
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Court of First Instance did not make an error of law in finding that there was no need for it
         to decide by reference to which of the two dates the assessment of the distinctive character of the trade marks in question
         should be carried out.
         
            
 The fourth part of the plea, which relates to the date by reference to which the distinctive character of a trade mark should
         be assessed, must therefore also be rejected as unfounded.
         
The fifth part of the plea: the criterion concerning use of a trade mark Arguments of the parties
         
            
 By the fifth part of its plea, Procter & Gamble submits that the public’s habit of perceiving the shape and pattern of a tablet
         as indicative of a product’s origin, a habit which may be created by the use of, or advertising for, other signs, is within
         the ambit of Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation 40/and not that of Article 7(3) of the regulation.
         
            
 OHIM contends that the question whether a trade mark has acquired distinctiveness through use arises solely under Article
         7(3) of Regulation No 40/94.
         
 Findings of the Court
         
            
 It is sufficient to state in this connection that such an argument is ineffective, since, as is apparent from paragraphs to of this judgment, the Court of First Instance correctly applied Article 7(1)(b) of Regulation No 40/and stated, without
         making any error of law, that the trade marks for which registration was applied were devoid of any distinctive character.
         
            
 It follows from all of the foregoing that the appeals are unfounded and must therefore be dismissed.
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, which applies to the appeal procedure by virtue of Article of those rules,
         the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings.
         As OHIM has applied for costs and Procter & Gamble has been unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the costs.
         
On those grounds,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
 hereby:
         
 
1.
Dismisses the appeals;
 
2.
 Orders Procter & Gamble Company to pay the costs.
Skouris
Cunha Rodrigues
Puissochet
Schintgen
Macken
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on April 2004.
         
R. Grass
V. Skouris
Registrar
President
 –
            
Language of the case: English.
Top  
 