
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-362/Commission of the European CommunitiesvIreland
«(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Failure to transpose Directive 98/5/EC – Reasoned opinion – Failure to take into account observations submitted by the Member State in response to the formal notice – Bearing on admissibility)»
Opinion of Advocate General Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer delivered on September I - Judgment of the Court, December I - Summary of the Judgment
1..
Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Pre-litigation procedure – Subject-matter  – Delimitation of the subject-matter of the action  (Art. EC) 
2..
Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Pre-litigation procedure – Reasoned opinion not taking into account information provided in response to a letter of formal notice – Bearing on admissibility – Limits  (Art. EC) 
1.
 The purpose of the pre-litigation procedure laid down in Article EC is to give the Member State concerned an opportunity
         to comply with its obligations under Community law or to avail itself of its right to defend itself against the complaints
         made by the Commission. The proper conduct of the pre-litigation procedure constitutes an essential guarantee required by
         the Treaty not only in order to protect the rights of the Member State concerned, but also so as to ensure that the contentious
         procedure will have as its subject-matter a clearly defined dispute. see paras 16-2.
 So far as concerns an action for failure to fulfil obligations by having failed to transpose a directive, there being no provision
         of Community law penalising failure to respond to the letter of formal notice within the period fixed by the Commission by
         rendering the Member State's observations inadmissible, the Commission is required to set out, in its reasoned opinion, its
         assessment of the observations received after that period had expired, before specifying which complaints it intended to pursue.
         Nevertheless, when a Member State does no more in its reply than announce the future adoption of implementing measures, the
         fact that the Commission fails to take account of those observations has no effect on the definition of the subject-mater
         of the dispute and thus does not make it impossible for the Member State to put an end to its infringement and does not compromise
         its rights of defence. In those circumstances, the reasoned opinion cannot be regarded as vitiated by a substantive defect capable of rendering the
         action inadmissible. see paras 19-JUDGMENT OF THE COURTDecember (1)
((Failure by a Member State to fulfil its obligations – Failure to transpose Directive 98/5/EC – Reasoned opinion – Failure to take into account observations submitted by the Member State in response to the formal notice – Bearing on admissibility))
In Case C-362/01, 
            
 Commission of the European Communities,  represented by K. Banks, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg
            
applicant, 
v
 Ireland,  represented by D.J. O'Hagan, acting as Agent, and by D. McGuinness SC and D.R. Phelan BL, with an address for service in
            Luxembourg,
            
defendant, 
APPLICATION for a declaration that, by failing to adopt the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply
            with Directive 98/5/EC of the European Parliament and the Council of February to facilitate practice of the profession
            of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the qualification was obtained (OJ L 77, p.
            36), or by failing to inform the Commission thereof, Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive,
            
THE COURT,,
composed of: G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias, President, J.-P. Puissochet (Rapporteur), M. Wathelet and C.W.A. Timmermans (Presidents of Chambers), D.A.O. Edward, A. La Pergola, P. Jann, F. Macken, N. Colneric, S. von Bahr and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2002,
gives the following
Judgment
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on September 2001, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         pursuant to Article EC for a declaration that, by failing to adopt the laws, regulations and administrative provisions
         necessary to comply with Directive 98/5/EC of the European Parliament and the Council of February to facilitate practice
         of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the qualification was obtained
         (OJ L 77, p. 36), or by failing to inform the Commission thereof, Ireland failed to fulfil its obligations under that
         directive. 
         
            
The first paragraph of Article 16(1) of Directive 98/provides: Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this directive
         by March 2000.  They shall forthwith inform the Commission thereof.
         
The pre-litigation procedure
            
Since it had received no notification from Ireland of measures transposing Directive 98/into its domestic legal system,
         by letter of August the Commission put the Irish Government on notice to submit its observations within two months.
         
         
            
The Irish Government answered the letter of formal notice by letter of January 2001, received by the Commission on January
         2001, that is to say, more than three months after the period prescribed had expired.  It stated, in essence, that the draft
         laws and regulations necessary for implementing Directive 98/were still under consideration and that those measures were,
         in principle, to enter into force at the beginning of 2001. 
         
            
On January the Commission sent Ireland a reasoned opinion requesting it to take all the measures necessary to comply
         with the provisions of Directive 98/within a period of two months.  In paragraph of that opinion, the Commission stated
          
          inter alia  that  
         [n]o official response ... has yet been received from the Irish Government.  The Commission therefore considered that no implementing measures had been adopted or communicated
         by Ireland and that that finding warranted the sending of a reasoned opinion. 
         
            
The Irish Government answered the reasoned opinion by letter of January 2001, pointing out that it had communicated its
         observations to the Commission and enclosing a copy of its statement of January.  That second letter did not bring any
         new facts to the Commission's attention. 
         
            
The Commission has not received any further information. 
         Admissibility
            
In its application, the Commission claims, principally, that Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations by failing to adopt
         the measures necessary to implement Directive 98/within the period prescribed for that purpose.  It observes that Ireland
         does not dispute the allegation levelled at it. 
         
            
In its defence, the Irish Government maintains that the action brought against it is inadmissible because the Commission did
         not respect the conditions for the issuing of a reasoned opinion.  In its view, the Commission wrongly claimed in its reasoned
         opinion that its letter of formal notice had gone unanswered.  It states that it drew that irregularity to the Commission's
         attention and considers that, instead of bringing an action before the Court, the Commission ought first to have taken account
         of its observations and explained in a fresh reasoned opinion why it considered the Irish authorities' reply to be insufficient.
          In support of that approach, the Irish Government cites, in particular, the order of the Court of July in Case C-266/Commission  v  
          Spain  [1995] ECR I-1975, paragraphs to 26, concerning infringement proceedings brought in identical circumstances, in which
         order the Court held that the conduct of the pre-litigation procedure had been improper and that that fact rendered the Commission's
         action manifestly inadmissible. 
         
            
The Government adds that the Commission in its application acknowledges the irregular nature of the pre-litigation procedure.
         
         
            
In its reply, the Commission first states that the observations of the Irish Government did not reach it in good time, since
         they were not sent until well after the period of two months prescribed in the letter of formal notice had expired.  The Commission
         submits that it was justified in not taking account of the Irish Government's reply, quite simply because it arrived just
         before the reasoned opinion was sent. 
         
            
Second, the Commission considers that, even if the observations made by the Irish Government had been made in good time, they
         were not such as to convince it as to the absence of any infringement.  In consequence, the Commission maintains that the
         sending of a reasoned opinion was in any event warranted and that its failure to take account of those observations, which
         it does not deny, could not justify finding the action brought against Ireland to be inadmissible. 
         
            
Third, the Commission contends that the circumstances in the light of which the Court held the action to be inadmissible in
         the order  
          Commission  v  
          Spain , cited above, do not exist in the present case.  In its submission, the Court did not hold that an action brought against
         a Member State must be held to be inadmissible where the observations made by that Member State have not been taken into account,
         but held the action before it to be inadmissible solely because there were national measures effecting partial implementation
         of the directive in question, and because the Kingdom of Spain's reply had arrived within the period set by the Commission
         in its letter of formal notice.  In the present case those two elements are lacking. 
         
            
It must at the outset be observed that, contrary to what the Commission appears to contend, the validity of its reasoned opinion,
         assuming it to be established, could never have the effect of rectifying a defect vitiating the pre-litigation stage of the
         infringement proceedings. 
         
            
The procedure laid down in Article EC comprises two consecutive stages, the pre-litigation stage of an administrative
         nature and the contentious stage before the Court. 
         
            
The purpose of the pre-litigation procedure laid down in Article EC is to give the Member State concerned an opportunity
         to comply with its obligations under Community law or to avail itself of its right to defend itself against the complaints
         made by the Commission (judgment in Case 293/Commission  v  
          Belgium  [1988] ECR 305, paragraph 13; order in  
          Commission  v  
          Spain , cited above, paragraph 16, and judgment in Case C-1/Commission  v  
          France  [2001] ECR I-9989, paragraph 53). 
         
            
The proper conduct of the pre-litigation procedure constitutes an essential guarantee required by the EC Treaty not only in
         order to protect the rights of the Member State concerned, but also so as to ensure that the contentious procedure will have
         as its subject-matter a clearly defined dispute (
          Commission  v  
          France , cited above, paragraph 53). 
         
            
Thus, the pre-litigation procedure pursues the following three objectives: to allow the Member State to put an end to any
         infringement, to enable it to exercise its rights of defence and to define the subject-matter of the dispute with a view to
         bringing an action before the Court. 
         
            
It has been established that the Commission received the observations of the Irish Government seven days before sending it
         a reasoned opinion.  No provision of Community law penalises failure to respond to the letter of formal notice within the
         period fixed by the Commission by rendering the Member State's observations inadmissible.  In principle, therefore, the Commission
         was required to set out, in its reasoned opinion, its assessment of those observations before specifying which complaints
         it intended to pursue, instead of wrongly claiming not to have received any official response from Ireland. 
         
            
The Commission did not, however, make it impossible for the Member State to put an end to its infringement and did not compromise
         its rights of defence.  Furthermore, the fact that the Commission failed to take account of Ireland's observations had no
         effect on the definition of the subject-matter of the dispute.  Paragraph above makes it clear that, in its reply to the
         Commission's letter of formal notice, Ireland did no more than announce that it would in the future be adopting implementing
         measures which were then under consideration. 
         
            
In those circumstances, while the manner in which the pre-litigation procedure may appear to have been conducted is to be
         regretted, the reasoned opinion cannot be regarded as vitiated by a substantive defect capable of rendering the Commission's
         action under Article EC inadmissible. 
         
            
It follows that the Commission's application is admissible. 
         The failure to fulfil obligations
            
Since implementation of Directive 98/on the practice of the profession of lawyer did not take place within the period prescribed,
         as the Irish Government has indeed acknowledged, the action brought by the Commission must be considered to be well founded.
         
         
            
It must therefore be declared that, by failing to adopt within the period prescribed the laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions necessary to comply with Directive 98/5, Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under the directive. 
         
Costs
            
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party's pleadings.  Since the Commission applied for costs and Ireland has been unsuccessful,
         the latter must be ordered to pay the costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT
hereby: 
         
1.
 Declares that, by failing to adopt within the period prescribed the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary
            to comply with Directive 98/5/EC of the European Parliament and the Council of February to facilitate practice of
            the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the qualification was obtained, Ireland
            has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive; 
            
2.
 Orders Ireland to pay the costs. 
Rodríguez Iglesias
Puissochet 
Wathelet 
Timmermans
Edward 
La Pergola 
Jann
Macken 
Colneric 
von Bahr
Cunha Rodrigues 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on December 2002. 
         
R. Grass 
G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: English.
Top  
 