
Case C-104/Commission of the European Communities
v
Federal Republic of Germany
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Regulations (EEC) Nos 2913/and 2454/– External Community transit procedure – Customs authorities – Procedures for collecting import duties – Time-limits – Non-compliance – Communities’ own resources – Making available – Time-limit – Non‑compliance – Default interest – Member State concerned – Default on payment)
Opinion of Advocate General Stix-Hackl delivered on July Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), April 2005. 
Summary of the Judgment
1.     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Subject-matter of the proceedings — Request seeking to have a Member State ordered
            to take specific measures — Inadmissible
(Art. EC)
2.     Free movement of goods — Community transit — External Community transit — Offences or irregularities — Member States’ obligations
            — Non-compliance with time-limits fixed for the procedures for collecting import duties — Establishment and late making available
            of own resources — Failure to fulfil obligations
(Council Regulations Nos 1552/89, Art. 2, and 2913/92, Arts 218(3) and 221(1))
1.     The purpose of an action under Article EC is to obtain a declaration that a Member State has failed to fulfil its Community
         obligations. When there is a finding of infringement, Article EC expressly requires the Member State in question to take
         the measures necessary to comply with the judgment of the Court of Justice. The Court cannot, however, order the Member State
         to take specific measures.
      
Consequently, the Court cannot, in the context of infringement proceedings, rule on pleas which seek an order that the Member
         State pay default interest. Such claims must be declared inadmissible.
      
(see paras 49-51)
2.     In the case of customs debts incurred following irregularities committed in the external Community transit system, it is clear
         from the wording itself of the third sentence of Article 379(2) of Regulation No 2454/laying down provisions for the implementation
         of Regulation No 2913/establishing the Community Customs Code, that the Member States are obliged to instigate the recovery
         procedure provided for therein upon expiry of the three-month time-limit when notified by the office of departure that the
         consignment has not been presented on time at the office of destination. That interpretation is also necessary in order to
         guarantee diligent and uniform application by the competent authorities of the provisions governing recovery of customs debts,
         with a view to making Community own resources available efficiently and speedily.
      
Late communication by a Member State of the amount of the debt to the principal, in violation of Articles 218(3) and 221(1)
         of Regulation No 2913/92, necessarily implies a delay in the establishment of the Community’s entitlement to the own resources
         referred to in Article of Regulation No 1552/implementing Decision 88/on the system of the Communities’ own resources.
      
(see paras 78, 89, 91, operative part 1)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations – Regulations (EEC) Nos 2913/and 2454/– External Community transit procedure – Customs authorities – Procedures for collecting import duties – Time-limits – Non-compliance – Communities’ own resources – Making available – Time-limit – Non‑compliance – Default interest – Member State concerned – Default on payment)
In Case C-104/02,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on March 2002,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by G. Wilms, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Federal Republic of Germany, represented by W.‑D. Plessing and R. Stüwe, acting as Agents, assisted by D. Sellner, Rechtsanwalt,
      
defendant,
supported by
Kingdom of Belgium, represented by A. Snoecx, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
intervener,
 
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, R. Schintgen and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: C. Stix-Hackl,
Registrar: M.‑F. Contet, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on May 2004,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on July 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application the Commission of the European Communities has brought an action for a declaration that: 
–       by making own resources available to the Community too late, the Federal Republic of Germany has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under Article of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 1214/of April on provisions for the implementation of the Community
         transit procedure and for certain simplifications of that procedure (OJ L 132, p. 1), or Article of Commission Regulation
         (EEC) No 2454/of July laying down provisions for the implementation of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/establishing
         the Community Customs Code (OJ L 253, p. 1) (‘the implementing regulation’), read together with Article 2(1) of Council
         Regulation (EEC, Euratom) No 1552/of May implementing Decision 88/376/EEC, Euratom on the system of the Communities’
         own resources (OJ L 155, p. 1);
      
–       pursuant to Article of Regulation No 1552/89, for the period up to May 2000, and Article of Council Regulation (EC,
         Euratom) No 1150/of May implementing Decision 94/728/EC, Euratom on the system of the Communities’ own resources
         (OJ L 130, p. 1) for the period after May 2000, the Federal Republic of Germany is required to pay into the Community
         budget the interest owing in the event of late entry in the accounts. 
      
 Legal framework 
 Community customs law
Various sets of substantively identical legislative rules applied in succession during the period from January to December 1996, the period to which the present action pertains. 
      
As regards Community transit procedures, in the applicable provisions were Council Regulation (EEC) No 2726/of September on Community transit (OJ L 262, p. 1), and Regulation No 1214/92, as amended by Commission Regulation
         (EEC) No 3712/of December (OJ L 378, p. 15) (‘Regulation No 1214/92’). 
      
As regards the customs debts, in the applicable provisions were  Council Regulation (EEC) No 2144/of July on customs debt (OJ L 201, p. 15), as amended by Council Regulation (EEC) No 4108/of December ( OJ L 361,
         p. 2) (‘Regulation No 2144/87’) and Commission Regulation (EEC) No 597/of March laying down provisions for the implementation
         of Regulation No 2144/(OJ L 65, p. 11).
      
As regards accounting and recovery of customs debts, the applicable provisions in were Council Regulation (EEC) No 1854/of June on the entry in the accounts and terms of payment of the amounts of the import duties or export duties resulting
         from a customs debt (OJ L 186, p. 1). 
      
Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/of October establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L 302, p. 1) (‘the
         Customs Code’) codified the legislation applicable under Community customs law. That code was the subject of provisions in
         the implementing regulation. Those provisions have been in force since January 1994.
      
Given that the different customs law schemes which applied successively during the period covered by the present infringement
         proceedings are substantively identical, the parties refer principally in their arguments only to the provisions which applied
         as from January 1994, that is, the Customs Code and the implementing regulation. For that reason, the table below simply
         lists the provisions which applied successively during the periods to which the dispute pertains. The text of the provisions
         of the Customs Code and the implementing regulation are reproduced after the table. 
      
Calendar year Calendar years and Articles and 3(2)(a) of Regulation No 2726/Article 91(1)(a) and (2)(a) of the Customs Code
Article 11(1)(a) and (b) of Regulation No 2726/Article 96(1)(a) of the Customs Code
Article 2(1)(c) of Regulation No 2144/Article of the Customs Code
Article 2(1)(d) of Regulation No 2144/Article of the Customs Code
Article 2(1) of Regulation No 1854/Article 217(1) of the Customs Code
Article 3(3) of Regulation No 1854/Article 218(3) of the Customs Code
Article of Regulation No 1854/Article of the Customs Code
Article 6(1) and Article of Regulation No 1854/Article 221(1) and (3) of the Customs Code
Article 22(1) and (4) of Regulation No 2726/Article 356(1) and (5) of the implementing regulation
Article 34(3) of Regulation No 2726/Article of the implementing regulation
Article of Regulation No 1214/Article of the implementing regulation
Article of Regulation No 1214/Article of the implementing regulation
 
 The Customs Code
Article 91(1)(a) and (2)(a) of the Customs Code provides: 
‘1.      The external transit procedure shall allow the movement from one point to another within the customs territory of the Community
         of: 
      
(a)      non-Community goods, without such goods being subject to import duties and other charges or to commercial policy measures;
         
      
… 
2.      Movement as referred to in paragraph shall take place: 
… under the external Community transit procedure, 
…’.
According to Article 96(1)(a) and (b) of the Customs Code: 
‘The principal shall be the holder of the external Community transit procedure. He shall be responsible for: 
(a)      production of the goods intact at the customs office of destination by the prescribed time-limit and with due observance of
         the measures adopted by the customs authorities to ensure identification; 
      
(b)      observance of the provisions relating to the Community transit procedure.’ 
According to Article of the Customs Code: 
‘1.      A customs debt on importation shall be incurred through: 
–      the unlawful removal from customs supervision of goods liable to import duties. 
2.      The customs debt shall be incurred at the moment when the goods are removed from customs supervision. 
3.      The debtors shall be: 
–      the person who removed the goods from customs supervision, 
–      any persons who participated in such removal and who were aware or should reasonably have been aware that the goods were being
         removed from customs supervision, 
      
–      any persons who acquired or held the goods in question and who were aware or should reasonably have been aware at the time
         of acquiring or receiving the goods that they had been removed from customs supervision, 
      
and
–      where appropriate, the person required to fulfil the obligations arising from temporary storage of the goods or from the use
         of the customs procedure under which those goods are placed.’
      
According to Article of the Customs Code: 
‘1.      A customs debt on importation shall be incurred through: 
(a)      non-fulfilment of one of the obligations arising, in respect of goods liable to import duties, from their temporary storage
         or from the use of the customs procedure under which they are placed, 
      
or
(b)       non-compliance with a condition governing the placing of the goods under that procedure or the granting of a reduced or zero
         rate of import duty by virtue of the end-use of the goods, 
      
in cases other than those referred to in Article unless it is established that those failures have no significant effect
         on the correct operation of the temporary storage or customs procedure in question. 
      
2.      The customs debt shall be incurred either at the moment when the obligation whose non-fulfilment gives rise to the customs
         debt ceases to be met or at the moment when the goods are placed under the customs procedure concerned where it is established
         subsequently that a condition governing the placing of the goods under the said procedure or the granting of a reduced or
         zero rate of import duty by virtue of the end-use of the goods was not in fact fulfilled. 
      
3.      The debtor shall be the person who is required, according to the circumstances, either to fulfil the obligations arising,
         in respect of goods liable to import duties, from their temporary storage or from the use of the customs procedure under which
         they have been placed, or to comply with the conditions governing the placing of the goods under that procedure.’
      
Article of the Customs Code provides: 
‘1.      A customs debt shall be incurred at the place where the events from which it arises occur. 
2.      Where it is not possible to determine the place referred to in paragraph 1, the customs debt shall be deemed to have been
         incurred at the place where the customs authorities conclude that the goods are in a situation in which a customs debt is
         incurred. 
      
3.      Where a customs procedure is not discharged for goods, the customs debt shall be deemed to have been incurred at the place
         where the goods: 
      
–      were placed under that procedure
or
–      enter the Community under that procedure.
4.      Where the information available to the customs authorities enables them to establish that the customs debt was already incurred
         when the goods were in another place at an earlier date, the customs debt shall be deemed to have been incurred at the place
         which may be established as the location of the goods at the earliest time when existence of the customs debt may be established.’
      
Article 217(1) of the Customs Code provides: 
‘Each and every amount of import duty or export duty resulting from a customs debt, hereinafter called “amount of duty”, shall
         be calculated by the customs authorities as soon as they have the necessary particulars, and entered by those authorities
         in the accounting records or on any other equivalent medium (entry in the accounts).’
      
Under Article 218(3) of the Customs Code: 
‘Where a customs debt is incurred under conditions other than those referred to in paragraph 1, the relevant amount of duty
         shall be entered in the accounts within two days of the date on which the customs authorities are in a position to: 
      
(a)      calculate the amount of duty in question, 
and
(b)      determine the debtor.’
According to Article of the Customs Code: 
‘1.      The time-limits for entry in the accounts laid down in Article may be extended: 
(a)      for reasons relating to the administrative organisation of the Member States, and in particular where accounts are centralised,
or
(b)      where special circumstances prevent the customs authorities from complying with the said time-limits. 
Such extended time-limit shall not exceed days. 
2.      The time-limits laid down in paragraph shall not apply in unforeseeable circumstances or in cases of force majeure.’
According to Article 221(1) and (3) of the Customs Code: 
‘1.      As soon as it has been entered in the accounts, the amount of duty shall be communicated to the debtor in accordance with
         appropriate procedures. 
      
… 
3.      Communication to the debtor shall not take place after the expiry of a period of three years from the date on which the customs
         debt was incurred. However, where it is as a result of an act that could give rise to criminal court proceedings that the
         customs authorities were unable to determine the exact amount legally due, such communication may, in so far as the provisions
         in force so allow, be made after the expiry of such three-year period.’
      
Article 236(1) of the Customs Code provides: 
‘Import duties or export duties shall be repaid in so far as it is established that when they were paid the amount of such
         duties was not legally owed or that the amount has been entered in the accounts contrary to Article 220(2). 
      
Import duties or export duties shall be remitted in so far as it is established that when they were entered in the accounts
         the amount of such duties was not legally owed or that the amount has been entered in the accounts contrary to Article 220(2).
         
      
No repayment or remission shall be granted when the facts which led to the payment or entry in the accounts of an amount which
         was not legally owed are the result of deliberate action by the person concerned.’ 
      
 The implementing regulation
According to Article 356(1) and (5) of the implementing regulation: 
‘1.      The goods and the Tdocument shall be presented at the office of destination. 
… 
5.      Where the goods are presented at the office of destination after expiry of the time-limit prescribed by the office of departure
         and the failure to comply with the time-limit is due to circumstances which are explained to the satisfaction of the office
         of destination and are not attributable to the carrier or the principal, the latter shall be deemed to have complied with
         the time-limit prescribed.’
      
Article of the implementing regulation provides: 
‘1.      Without prejudice to Article of the [Customs] Code, where the consignment has not been presented at the office of destination
         and the place of the offence or irregularity cannot be established, such offence or irregularity shall be deemed to have been
         committed: 
      
–      in the Member State to which the office of departure belongs, 
or
–      in the Member State to which the office of transit at the point of entry into the Community belongs, to which a transit advice
         note has been given, 
      
unless within the period laid down in Article 379(2), to be determined, proof of the regularity of the transit operation or
         of the place where the offence or irregularity was actually committed is furnished to the satisfaction of the customs authorities.
         
      
2.      Where no such proof is furnished and the said offence or irregularity is thus deemed to have been committed in the Member
         State of departure or in the Member State of entry as referred to in the first paragraph, second indent, the duties and other
         charges relating to the goods concerned shall be levied by that Member State in accordance with Community or national provisions.
         
      
3.      If the Member State where the said offence or irregularity was actually committed is determined before expiry of a period
         of three years from the date of registration of the Tdeclaration, that Member State shall, in accordance with Community
         or national provisions, recover the duties and other charges (apart from those levied, pursuant to the second subparagraph,
         as own resources of the Community) relating to the goods concerned. In this case, once proof of such recovery is provided,
         the duties and other charges initially levied (apart from those levied as own resources of the Community) shall be repaid.
         
      
4.      The guarantee covering the transit operation shall not be released until the end of the aforementioned three-year period or
         until the duties and other charges applicable in the Member State where the said offence or irregularity was actually committed
         have been paid. 
      
Member States shall take the necessary measures to deal with any offence or irregularity and to impose effective penalties.’
According to Article of the implementing regulation: 
‘1.      Where a consignment has not been presented at the office of destination and the place where the offence or irregularity occurred
         cannot be established, the office of departure shall notify the principal of this fact as soon as possible and in any case
         before the end of the 11th month following the date of registration of the Community transit declaration. 
      
2.      The notification referred to in paragraph shall indicate, in particular, the time-limit by which proof of the regularity
         of the transit operation or the place where the offence or irregularity was actually committed must be furnished to the office
         of departure to the satisfaction of the customs authorities. That time-limit shall be three months from the date of the notification
         referred to in paragraph 1. If the said proof has not been produced by the end of that period, the competent Member State
         shall take steps to recover the duties and other charges involved. In cases where that Member State is not the one in which
         the office of departure is located, the latter shall immediately inform the said Member State.’
      
According to Article of the implementing regulation: 
‘Proof of the regularity of a transit operation within the meaning of Article 378(1) shall be furnished to the satisfaction
         of the customs authorities inter alia: 
      
(a)      by the production of a document certified by the customs authorities establishing that the goods in question were presented
         at the office of destination or, where Article applies, to the authorised consignee. That document shall contain enough
         information to enable the said goods to be identified, 
      
or
(b)      by the production of a customs document issued in a third country showing release for home use or by a copy or photocopy thereof;
         such copy or photocopy must be certified as being a true copy by the organisation which certified the original document, by
         the authorities of the third country concerned or by the authorities of one of the Member States. The document shall contain
         enough information to enable the goods in question to be identified.’ 
      
Article of the implementing regulation provides: 
‘The following failures shall be considered to have no significant effect on the correct operation of the temporary storage
         or customs procedure in question within the meaning of Article 204(1) of the [Customs] Code, provided: 
      
–      they do not constitute an attempt to remove the goods unlawfully from customs supervision, 
–      they do not imply obvious negligence on the part of the person concerned, and
–      all the formalities necessary to regularise the situation of the goods are subsequently carried out: 
(1)      exceeding the time-limit allowed for assignment of the goods to one of the customs-approved treatments or uses provided for
         under the temporary storage or customs procedure in question, where the time-limit would have been extended had an extension
         been applied for in time; 
      
(2)      in the case of goods placed under a transit procedure, exceeding the time-limit for presentation of the goods to the office
         of destination, where such presentation takes place later; 
      
(3)      in the case of goods placed in temporary storage or under the customs warehousing procedure, handling not authorised in advance
         by the customs authorities, provided such handling would have been authorised if applied for; 
      
(4)      in the case of goods placed under the temporary importation procedure, use of the goods otherwise than as provided for in
         the authorisation, provided such use would have been authorised under that procedure if applied for; 
      
(5)      in the case of goods in temporary storage or placed under a customs procedure, unauthorised movement of the goods, provided
         the goods can be presented to the customs authorities at their request; 
      
(6)      in the case of goods in temporary storage or placed under a customs procedure, removal of the goods from the customs territory
         of the Community or their entry into a free zone or free warehouse without completion of the necessary formalities; 
      
(7)      in the case of goods having received favourable tariff treatment by reason of their end-use, transfer of the goods without
         notification to the customs authorities, before they have been put to the intended use, provided that: 
      
(a)      the transfer is recorded in the transferor’s stock records;
and
(b)      the transferee is the holder of an authorisation for the goods in question.’
 Community own resources
According to Article 2(1) of Council Decision 88/376/EEC, Euratom of June on the system of the Communities’ own resources
         (OJ L 185, p. 24): 
      
‘Revenue from the following shall constitute own resources entered in the budget of the Communities: 
(a)      levies, premiums, additional or compensatory amounts, additional amounts or factors and other duties established or to be
         established by the institutions of the Communities in respect of trade with non-member countries within the framework of the
         common agricultural policy, and also contributions and other duties provided for within the framework of the common organisation
         of the markets in sugar; 
      
(b)      Common Customs Tariff duties and other duties established or to be established by the institutions of the Communities in respect
         of trade with non-member countries and customs duties on products coming under the Treaty establishing the European Coal and
         Steel Community.
      
…’.
According to Article of Regulation No 1552/89: 
‘1.      For the purpose of applying this Regulation, the Community’s entitlement to the own resources referred to in Article 2(1)(a)
         and (b) of Decision 88/376/EEC, Euratom shall be established as soon as the amount due has been notified by the competent
         department of the Member State to the debtor. Notification shall be given as soon as the debtor is known and the amount of
         entitlement can be calculated by the competent administrative authorities, in compliance with all the relevant Community provisions.
         
      
2.      Paragraph shall apply when a notification must be corrected.’ 
Article of the same regulation provides: 
‘Any delay in making the entry in the account referred to in Article 9(1) shall give rise to the payment of interest by the
         Member State concerned at the interest rate applicable on the Member State’s money market on the due date for short-term public
         financing operations, increased by two percentage points. This rate shall be increased by 0.of a percentage point for each
         month of delay. The increased rate shall be applied to the entire period of delay.’
      
 Pre-litigation procedure
By letter of January 1996, the Commission sent to the German authorities the report relating to an audit of customary own
         resources carried out by it in Germany between and March 1995. In that report, the Commission referred, with respect
         to the years and 1994, to certain delays under the Community transit system which, in its view, caused delays in making
         the Community own resources in question available. In its view, those delays were the result of non‑compliance with the 14-month
         time-limit provided for in Article of Regulation No 1214/and Article of the implementing regulation, read together
         with Article 2(1) of Regulation No 1552/89. 
      
Finding that the late making available of own resources gave rise to default interest pursuant to Article of Regulation
         No 1552/89, the Commission requested the German authorities inter alia to instigate immediately the recovery procedure in
         the regional finance directorates for all undischarged Tdocuments issued over months previously, to check the late making
         available of own resources and to inform it thereof, and to provide it with a list showing for all regional directorates the
         delays in subsequent recovery relating to transit procedures not discharged since January 1993. 
      
A second audit, carried out by the Commission in November and relating to the years and 1996, revealed other cases
         of the 14-month time-limit referred to in Article of Regulation No 1214/and Article of the implementing regulation
         being exceeded. 
      
The reason relied on by the German customs authorities to justify the delays, that is, that they were seeking first to identify
         the recipient of the goods or the shipper for the purposes of payment, was dismissed by the Commission, having regard to the
         clear wording of Article of Regulation No 1214/and Article of the implementing regulation. 
      
The Commission requested the German authorities to instigate immediately the recovery procedure for all undischarged Tdocuments
         issued over the previous months, to inform it of delays in achieving recovery, to guarantee henceforth the commencement,
         within months, of the recovery procedure for undischarged transit documents, and to respond to its earlier audit report.
         
      
In their letter of April 1998, the German authorities, whilst not contesting that the 14-month time-limit had been exceeded,
         stated that they were not required to collect import duties within months after registration of the Tdocument. In their
         view, Article of the implementing regulation does not contain a mandatory time-limit, but rather merely an indicative
         one. The office of departure still has sufficient time, given the three-year time-limit provided for in Article 221(3) of
         the Customs Code, to proceed with recovery from the debtor. Consequently, there can be no question of default interest pursuant
         to Article of Regulation No 1552/89. 
      
By letter of July 1998, the Commission reiterated its request to the German authorities to provide it, at the latest by
         September 1998, with the information requested in its audit report so that it could calculate the default interest
         pursuant to Article of Regulation No 1552/89. 
      
In their letter of September 1998, the German authorities reiterated and confirmed the arguments put forward earlier in
         their letter of April concerning the audit report. The information requested again by the Commission’s inspectors
         in that report was not provided to them. 
      
On November 1999, the Commission issued a letter of formal notice to the German authorities, setting out again its point
         of view, as described above, and asking the German authorities to submit their observations on the matter within two months.
         
      
In their reply of February 2000, forwarded by letter of February 2000, the German Government confirmed its view that
         the 14-month time-limit was merely indicative, meaning that duties could still be collected after the expiry of that time-limit
         if the investigation procedure had gone on for more than months. It added that, in many cases, it was not possible to complete
         the inquiry procedure by the 11-month time-limit, since the exchange of information between the Member States could take longer.
         Moreover, pursuant to Articles and of the Customs Code, a total time-limit of three years was always allowed for collecting
         duties when the information necessary for calculating and entering the duties in the accounts was not available. 
      
In its reasoned opinion of July 2000, the Commission stated, in particular, that the Federal Republic of Germany’s argument
         was not compatible with the clear wording of Article of the implementing regulation. Furthermore, it followed from the
         meaning and purpose of that provision that an accelerated procedure was called for in order to detect irregularities early.
         
      
In correspondence of September 2000, forwarded by a letter of the same day, the German Government informed the Commission
         that it maintained its position. In those circumstances, the Commission decided to bring the present action. 
      
 The action
By its action, the Commission is seeking, first, a declaration that the Federal Republic of Germany infringed Article 379(2)
         of the implementing regulation, which entered into force on January 1994, and the third sentence of Article 49(2) of Regulation
         No 1214/92, which was applicable in 1993, read together with Article of Regulation No 1552/89, by failing to make available
         in due time own resources in cases of late discharge of external Community transit operations detected in the period to 1996. 
      
Second, the Commission asks the Court to order the Federal Republic of Germany to ‘pay into the Community budget the interest
         owing in the event of late entry in the accounts’ pursuant to Article of Regulation No 1552/for the period up to May 2000, and Article of Regulation No 1150/for the period after May 2000. 
      
 Admissibility
 Arguments of the parties
The German Government expresses doubts as to the admissibility of the action as a whole. Infringement proceedings are intended
         to bring existing infringements to an end. The existence of an infringement must be assessed solely on the basis of whether
         the Member State was in violation of Community law at the time the time-limit set out in the reasoned opinion expired. The
         Commission does not state that the Federal Republic of Germany infringed Community law on the date the time-limit prescribed
         in the reasoned opinion of September expired. It is common ground that, long before that date, the German Government
         acted on comments made by Commission auditors to call on its customs offices to be more vigilant in complying with the time-limits
         provided for in Article of the implementing regulation, although it did not abandon its view that those time-limits were
         not mandatory, contrary to the view maintained by the Commission. 
      
The Commission counters that the action is admissible. It submits that the infringement is continuing because the interest
         owing for the late payment in question has not been paid into the Community budget which, in its view, clearly implies that
         the infringement is ongoing. 
      
The German Government also questions the admissibility of the action on the ground that, in the second form of order sought,
         the Commission seeks to have the defendant ordered to pay the interest owing into the Community budget because of the late
         credit entry in its favour in the accounts. It follows from Article 228(1) EC that, in infringement proceedings, the Court
         may only make a finding of infringement, which leaves it for national bodies to determine the inferences to be drawn from
         that finding, it being understood that the infringement must cease immediately. The second form of order sought must, accordingly,
         be dismissed as inadmissible, since the Commission is thereby seeking nothing other than payment of interest allegedly owed.
         
      
The Commission replies that Article of Regulation No 1552/provides for a specific and unconditional obligation to pay
         default interest. The Court has previously referred to such an obligation in other infringement actions (Case 303/Commission v Germany [1986] ECR 1171, paragraph 19). Nor does Article EC prevent the Court from making appropriate declarations with a view
         to putting an end to an infringement it has found. Lastly, the Member State has no margin of discretion on the issue of how
         to end the infringement, as the payment of the default interest in question is the only means of complying with a judgment
         which has upheld an infringement action. 
      
 Findings of the Court
As to the first plea of inadmissibility put forward, to the effect that when the time-limit prescribed in the reasoned opinion
         expired, the German authorities were complying with the time-limits provided for in Article of the implementing regulation,
         the Court notes that, assuming that were true, the Federal Republic of Germany is refusing to pay the default interest claimed
         by the Commission for the period covered by the present action, that is, to 1996, during which those time-limits were
         exceeded, a fact which has been established and acknowledged by that Member State. 
      
According to the well-established case-law of the Court (see, inter alia, Case C-96/Commission v Netherlands [1991] ECR I-2461, paragraph 38), there is an inseparable link between the obligation to establish the Communities’ own resources,
         the obligation to credit them to the Commission’s account within the prescribed time-limit and the obligation to pay default
         interest.
      
Therefore, if the Commission’s plea, relating to the delay in entering the amount of the customs debt in the accounts and
         crediting the appurtenant own resources to the Commission’s account, is well founded, the possibility cannot be excluded that
         not all of the consequences of the infringement had been brought to an end when the time-limit prescribed in the reasoned
         opinion expired, particularly the payment of default interest pursuant to Regulation No 1552/89. Consequently, if the alleged
         infringement does exist, there is still an interest in having that fact declared in a judgment. 
      
The first plea of inadmissibility must, accordingly, be dismissed. 
As to the second plea of inadmissibility, restricted to the second form of order sought, the Court notes that, in that portion
         of the action, the Commission is asking the Court to order the Federal Republic of Germany to ‘pay into the Community budget
         the interest owing in the event of late entry in the accounts’ pursuant to Article of Regulation No 1552/for the period
         up to May 2000, and Article of Regulation No 1150/for the period after May 2000. 
      
It is well established that the purpose of an action under Article EC is to obtain a declaration that a Member State has
         failed to fulfil its Community obligations. When there is a finding of infringement, Article EC expressly requires the
         Member State in question to take the measures necessary to comply with the judgment of the Court of Justice. The Court cannot,
         however, order the Member State to take specific measures. 
      
Consequently, the Court cannot, in the context of infringement proceedings, rule on pleas like those in the present case which
         seek an order that the Member State pay default interest. 
      
The forms of order sought in this case, in so far as they seek the payment of default interest pursuant to Article of Regulation
         No 1552/89, must, accordingly, be declared inadmissible. It follows that the plea put forward in support of that part of the
         forms of order sought, based on infringement of that provision, must be dismissed as inadmissible. 
      
Accordingly, the examination of this action will be limited to the plea relating to the Federal Republic of Germany’s delay
         in making available own resources in the period to 1996, in violation of Article of Regulation No 1214/or Article
         of the implementing regulation, read together with Article 2(1) of Regulation No 1552/89. 
      
 Substance
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission submits that it follows from the wording of Article of the implementing regulation and Article of Regulation
         No 1214/92, and also the purpose pursued by the Community legislature, that those provisions require customs authorities to
         ensure subsequent recovery of customs debts as soon as possible and at the latest at the end of the 14-month time-limit, when
         the authorities know the debtor and the amount of duties owing to be notified to him (Article 2(1) of Regulation No 1552/89).
         
      
The purpose of Article of the implementing regulation is to encourage customs authorities to act as quickly as possible
         in order to avoid negative impact on the Community budget. The risk of not being able to establish the customs debt increases
         with time (debtor impossible to find or bankrupt). Thus, the 14-month time-limit, which applies only exceptionally, is a maximum
         time-limit which, if not complied with, leads to delays in the Member State’s making own resources available.  
      
Non-compliance with the time-limits laid down in Article of the implementing regulation jeopardises the Community’s interests
         and also the interests of the other Member States, which may have to cover financing needs in the Community budget when there
         are late entries of own resources. 
      
The Federal Republic of Germany submits that neither Article of the implementing regulation nor Article of Regulation
         No 1214/imposes any maximum or mandatory time-limit on the authorities. 
      
The very wording of Article 379(1) of the implementing regulation shows that no mandatory time‑limit is laid down. Nor does
         that provision serve the interests of the Community in ensuring rapid recovery of customs duties, an area regulated solely
         by Article et seq. of the Customs Code. The rules laid down in Article et seq. of the implementing regulation, based
         on Article EC, relate to matters preceding recovery, namely the establishment of the facts underlying the recovery, which
         may be delayed by certain circumstances. 
      
The German Government submits that, if the investigation is delayed, the German customs authorities are unable to comply with
         the 11-month time-limit, most often due to circumstances which are not even attributable to them, but for which the customs
         administrations of other Member States are to be held accountable. 
      
Like Article 379(1), Article 379(2) of the implementing regulation does not impose a maximum time-limit on customs authorities
         either. The very wording of the latter provision shows that the Community legislature does not require the authorities to
         have recovered the duties and contributions upon expiry or even before the expiry of a three-month time-limit. 
      
If proof is submitted shortly before the expiry of the three-month time-limit, the customs authorities are required to ascertain
         its probative value. The declarant can also produce alternative forms of proof as provided for in Article of the implementing
         regulation. It is only when the customs authorities have finished their investigation that they are in a position to determine
         whether a customs debt has been incurred and determine the amount thereof, as well as the identity of the debtor. Those investigations
         can sometimes take a very long time. 
      
There is, moreover, nothing to warrant the conclusion that the Member States are required to proceed with recovery and making
         available of own resources in relation to the Community when, in relation to holders of a customs debt, they may still effect
         recovery after a 14-month time-limit. Only the three-year time-limit laid down in Article 221(3) of the Customs Code is mandatory
         as regards the customs authorities. 
      
The German Government states also that even if the two time-limits were considered to be mandatory, they cannot be cumulated
         because they are aimed at two different addressees. Article 379(1) of the implementing regulation seeks to encourage the Member
         States to carry out investigations as quickly as possible and to cooperate promptly, whereas Article 379(2) encourages the
         principal to cooperate actively in clarifying the situation, subject to having to pay duties in the Member State to which
         the office of departure belongs. Logically, only maximum time-limits addressed to the same parties may be added together.
         
      
Moreover, the time-limits laid down in Article 379(1) and (2) of the implementing regulation are necessarily supplemented
         by the time-limit by which the customs authorities must conduct investigations and checks on the proof referred to in Article
         of that regulation. 
      
Lastly, the provisions concerning the entry of the amount of the customs debt and notification thereof are covered by Articles
         to of the Customs Code. As long as the particulars necessary for the calculation and entry of the contributions are
         not available, the Community legislature allows three years for the recovery of the duties. 
      
The Belgian Government, intervening in support of the forms of order sought by the German Government, submits that the expiry
         of the 14-month time-limit is not a deadline or a mandatory time-limit, but rather an indicative time-limit which marks the
         point of departure for the establishment of the customs debt by the Member State. 
      
The Belgian Government adds that the establishment of the customs debt implies that, pursuant to Article et seq. of the
         Customs Code, the Member State has sufficient time. Upon expiry of the 14-month time-limit, the office of departure does not
         have all the particulars necessary for calculating the customs debt in question. 
      
 Findings of the Court
The Court notes at the outset that the German Government does not contest the Commission’s findings of fact relating to the
         customs debts incurred following irregularities committed in the external Community transit system, debts which, during the
         period which is the subject of the present action, that is, from to 1996, were not the subject of a recovery procedure
         by the German customs authorities within the two-day time-limit referred to in Article of the Customs Code following the
         expiry of the three-month time-limit referred to in the third sentence of Article 379(2) of the implementing regulation and
         the equivalent provisions which applied previously. However, unlike the Commission, the German Government considers that,
         by instigating the recovery procedure several months after the expiry of that three-month time-limit, it did not disregard
         its obligations under Community customs law. 
      
The Court notes that under Article 379(1) of the implementing regulation, when a consignment has not been presented at the
         office of destination and the place where the offence or irregularity occurred cannot be established, the office of departure
         is to notify the principal of that fact as soon as possible and in any case before the end of the 11th month following the
         date of registration of the Community transit declaration. 
      
Although in Case C-112/SPKR [2002] ECR I‑10655, paragraph 40, the Court held that non-compliance with the 11-month time-limit does not by itself prevent
         recovery of the customs debt from the principal, it also stated, at paragraph of the same judgment, that that time-limit
         is directed at administrative authorities and has as its objective to ensure diligent uniform application, by those authorities,
         of the provisions relating to the recovery of customs debts in order to secure rapid availability of the Community’s own resources.
         Accordingly, compliance with the 11-month time-limit, although it does not have any effect on whether the customs debt is
         owed, is nevertheless mandatory for the Member States in respect of their Community obligations relating to the making available
         of Community own resources. 
      
Moreover, pursuant to Article 379(2) of the implementing regulation, the notification referred to in Article 379(1) must state,
         in particular, the time-limit by which proof of the regularity of the transit operation or the place where the offence or
         irregularity was actually committed may be furnished to the office of departure to the satisfaction of the customs authorities.
         That time-limit is three months as from the date of notification referred to in Article 379(1). If that proof has not been
         provided by the expiry of that time-limit, the competent Member State ‘shall take steps to recover’ the duties and other charges
         involved. 
      
In paragraphs and of Case C-300/Honeywell Aerospace [2005] ECR I‑0000, the Court held that it follows from the very wording of Article 378(1) and Article 379(2) of the implementing
         regulation that notification by the office of departure to the principal of the time-limit by which the proof requested must
         be furnished is mandatory and must precede recovery of the customs debt. The time-limit is intended to protect the interests
         of the principal by allowing him three months in which to furnish, where appropriate, proof of the regularity of the transit
         operation or the place where the offence or irregularity was actually committed. In those circumstances, the Member State
         to which the office of departure belongs may recover import duties only if, in particular, it has indicated to the principal
         that he has three months in which to furnish the proof requested and such proof has not been provided within that period.
         
      
ConsequentlyConsequenConsequently, where, as in the present case, disputed consignments were not presented at the office of destination and the
         place where the offence or irregularity occurred cannot be established, the office of departure must, with a view to making
         Community own resources available rapidly, notify that fact to the principal as soon as possible and in any case before the
         end of the 11th month following the date of registration of the Community transit declaration. That notification must inform
         the addressee that he has three months during which proof of the regularity of the transit operation or of the place where
         the offence was actually committed may be provided to the office of departure to the satisfaction of the customs authorities.
         If that proof has not been provided at the end of that time-limit, the competent Member State ‘shall take steps to recover’
         the customs debt. 
      
In this context Article 217(1) of the Customs Code provides that any amount of import duties or export duties resulting from
         a customs debt must be ‘calculated’ by the customs authorities as soon as they ‘have the necessary particulars’ and be ‘entered
         by those authorities in the accounting records’. 
      
According to Article 218(3) of the Customs Code, the ‘relevant amount of duty shall be entered in the account’ within two
         days of the date on which the customs authorities are ‘in a position to calculate the amount of duty in question, and determine
         the debtor’ of the customs debt. Article of the Customs Code allows for that time-limit to be extended to a maximum of
         days either for reasons relating to the administrative organisation of the Member States or where special circumstances
         prevent the customs authorities from complying with the said time-limit. Under Article 221(1) of the Customs Code, the amount
         of duties must ‘as soon as it has been entered in the accounts, … be communicated to the debtor’. 
      
In the present action, the Commission essentially criticises the German customs authorities for not having taken steps to
         recover the customs debt within two days of the expiry of the three-month time-limit provided for in Article 379(2) of the
         implementing regulation. More specifically, it criticises them for not having entered in the accounts the relevant amount
         of duties, in accordance with Article 218(3) of the Customs Code, and for not having communicated the amount to the debtor
         pursuant to Article 221(1) of the Customs Code, procedures associated with the establishment of own resources referred to
         in Article 2(1) of Regulation No 1552/89. 
      
The German Government submits that the Member States are not required to take steps to recover the customs debt immediately
         upon expiry of the three-month time-limit occurring after the expiry of the 11-month time-limit referred to in Article 379(1)
         of the implementing regulation. 
      
That argument cannot be accepted. 
As rightly pointed out by the Commission, it is clear from the very wording of the third sentence of Article 379(2) of the
         implementing regulation that the Member States are obliged to instigate the recovery procedure provided for therein upon expiry
         of the three-month time-limit referred to therein. That interpretation is also necessary in order to guarantee diligent and
         uniform application by the competent authorities of the provisions governing recovery of customs debts, with a view to making
         Community own resources available efficiently and speedily. 
      
Nor is that interpretation incompatible with Article 221(3) of the Customs Code, which authorises communication of the amount
         of duties to be paid during a period of three years as from the time when the customs debt is incurred. That provision seeks
         primarily to ensure legal certainty by prescribing a maximum time-limit for communicating the amount of the customs debt to
         the debtor. It does not affect the obligations for customs authorities vis-à-vis the Community under the provisions of the
         Customs Code and the implementing regulation for the purpose of securing diligent and uniform application of the provisions
         governing recovery of customs debts with a view to ensuring that Community own resources are made available efficiently and
         speedily. 
      
Under Articles 217(1), 218(3), and of the Customs Code, the entry in the accounts of the amount relating to customs debts
         such as those contemplated in the present action must take place within two days, which may be extended to but not exceed
         days in all. In addition, the debtor must be informed of the amount of those debts as soon as it has been entered in the
         accounts, pursuant to Article 221(1) of the Customs Code. That time-limit starts to run from the date when the customs authorities
         have the necessary particulars and, therefore, are in a position to calculate the amount of duties and determine the debtor.
         Moreover, contrary to the position advocated by the German Government, this is precisely the case at the latest upon the expiry
         of the three-month time-limit referred to in Article 379(2) of the implementing regulation. 
      
First, with respect to the finding that a customs debt was incurred, the Court notes that when, as in the cases contemplated
         in the present action, the consignments placed in the external Community transit procedure were not presented at the office
         of destination by the time-limit prescribed by the office of departure, the customs debt is presumed to have been incurred
         and the principal is presumed to be the debtor thereof. In such a case, and when the place of the offence or irregularity
         cannot be established, the office of departure must, pursuant to Article 379(1) of the implementing regulation, give notice
         of that fact to the principal before the end of the 11th month following the date of registration of the Community transit
         declaration. 
      
Under the first and second sentences of Article 379(2), that notification must indicate the three-month time-limit which the
         addressee has in which to prove the regularity of the transit operation. As stated in paragraph of this judgment, the competent
         customs authorities can take steps to recover the debt only when they have informed the principal that he has a three-month
         period in which to provide proof of the regularity of the transit operation and that proof has not been produced at the end
         of that period. 
      
Moreover, as the Advocate General stated in paragraph of her Opinion, nothing warrants the conclusion that the examination
         of the proof presented in order to establish the regularity of the operation, such as that enumerated in a non-exhaustive
         manner in Article of the implementing regulation, even if that evidence was produced on the last day of the three-month
         time-limit referred to earlier, justifies a derogation from the provisions of Articles and of the Customs Code for
         the purposes of the entry in the accounts of the amounts of duties and communication thereof to the debtor pursuant to Article
         221(1) of the Customs Code. 
      
Turning next to the determination of the debtor of the customs debt, the Court notes that, pursuant to Article 379(1) and
         (2) of the implementing regulation, at the end of that three-month time-limit, the principal is considered to be the debtor
         of the customs debt, regardless of whether the liability of other parties might be established. Consequently, at the latest
         upon expiry of the three-month time-limit, the customs authorities are manifestly in a position to identify the principal
         as debtor of the customs debt. 
      
With respect to the determination of the amount of duties, the Court notes that, as explained by the Advocate General in paragraphs
         to of her Opinion, although the office of departure cannot be required to calculate systematically the amount of duties
         relating to the customs debt upon import for each transit operation undertaken when the transit declaration is filed, which
         is when that office, in principle, has the necessary particulars for calculating the duties in question, there is in any event
         nothing preventing such a calculation from being made as soon as the principal has been informed of the three-month period
         which he has to produce proof of the regularity of the operation, that is, at the latest at the end of the 11-month time-limit
         provided for in Article 379(1) of the implementing regulation. 
      
Lastly, with respect to the decision by the competent customs authorities to take steps to recover the customs debt, Article
         378(1) and (2) of the implementing regulation establishes a presumption of competence in favour of the Member State to which
         the office of departure belongs. In the three months provided for in Article 379(2) of that same regulation, proof that the
         offence was committed in another State may be produced by the principal. As rightly pointed out by the Commission, there is
         nothing to show that the assessment of the documents produced for that purpose, even assuming that they were provided on the
         last day of the three-month period, cannot be carried out within the two-day time-limit following the end of the three-month
         time-limit, increased in duly justified special cases by supplementary days, giving a maximum time-limit of days. 
      
It follows from all of the foregoing that the Court must reject the German Government’s argument that the 11-month and three-month
         time-limits are merely indicative and that it is not mandatory to instigate the recovery procedure upon expiry of the three-month
         time-limit because at the end of that time-limit the competent customs authorities are physically unable to instigate immediately
         the procedure to recover the customs debt. 
      
Lastly, the communication of the amount of the debt to the principal immediately after the end of the three-month time-limit
         does not represent a disproportionate burden for him. If it should subsequently emerge that the Community transit operation
         took place in a lawful manner and within the time-limits allowed or that it ended late without any other irregularities, the
         principal may obtain reimbursement of the amounts paid, which, since the adoption of the Customs Code, is expressly provided
         for in Article 236(1) thereof, once it is established that, in accordance with Article 204(1) of the Customs Code, read together
         with Article of the implementing regulation, the breach did not have any real impact on the proper functioning of the
         customs scheme in question. 
      
As evidenced by the aforegoing considerations, late notification of the amounts of the relevant duties, in violation of Articles
         221(1) and 218(3) of the Customs Code, necessarily implies a delay in the establishment of the Community’s entitlement to
         the own resources referred to in Article of Regulation No 1552/89. Under that provision, the entitlement in question is
         established ‘as soon as’ the competent authorities notify the debtor of the amount due, which must be done as soon as the
         debtor is known and the amount of entitlement can be calculated by the competent administrative authorities, in compliance
         with the relevant Community provisions, in this case the Customs Code and the implementing regulation. 
      
Consequently, the Court finds that the first plea is founded as regards both the provisions of the Customs Code and of the
         implementing regulation and those of the regulations, in substance identical, which were applicable previously during the
         period covered by the present action. 
      
In the light of the foregoing, the Court finds that, by making own resources available to the Community too late, the Federal
         Republic of Germany has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of Regulation No 1214/and Article of the
         implementing regulation, read together with Article 2(1) of Regulation No 1552/89. 
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs to be awarded against the Federal
         Republic of Germany and the latter has been essentially unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the costs. In accordance with
         Article 69(4) of those Rules, the Kingdom of Belgium is to bear its own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that by making own resources available to the Community too late, the Federal Republic of Germany has failed to fulfil
            its obligations under Article of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 1214/of April on provisions for the implementation
            of the Community transit procedure and for certain simplifications of that procedure and Article of Commission Regulation
            (EEC) No 2454/of July laying down provisions for the implementation of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/establishing
            the Community Customs Code, read together with Article 2(1) of Council Regulation (EEC, Euratom) No 1552/of May implementing Decision 88/376/EEC, Euratom, on the system of the Communities’ own resources;
2.      Dismisses the remainder of the action;
3.      Orders the Federal Republic of Germany to pay the costs;
4.      Orders the Kingdom of Belgium to bear its own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 