
Order of the Court (Fifth Chamber) of July —Power-One Italy v Commission
(Case C-372/P)
Appeal — Non-contractual liability — Project co-funded by the financial instrument ‘LIFE’ — Development of a new system of supplying power for use in mobile telephony (‘Pneuma’ project) — Commission decision to end the project and to recover the advance paid — Compensation for the loss allegedly sustained
1.                     Appeals — Grounds — Order of the General Court dismissing an action for annulment as manifestly inadmissible — Grounds raised
            in support of the appeal concerning substantive issues — Manifestly unfounded (Art. TFEU) (see paras 29-38, 47-49) 
2.                     Appeals — Grounds — Inadequate statement of reasons — Order of the General Court dismissing an action for annulment as manifestly
            inadmissible — Order containing a proper statement of reasons — Unfounded ground (Art. TFEU) (see paras 40-42) 
3.                     Appeals — Grounds — Erroneous assessment of the facts — Inadmissibility — Review by the Court of the findings of fact — Possible
            only where the clear sense of the evidence has been distorted — Plea alleging distortion of the clear sense of the evidence —
            Necessity of indicating precisely the evidence alleged to have been distorted and showing the errors of appraisal which led
            to that distortion (Art. TFEU; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.) (see paras 56-58) 
Re: 
Appeal against the order of the General Court (Sixth Chamber) of May in Case T-489/Power-One Italy
 v 
Commission
 by which that court dismissed an action for compensation for the loss allegedly sustained by the appellant following the
                  Commission’s decision to end the Pneuma project (LIFEENV/IT/000595) intended to co-fund development of a new system of
                  supplying power for use in mobile telephony — Legitimate expectations — Duty to state reasons. 
               
Operative part 
1.
	The appeal is dismissed.
2.
	Power-One Italy SpA is ordered to pay the costs.
Top  
 