
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-377/Léon Van Parys NV
v
Belgisch Interventie- en Restitutiebureau (BIRB)
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from Raad van State (Belgium))
(Common organisation of the markets – Bananas – GATT – Articles I and XIII – Framework agreement of April between the EEC and the Cartagena Group – Direct effect – Recommendations and decisions of the WTO Dispute Settlement Body – Legal effects)
Opinion of Advocate General Tizzano delivered on November Judgment of the Court (Grand Chamber), March 2005. 
Summary of the Judgment
Preliminary rulings – Determination of validity – Not possible to rely on WTO agreements to challenge the legality of a Community
            measure – Exceptions – Community measure intended to ensure their implementation or referring to them expressly and specifically
            – Decision of the WTO Dispute Settlement Body – Community obligations – Right to rely on the WTO agreements – None
(Art. EC)
Given their nature and structure, the WTO agreements are not in principle among the rules in the light of which the Court
         is to review the legality of measures adopted by the Community institutions. It is only where the Community has intended to
         implement a particular obligation assumed in the context of the WTO, or where the Community measure refers expressly to the
         precise provisions of the WTO agreements, that it is for the Court to review the legality of the Community measure in question
         in the light of the WTO rules.
      
By undertaking after the adoption of the decision of the WTO Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) to comply with the rules of that
         organisation and, in particular, with Articles I(1) and XIII of GATT 1994, the Community did not intend to assume a particular
         obligation in the context of the WTO, capable of justifying an exception to the impossibility of relying on WTO rules before
         the Community Courts and enabling the latter to exercise judicial review of the relevant Community provisions in the light
         of those rules.
      
First, even where there is a decision of the DSB holding that the measures adopted by a member are incompatible with the WTO
         rules, the WTO dispute settlement system nevertheless accords considerable importance to negotiation between the parties.
         In those circumstances, to require courts to refrain from applying rules of domestic law which are inconsistent with the WTO
         agreements would have the consequence of depriving the legislative or executive organs of the contracting parties of the possibility
         afforded in particular by Article of the Understanding on rules and procedures governing the settlement of disputes of
         reaching a negotiated settlement, even on a temporary basis.
      
Secondly, to accept that the Community Courts have the direct responsibility for ensuring that Community law complies with
         the WTO rules would deprive the Community’s legislative or executive bodies of the discretion which the equivalent bodies
         of the Community’s commercial partners enjoy.
      
Therefore, an economic operator cannot plead before a court of a Member State that Community legislation is incompatible with
         certain WTO rules, even if the DSB has stated that that legislation is incompatible with those rules.
      
(see paras 39-42, 48, 53-54, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)March 2005(1)
(Common organisation of the markets  –  Bananas  –  GATT –  Articles I and XIII  –  Framework agreement of April between the EEC and the Cartagena Group  –  Direct effect  –  Recommendations and decisions of the WTO dispute settlement body  –  Legal effects)
 In Case C-377/02,REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Raad van State (Belgium), made by decision of October 2002, received at the Court on October 2002,  in the proceedings
            
Léon Van Parys NV
v
Belgisch Interventie- en Restitutiebureau (BIRB),
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),,
 composed of V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans and A. Borg Barthet, Presidents of Chambers, J.-P. Puissochet,
            R. Schintgen (Rapporteur), N. Colneric, S. von Bahr, G. Arestis, M. Ilešič, J. Malenovský, J. Klučka and U. Lõhmus,  Judges,
            
 Advocate General: A. Tizzano,Registrar: M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator,
             having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on  September 2004,after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
            
–
 Léon Van Parys NV, by P. Vlaemminck and C. Huys, lawyers,
            
–
 Belgisch Interventie- en Restitutiebureau (BIRB), by E. Vervaeke, lawyer,
            
–
 the Council of the European Union, by M. Balta, K. Michoel and F.P. Ruggeri Laderchi, acting as Agents,
            
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by T. van Rijn, C. Brown and L. Visaggio, acting as Agents, 
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on November 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the validity of Council Regulation (EEC) No 404/of February on
         the common organisation of the market in bananas (OJ L 47, p. 1) as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 1637/of
         July (OJ L 210, p. 28), Commission Regulation (EC) No 2362/of October laying down detailed rules for
         the implementation of Council Regulation (EEC) No 404/regarding imports of bananas into the Community (OJ L 293, p.
         32), Commission Regulation (EC) No 2806/of December on the issuing of import licences for bananas under the tariff
         quotas and for traditional ACP bananas for the first quarter of and on the submission of new applications (OJ L
         349, p. 32), Commission Regulation (EC) No 102/of January on the issuing of import licences for bananas under
         the tariff quotas and for traditional ACP bananas for the first quarter of (second period) (OJ L 11, p. 16), Commission
         Regulation (EC) No 608/of March on the issuing of import licences for bananas under the tariff quotas and for
         traditional ACP bananas for the second quarter of and on the submission of new applications (OJ L 75, p. 18), in
         the light of Articles I and XIII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (OJ L 336, p. 103, ‘GATT 1994‘) which
         appears in Annex 1A of the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation (‘WTO’), approved by Council Decision 94/800/EC
         of December concerning the conclusion on behalf of the European Community, as regards matters within its competence,
         of the agreements reached in the Uruguay Round multilateral negotiations (1986-1994) (OJ L 336, p. 1), and of Article
         of the Framework agreement on cooperation between the European Economic Community and the Cartagena Agreement and its member
         countries, namely the Republic of Bolivia, the Republic of Colombia, the Republic of Ecuador, the Republic of Peru and the
         Republic of Venezuela, approved on behalf of the Community by Council Decision 98/278/EC of April (OJ L 127, p.
         10, ‘the framework agreement’).
         
            
 The reference was made in proceedings between Léon Van Parys NV (‘Van Parys’) and Belgisch Interventie- en Restitutiebureau
         (the Belgian Intervention and Refund Board, ‘BIRB’), concerning the latter’s refusal to issue the former with import licences
         for certain quantities of bananas originating in Ecuador and Panama.
         
Law
The WTO agreements
            
 By Decision 94/800, the Council of the European Union approved the agreement establishing the WTO together with the agreements
         set out in Annexes 1, and of that agreement (‘the WTO agreements’), which include GATT 1994.
         
            
 Under Article II(2) of the WTO Agreement:
         ‘The agreements and associated legal instruments included in Annexes 1, and ... are integral parts of this Agreement,
         binding on all Members.‘
         
            
 Article I(1) of GATT provides:
         ‘With respect to customs duties and charges of any kind imposed on or in connection with importation or exportation …, any
         advantage, favour, privilege or immunity granted by any contracting party to any product originating in or destined for any
         other country shall be accorded immediately and unconditionally to the like product originating in or destined for the territories
         of all other contracting parties.’
         
            
 Article XIII of GATT 1994, on the non-discriminatory administration of quantitative restrictions, provides:
         ‘1.     No prohibition or restriction shall be applied by any contracting party on the importation of any product of the territory
         of any other contracting party …, unless the importation of the like product of all third countries … is similarly prohibited
         or restricted.
          2.       In applying import restrictions to any product, contracting parties shall aim at a distribution of trade in such product approaching
         as closely as possible the shares which the various contracting parties might be expected to obtain in the absence of such
         restrictions and to this end shall observe the following provisions:
         (a)     wherever practicable, quotas representing the total amount of permitted imports (whether allocated among supplying countries
         or not) shall be fixed…;
         (b)     in cases in which quotas are not practicable, the restrictions may be applied by means of import licences or permits without
         a quota;
         (c)     contracting parties shall not, except for purposes of operating quotas allocated in accordance with sub-paragraph (d) of this
         paragraph, require that import licences or permits be utilised for the importation of the product concerned from a particular
         country or source;
         (d)     in cases in which a quota is allocated among supplying countries the contracting party applying the restrictions may seek
         agreement with respect to the allocation of shares in the quota with all other contracting parties having a substantial interest
         in supplying the product concerned. In cases in which this method is not reasonably practicable, the contracting party concerned
         shall allot to contracting parties having a substantial interest in supplying the product shares based upon the proportions,
         supplied by such contracting parties during a previous representative period, of the total quantity or value of imports of
         the product, due account being taken of any special factors which may have affected or may be affecting the trade in the product.
         ...
         …
          5.       The provisions of this Article shall apply to any tariff quota instituted or maintained by any contracting party …’
         
            
 Article 3(2), (3), (5) and (7) of the Understanding on rules and procedures governing the settlement of disputes (‘the understanding’),
         which forms Annex of the agreement establishing the WTO, provide: 
         ‘2. The dispute settlement system of the WTO is a central element in providing security and predictability to the multilateral
         trading system. …
          3. The prompt settlement of situations in which a Member considers that any benefits accruing to it directly or indirectly
         under the covered agreements are being impaired by measures taken by another Member is essential to the effective functioning
         of the WTO and the maintenance of a proper balance between the rights and obligations of Members. 
         … 
          5. All solutions to matters formally raised under the consultation and dispute settlement provisions of the covered agreements,
         including arbitration awards, shall be consistent with those agreements and shall not nullify or impair benefits accruing
         to any Member under those agreements, nor impede the attainment of any objective of those agreements. 
         …
          7. Before bringing a case, a Member shall exercise its judgement as to whether action under these procedures would be fruitful.
         The aim of the dispute settlement mechanism is to secure a positive solution to a dispute. A solution mutually acceptable
         to the parties to a dispute and consistent with the covered agreements is clearly to be preferred. In the absence of a mutually
         agreed solution, the first objective of the dispute settlement mechanism is usually to secure the withdrawal of the measures
         concerned if these are found to be inconsistent with the provisions of any of the covered agreements. The provision of compensation
         should be resorted to only if the immediate withdrawal of the measure is impracticable and as a temporary measure pending
         the withdrawal of the measure which is inconsistent with a covered agreement. The last resort which this Understanding provides
         to the Member invoking the dispute settlement procedures is the possibility of suspending the application of concessions or
         other obligations under the covered agreements on a discriminatory basis vis-à-vis the other Member, subject to authorisation
         by the [Dispute Settlement Body of the WTO, “the DSB”] of such measures.’ 
         
            
 Article of the understanding, entitled ‘Surveillance of Implementation of [DSB] Recommendations and Rulings’, provides:
         ‘1. Prompt compliance with recommendations or rulings of the DSB is essential in order to ensure effective resolution of disputes
         to the benefit of all Members.
         …
          3. At a DSB meeting held within days after the date of adoption of the panel or Appellate Body report, the Member concerned
         shall inform the DSB of its intentions in respect of implementation of the recommendations and rulings of the DSB. If it is
         impracticable to comply immediately with the recommendations and rulings, the Member concerned shall have a reasonable period
         of time in which to do so. …
         … 
          5. Where there is disagreement as to the existence or consistency with a covered agreement of measures taken to comply with
         the recommendations and rulings such dispute shall be decided through recourse to these dispute settlement procedures, including
         wherever possible resort to the original panel. …
          6. The DSB shall keep under surveillance the implementation of adopted recommendations or rulings. The issue of implementation
         of the recommendations or rulings may be raised at the DSB by any Member at any time following their adoption. …’ 
         
            
 Lastly, Article of the understanding, entitled ‘Compensation and the Suspension of Concessions’, provides:
         ‘1. Compensation and the suspension of concessions or other obligations are temporary measures available in the event that
         the recommendations and rulings are not implemented within a reasonable period of time. However, neither compensation nor
         the suspension of concessions or other obligations is preferred to full implementation of a recommendation to bring a measure
         into conformity with the covered agreements. Compensation is voluntary and, if granted, shall be consistent with the covered
         agreements. 
          2. If the Member concerned fails to bring the measure found to be inconsistent with a covered agreement into compliance therewith
         or otherwise comply with the recommendations and rulings within the reasonable period of time determined pursuant to paragraph
         of Article 21, such Member shall, if so requested, and no later than the expiry of the reasonable period of time, enter
         into negotiations with any party having invoked the dispute settlement procedures, with a view to developing mutually acceptable
         compensation. If no satisfactory compensation has been agreed within days after the date of expiry of the reasonable period
         of time, any party having invoked the dispute settlement procedures may request authorisation from the DSB to suspend the
         application to the Member concerned of concessions or other obligations under the covered agreements.
         …
          8. The suspension of concessions or other obligations shall be temporary and shall only be applied until such time as the
         measure found to be inconsistent with a covered agreement has been removed, or the Member that must implement recommendations
         or rulings provides a solution to the nullification or impairment of benefits, or a mutually satisfactory solution is reached.
         In accordance with paragraph of Article 21, the DSB shall continue to keep under surveillance the implementation of adopted
         recommendations or rulings, including those cases where compensation has been provided or concessions or other obligations
         have been suspended but the recommendations to bring a measure into conformity with the covered agreements have not been implemented’.
         
         
The framework agreement
            
 Article of the framework agreement provides:
         ‘The Contracting Parties hereby grant each other most-favoured-nation treatment in trade, in accordance with the General Agreement
         on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
          Both Parties reaffirm their will to conduct trade with each other in accordance with that Agreement.’ 
         
Community legislation
            
 Title IV of Regulation No 404/substituted, in the banana sector, a common system of trade with third States for the various,
         hitherto-existing national systems.
         
            
 After certain third States complained, that common system of imports was the subject of a WTO dispute resolution procedure.
         
            
 In a report of September 1997, the Standing Appellate Body, established pursuant to Article of the understanding, found
         that certain features of the system of trade with third States set up under Regulation No 404/were incompatible with Article
         I(1) and XIII of GATT 1994. That report was adopted by the DSB by decision of September 1997.
         
            
 Following that decision, the Council amended Title IV of Regulation No 404/by Regulation No 1637/98, so as to comply, as
         is stated in the second recital to that regulation, ‘with the Community’s international commitments under the World Trade
         Organisation (WTO)’ and to the ‘other signatories of the Fourth ACP-EC [Lomé] Convention …, whilst achieving at the same time
         the purposes of the common organisation of the market in bananas’. Pursuant to the second paragraph of Article 2, Regulation
         No 1637/ceased to apply with effect from January 1999, the expiry date of the 15-month period granted by the DSB to the
         European Community within which to comply with the DSB’s decision of September 1997.
         
            
 The amended system for imports of bananas maintains the distinction under the former trade system between, on the one hand,
         traditional and non-traditional bananas originating in the African, Caribbean and Pacific States (‘the ACP States’), and third
         State bananas, on the other. 
         
            
 Article 16(2) of Regulation No 404/as amended by Regulation No 1637/(‘Regulation No 404/93’) provides in that regard
         that: 
         ‘For the purposes of this Title [“Trade with third countries”]:
         
1.
“traditional imports from ACP States” means imports into the Community of bananas originating in the States listed in the
               Annex hereto up to a limit of tonnes (net weight) per year; these are termed “traditional ACP bananas”; 
            
2.
“non-traditional imports from ACP States” means imports into the Community of bananas originating in ACP States but not covered
               by definition 1; these are termed “non-traditional ACP bananas”; 
            
3.
“imports from non-ACP third States” means bananas imported into the Community originating in third States other than the ACP
               States; these are termed “third State bananas”.’
            
            
 The first paragraph of Article of Regulation No 404/provides that ‘any importation of bananas into the Community shall
         be subject to submission of an import licence issued by Member States to any interested party … without prejudice to the special
         provisions made for the implementation of Articles and 19’. 
         
            
 Article of the same regulation provides:
         ‘1. A tariff quota of tonnes (net weight) shall be opened each year for imports of third State and non-traditional
         ACP bananas.
          Imports of third State bananas under the tariff quota shall be subject to duty of ECU per tonne, while imports of non-traditional
         ACP bananas shall be free of duty.
          2. An additional tariff quota of tonnes (net weight) shall be opened each year for imports of third State and of non-traditional
         ACP bananas.
          Imports of third State bananas under this tariff quota shall be subject to duty of ECU per tonne while imports of non-traditional
         ACP bananas shall be free of duty.
          3. No duty shall be payable on imports of traditional ACP bananas.
          4. Should there be no reasonable possibility of securing agreement of all WTO contracting parties with a substantial interest
         in the supply of bananas, the Commission may under the procedure set out in Article allocate the tariff quotas provided
         for in paragraphs and and the traditional ACP quantity between those States with a substantial interest in the supply.’
         
         
            
 The annex to Regulation No 404/93, referred to in the first subparagraph of the second paragraph of Article of that regulation,
         which was also amended by Regulation No 1637/98, contains a list of supplier States of traditional ACP bananas to which
         an annual quota of tonnes (net weight) is reserved without allocating maximum quantities to each of those States.
         
         
            
 Article of Regulation No 404/provides that imports are to be managed in accordance with ‘the method based on taking
         account of traditional trade flows (“traditionals/newcomers”).‘
         
            
 Pursuant to its duty, under Article of Regulation No 404/93, to implement the new system of trade with third States, the
         Commission adopted Regulation No 2362/98. Article of that regulation states as follows: 
         ‘1.     Each traditional operator registered in a Member State in accordance with Article shall receive, for each year and for all
         the origins listed in Annex I, a single reference quantity based on the quantities of bananas actually imported during the
         reference period.
          2.       For imports carried out in under the tariff quotas or as traditional ACP bananas, the reference period shall be made
         up of the years 1994, and 1996.‘
         
            
 Article of Regulation No 2362/concerns the method for determining the reference quantity.
         
            
 As for the method of issuing import licences, Article of that regulation provides:
         ‘Where, for a given quarter and for any one or more of the origins listed in Annex I, the quantities applied for appreciably
         exceed any indicative quantity fixed under Article 14, or exceed the quantities available, a percentage reduction to be applied
         to the amounts requested shall be fixed’.
         
            
 Article of the same regulation provides:
         ‘1.     Where a percentage reduction has been fixed for one or more given origins under Article 17, operators who have applied for
         import licences for the origin(s) concerned may:
         
(a)
either renounce their use of the licence by informing the relevant issuing authority accordingly within working days of
               publication of the Regulation fixing the reduction percentage, whereupon the security lodged against the licence shall be
               released immediately; or
            
(b)
submit one or more fresh licence applications for the origins for which available quantities have been published by the Commission,
               up to an amount equal to or smaller than the quantity applied for but not covered by the original licence issued. Such requests
               shall be submitted within the time limit laid down in point (a) and shall be subject to all the conditions governing licence
               applications.
            
 2.       The Commission shall immediately determine the quantities for which licences can be issued for each of the origins concerned’.
         
            
 Article of Regulation No 2362/states:
         ‘If the quantities covered by applications for licences in respect of the first quarter of covering imports from one
         or more of the origins listed in Annex I exceed 26% of the quantities set out in that Annex, the Commission shall fix a percentage
         reduction to be applied to all applications in respect of the origin(s) concerned’.
         
            
 In application of Article of Regulation No 2362/98, Article of Regulation No 2806/fixes the reduction coefficients
         in the following terms:
         ‘Import licences shall be issued under the arrangements for the importation of bananas, tariff quota arrangements and arrangements
         for traditional ACP bananas for the first quarter of for the quantity indicated in the licence application, multiplied
         by reduction coefficients of 0.5793, 0.and 0.for applications indicating the origins “Colombia”, “Costa Rica” and
         “Ecuador” respectively’.
         
            
 Pursuant to Article 18(2) of Regulation No 2362/98, Regulation No 2806/also fixes the quantities for which licence applications
         may still be lodged in the first quarter of 1999. Those new applications are the subject of Regulation No 102/1999, Article
         1(1) of which fixes reduction coefficients of 0.in respect of applications for imports of traditional ACP bananas originating
         in ‘Panama’ and 0.in respect of bananas originating in ‘Others’. The applications in respect of origins other than those
         mentioned in Article 1(1) may, pursuant to Article 1(2), be satisfied in full.
         
            
 Regulation No 608/concerns applications for licences for the second quarter of 1999. It fixes the reduction coefficients
         for applications to import bananas indicating the origins ‘Colombia’, ‘Costa Rica’ and ‘Ecuador’ at 0.5403, 0.and 0.respectively. For applications in respect of origins other than those just mentioned, the Member States may issue import licences
         for the quantity indicated in the application.
         
            
 In a report dated April 1999, a panel, instituted at the request of the Republic of Ecuador pursuant to Article 21(5) of
         the understanding, stated that the new system of trade with third States as established by Regulation No 1637/had not removed
         the infringement of Articles I(1) and XIII of GATT 1994. The DSB adopted that report on May 1999. 
         
            
 The Community system was subsequently amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 216/of January amending Regulation
         No 404/(OJ L 31, p. 2).
         
The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 Van Parys, established in Belgium, has imported bananas into the European Community from Ecuador for more than years.
         
            
 On December 1998, Van Parys applied to the BIRB for import licences, during the first quarter of 1999, in respect of kg of bananas originating in Ecuador. The BIRB issued licences for the quantities referred to in the applications,
         subject to a reduction coefficient of 0.fixed by Regulation No 2806/98.
         
            
 On January 1999, Van Parys made, pursuant to Article of Regulation No 2362/98, three new applications for licences in
         respect of the unallocated quantity for the importation of bananas originating in Panama and in other third States. The BIRB
         also applied a reduction coefficient to those applications pursuant to Regulation No 102/1999.
         
            
 On March 1999, Van Parys applied for licences in respect of the second quarter of to import kg of bananas
         originating in Ecuador. That application was acceded to, subject to the deduction of an amount corresponding to the reduction
         coefficient of 0.fixed by Regulation No 608/1999.
         
            
 Van Parys brought two actions before the Raad van State against the decisions of the BIRB refusing to issue it with import
         licences for the full amounts applied for. In its actions it submitted that those decisions were unlawful because of the unlawfulness,
         in the light of the WTO rules, of the regulations governing imports of bananas into the Community on which those decisions
         are based. 
         
            
 Considering that, in accordance with the Court’s case-law, it is not for the national courts to rule on the validity of Community
         measures, the Raad van State decided to stay the proceedings and refer to the Court the following questions for a preliminary
         ruling:
         
‘1.
Do … Regulation (EEC) No 404/… as amended by … Regulation (EC) No 1637/…, … Regulation (EC) No 2362/…, … Regulation
               (EC) No 2806/…, … Regulation (EC) No 102/[19]… and Regulation (EC) No 608/… infringe Article I, Article XIII:and Article XIII:2(d) of GATT 1994, taken separately or together, inasmuch as they:
            
–
	introduce to the benefit of twelve countries named in the annex to Regulation No 1637/a joint quota of a maximum of [tonnes] of bananas (“traditional ACP bananas”) and, moreover, in that that quota does not accord with a distribution
               of trade that approaches trade without restrictions in so far as it is included in the system introduced by Regulation No 1637/98,
               the import of bananas being regulated solely on the basis of a tariff quota;
            
–
	introduce a tariff quota for a total quantity of tonnes for third countries and for non-traditional ACP bananas
               and then allocate that tariff quota in percentage terms on the basis of a non-representative period, since the import of bananas
               in the period from to was already subject to restrictive conditions?
            
2.
Do the regulations referred to in paragraph infringe Article of the framework agreement … inasmuch as by that agreement,
               the European Community undertook to have its relations with Ecuador governed by the provisions of GATT and to grant that country
               most-favoured-nation treatment?
            
3.
Do the regulations referred to in paragraph hereof infringe the principle of the protection of legitimate expectations and
               the principle of good faith in international public law and international customary law, inasmuch as the Commission has not
               fulfilled the obligations arising for the Community from GATT 1994, has misused legal procedures and has not taken account
               of judicial proceedings and of the outcome of an international dispute settlement procedure inasmuch as, despite declarations
               made at the time of the adoption of Regulation No 1637/98, it has not established a system under which import licences for
               bananas are issued to “genuine importers”?
            
4.
Has the Commission exceeded the authority given to it by … Regulation No 404/93, as amended by Regulation No 1637/98, by adopting
               the tariff quota for the import of bananas while disregarding the obligations which arise for the Community from GATT and GATS [General Agreement on Trade in Services] or which must, where appropriate, be taken into account, because of its
               avowed intention to adapt the regime for the import of bananas into the Community to the applicable WTO agreements, as a positive
               rule of law to be integrated into Community law?’
            
The first, third and fourth questions 
            
 By its first, third and fourth questions, the referring court essentially asks the Court to assess the validity of Regulations
         No 404/93, 2362/98, 2806/98, 102/and 608/in the light of Articles I and XIII of GATT 1994.
         
            
 Before making that assessment, it is necessary to answer the question whether the WTO agreements give Community nationals
         a right to rely on those agreements in legal proceedings challenging the validity of Community legislation where the DSB has
         held that both that legislation and subsequent legislation adopted by the Community in order, inter alia, to comply with the
         relevant WTO rules are incompatible with those rules.
         
            
 It is settled case-law in that regard that, given their nature and structure, the WTO agreements are not in principle among
         the rules in the light of which the Court is to review the legality of measures adopted by the Community institutions (Case
         C-149/Portugal v Council [1999] ECR I-8395, paragraph 47; order of May in Case C-307/OGT Fruchthandelsgesellschaft [2001] ECR I-3159, paragraph 24; Joined Cases C-27/and C-122/Omega Air and Others [2002] ECR I-2569, paragraph 93; Case C-76/P Petrotub and Republica v Council [2003] ECR I-79, paragraph and Case C-93/P Biret International v Council [2003] ECR I-10497, paragraph 52).
         
            
 It is only where the Community has intended to implement a particular obligation assumed in the context of the WTO, or where
         the Community measure refers expressly to the precise provisions of the WTO agreements, that it is for the Court to review
         the legality of the Community measure in question in the light of the WTO rules (see, as regards GATT 1947, Case 70/Fediol v Commission [1989] ECR 1781, paragraphs to 22, and Case C-69/Nakajima v Council [1991] ECR I-2069, paragraph 31, and, as regards the WTO agreements, Portugal v Council, paragraph 49, and Biret International v Council, paragraph 53). 
         
            
 In the present case, by undertaking after the adoption of the decision of the DSB of September to comply with the
         WTO rules and, in particular, with Articles I(1) and XIII of GATT 1994, the Community did not intend to assume a particular
         obligation in the context of the WTO, capable of justifying an exception to the impossibility of relying on WTO rules before
         the Community Courts and enabling the Community Courts to exercise judicial review of the relevant Community provisions in
         the light of those rules. 
         
            
 First, it should be noted that even where there is a decision of the DSB holding that the measures adopted by a member are
         incompatible with the WTO rules, as the Court has already held, the WTO dispute settlement system nevertheless accords considerable
         importance to negotiation between the parties (Portugal v Council, paragraphs to 40). 
         
            
 Thus, although, in the absence of a resolution mutually agreed between the parties and compatible with the agreements in question,
         the main purpose of the dispute settlement system is in principle, according to Article 3(7) of the understanding, to secure
         the withdrawal of the measures in question if they are found to be inconsistent with the WTO rules, that provision provides,
         however, that where the immediate withdrawal of the measures is impracticable, compensation may be granted or the application
         of concessions or the enforcement of other obligations may be suspended on an interim basis pending the withdrawal of the
         inconsistent measure (see, to that effect, Portugal v Council, paragraph 37).
         
            
 It is true that, according to Articles 3(7) and 22(1) of the understanding, compensation and the suspension of concessions
         or other obligations are temporary measures available in the event that the recommendations and rulings of the DSB are not
         implemented within a reasonable period of time, the latter of those provisions showing a preference for full implementation
         of a recommendation to bring a measure into conformity with the WTO agreements in question (Portugal v Council, paragraph 38). 
         
            
 However, Article 22(2) provides that, if the Member concerned fails to enforce those recommendations and decisions within
         a reasonable period, if so requested, and within a reasonable period of time, it is to enter into negotiations with any party
         having invoked the dispute settlement procedures with a view to agreeing compensation. If no satisfactory compensation has
         been agreed within days after the expiry of the reasonable period, the complainant may request authorisation from the DSB
         to suspend, in respect of that member, the application of concessions or other obligations under the WTO agreements.
         
            
 Furthermore, Article 22(8) of the understanding provides that the dispute remains on the agenda of the DSB, pursuant to Article
         21(6) of the understanding, until it is resolved, that is until the measure found to be inconsistent has been ‘removed’ or
         the parties reach a ‘mutually satisfactory solution’.
         
            
 Where there is no agreement as to the compatibility of the measures taken to comply with the DSB’s recommendations and decisions,
         Article 21(5) of the understanding provides that the dispute shall be decided ‘through recourse to these dispute settlement
         procedures’, including an attempt by the parties to reach a negotiated solution.
         
            
 In those circumstances, to require courts to refrain from applying rules of domestic law which are inconsistent with the WTO
         agreements would have the consequence of depriving the legislative or executive organs of the contracting parties of the possibility
         afforded by Article of that memorandum of reaching a negotiated settlement, even on a temporary basis (Portugal v Commission, paragraph 40).
         
            
 In the dispute in the main proceedings, it is apparent from the file that: 
         
–
after declaring to the DSB its intention to comply with the DSB’s decision of September 1997, the Community amended its
               system for imports of bananas upon the expiry of the period allocated to it for that purpose;
            
–
as a result of the challenge by the Republic of Ecuador to the compatibility with the WTO rules of the new system of trade
               with third States arising from Regulation No 1637/98, the matter was referred to an ad hoc panel pursuant to Article 21(5)
               of the understanding and that panel held in a report adopted by the DSB on May that that system continued to infringe
               Articles I(1) and XIII of GATT 1994;
            
–
in particular, the United States of America was authorised, in 1999, pursuant to Article 22(2) of the understanding and following
               an arbitration procedure, to suspend concessions to the Community up to a certain level;
            
–
the Community system was the subject of further amendments introduced by Regulation No 216/2001, applicable with effect from
               April pursuant to the second paragraph of Article 2;
            
–
agreements were negotiated with the United States of America on April and with the Republic of Ecuador on April
               2001, with a view to bringing the Community legislation into conformity with the WTO rules.
            
            
 Such an outcome, by which the Community sought to reconcile its obligations under the WTO agreements with those in respect
         of the ACP States, and with the requirements inherent in the implementation of the common agricultural policy, could be compromised
         if the Community Courts were entitled to judicially review the lawfulness of the Community measures in question in light of
         the WTO rules upon the expiry of the time-limit, in January 1999, granted by the DSB within which to implement its decision
         of September 1997. 
         
            
 The expiry of that time-limit does not imply that the Community had exhausted the possibilities under the understanding of
         finding a solution to the dispute between it and the other parties. In those circumstances, to require the Community Courts,
         merely on the basis that that time-limit has expired, to review the lawfulness of the Community measures concerned in the
         light of the WTO rules, could have the effect of undermining the Community’s position in its attempt to reach a mutually acceptable
         solution to the dispute in conformity with those rules.
         
            
 It follows from the foregoing considerations that Regulation No 1637/and the regulations in issue in the main proceedings
         adopted to apply it, cannot be interpreted as measures intended to ensure the enforcement within the Community legal order
         of a particular obligation assumed in the context of the WTO. Neither do those measures expressly refer to specific provisions
         of the WTO agreements.
         
            
 Second, as the Court held in paragraphs and of its judgment in Portugal v Council, to accept that the Community Courts have the direct responsibility for ensuring that Community law complies with the WTO
         rules would deprive the Community’s legislative or executive bodies of the discretion which the equivalent bodies of the Community’s
         commercial partners enjoy. It is not in dispute that some of the contracting parties, which are amongst the most important
         commercial partners of the Community, have concluded from the subject-matter and purpose of the WTO agreements that they are
         not among the rules applicable by their courts when reviewing the legality of their rules of domestic law. Such lack of reciprocity,
         if admitted, would risk introducing an anomaly in the application of the WTO rules. 
         
            
 It follows from all of the foregoing that an operator, in circumstances such as those in the main proceedings, cannot plead
         before a court of a Member State that Community legislation is incompatible with certain WTO rules, even if the DSB has stated
         that that legislation is incompatible with those rules.
         
The second question 
            
 By its second question, the referring court asks essentially whether Regulations No 404/93, 2362/98, 2806/98, 102/and
         608/are compatible with Article of the framework agreement. 
         
            
 It should be stated that that article, pursuant to which the contracting parties accord each other most-favoured-nation treatment
         as laid down by Article I of GATT 1994, adds nothing to the obligations already incumbent on those parties under the WTO rules.
         
            
 As the Commission rightly points out, Article of the framework agreement was added to the framework agreement at a time
         when the Member States of the Andean Pact were not yet members of the WTO, and that amendment did not alter the scope or nature
         of the obligations imposed by GATT 1994.
         
            
 In those circumstances, the reasoning set out in reply to the first question as to whether or not the WTO rules may be relied
         upon before a court of a Member State applies equally to the interpretation of Article of the framework agreement. 
         
Costs
            
 Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
         
 On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) rules as follows:
         In circumstances such as those in the main proceedings, an operator may not rely in proceedings before a national court on
               the fact that Community legislation is incompatible with certain rules of the World Trade Organisation even where the Dispute
               Settlement Body referred to in Article 2(1) of the Understanding on rules and procedures governing the settlement of disputes,
               which forms Annex to the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation, approved by Council Decision 94/800/EC of
               December concerning the conclusion on behalf of the European Community, as regards matters within its competence,
               of the agreements reached in the Uruguay Round multilateral negotiations (1986-1994), has declared that legislation to be
               incompatible with those rules. [Signatures]
      
 –
            
Language of the case: Dutch.
Top  
 