
         				Ordonnance de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-326/Banco de Fomento e Exterior SAvAmândio Maurício Martins Pechim and Others(Reference for a preliminary rulingfrom the Tribunal Cível da Comarca, Lisbon)
         
«(Reference for a preliminary ruling – Inadmissibility)»
Order of the Court, March Summary of the Order
Preliminary rulings – Admissibility – Questions not relating to specific technical points, submitted without providing any explanation of the factual and legislative
                     context
                  (EC Treaty, Art. 177; EC Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 20)In order to reach an interpretation of Community law which will be of use to the national court, it is essential that the
         national court define the factual and legislative context of the questions it is asking or, at the very least, explain the
         factual circumstances on which those questions are based.The information provided in orders for reference must not only enable the Court usefully to reply but also enable the Governments
         of the Member States and other interested parties to submit observations pursuant to Article of the Statute of the Court.
          It is the Court's duty to ensure that the opportunity to do so is safeguarded, bearing in mind that, by virtue of the abovementioned
         provision, only the orders for reference are notified to the interested parties.The requirement for the national court to define the factual and legislative context of the questions it is asking is less
         pressing where the questions relate to specific technical points and enable the Court to give a useful reply even where the
         national court has not given an exhaustive description of the legal and factual situation.None the less, a request from a national court is manifestly inadmissible where the order for reference does not contain any
         indication by the national court of the factual and legal situation in the case before it or of the reasons why it considers
         that the answers to the questions referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling are necessary in order to settle the dispute.
      
  
  
ORDER OF THE COURTMarch (1)
((Reference for a preliminary ruling – Inadmissibility))
In Case C-326/95, 
REFERENCE to the Court under Article of the EC Treaty by the Tribunal Cível da Comarca de Lisboa for a preliminary ruling
         in the proceedings pending before that court between 
         
 Banco de Fomento e Exterior SA
and
 Amândio Maurício Martins Pechim, Maria da Luz Lima Barros Raposo Pechim,  Confecções Têxteis de Vouzela, Ld.ª (CTV),
on the interpretation of Articles 59, and of the EC Treaty,
         
THE COURT,
composed of: G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias, President, C.N. Kakouris, D.A.O. Edward, J.-P. Puissochet and G. Hirsch (Presidents of Chambers), G.F. Mancini, F.A. Schockweiler, J.C. Moitinho de Almeida (Rapporteur), P.J.G. Kapteyn, C. Gulmann, J.L. Murray, P. Jann, H. Ragnemalm, L. Sevón and M. Wathelet, Judges, 
         
Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer, Registrar: R. Grass, 
         
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General, makes the following 
Order
            
By an undated decision, received at the Court on October 1995, the Tribunal Cível da Comarca de Lisboa (Local Civil Court,
         Lisbon) referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article of the EC Treaty a number of questions raised by
         Mr and Mrs Pechim and by Confecções Têxteis de Vouzela, Ld.ª, the defendants in the main proceedings, on the interpretation
         of Articles 59, and of the EC Treaty. 
         
            
The Banco de Fomento e Exterior SA (
         BFE) brought an action before the national court to enforce a debt against the defendants in the main proceedings. 
         
            
It is apparent from the case file forwarded by the national court that, according to the defendants in the main proceedings,
         the procedure followed by the BFE is irregular on the ground that Decree-law No of November (
          Diario do Governo , Second Semester 1958, p. 558), which confers numerous advantages on the BFE, in particular the power to proceed to recover
         debts in accordance with the enforcement procedure provided for in fiscal matters and, to that end, to treat as enforceable
         the certificate of the debt extracted from the bank's books, is incompatible with the Community rules on freedom to provide
         services and on competition law.  They therefore proposed that the national court should refer the following questions to
         the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling: 
         
1.
 Must the BFE be regarded as an  
         undertaking and in particular  
         a public undertaking within the meaning of Articles and of the Treaty of Rome? 
         
2.
 May the advantage which the BFE enjoys over its competitors be considered to be  
         State aid within the meaning of Article of the Treaty of Rome? 
         
3.
 Must such advantages be taken to be restrictions on the freedom to provide services within the Community, within the meaning
         of Article of the Treaty of Rome? 
         
4.
 Do Articles 59, 90(1), and 92(1) of the Treaty of Rome have direct effect and may they be relied upon by a party which is
         the subject of enforcement proceedings in the present case? 
         
5.
 Do the rules contained in the Treaty of Rome take precedence over and negate any conflicting provisions of national law?
         
            
In its order for reference, the national court decided to suspend the proceedings pending consideration of the questions which
         the defendants in the main proceedings had suggested should be referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling. 
         
            
The second paragraph of Article of the EC Treaty provides that where such a question is raised before a court or tribunal
         of a Member State, that court or tribunal may, if it considers that a decision on the question is necessary to enable it to
         give judgment, request the Court of Justice to give a ruling thereon. 
         
            
It is settled case-law that in order to reach an interpretation of Community law which will be of use to the national court,
         it is essential that the national court define the factual and legislative context of the questions it is asking or, at the
         very least, explain the factual circumstances on which those questions are based (see, in particular, the judgment in Joined
         Cases C-320/90, C-321/and C-322/Telemarsicabruzzo and Others  v  
          Circostel  [1993] ECR I-393, paragraph 6, and the orders in Case C-157/Pretore di Genova  v  
          Banchero  [1993] ECR I-1085, paragraph 4, Case C-378/La Pyramide  [1994] ECR I-3999, paragraph 14, and Case C-458/Saddik  [1995] ECR I-511, paragraph 12). 
         
            
Moreover, the information provided and the questions raised in orders for reference must not only be such as to enable the
         Court usefully to reply but also such as to give the Governments of the Member States and other interested parties the opportunity
         to submit observations pursuant to Article of the EC Statute of the Court of Justice. It is the Court's duty to ensure
         that the opportunity to submit observations is safeguarded, bearing in mind that, by virtue of the abovementioned provision,
         only the orders for reference are notified to the interested parties (judgment in Joined Cases 141/81, 142/and 143/Holdijk and Others  [1982] ECR 1299, paragraph 6, and the order in  
          Saddik , cited above, paragraph 13). 
         
            
The Court has indeed acknowledged that the requirement for the national court to define the factual and legislative context
         of the questions it is asking is less pressing where the questions relate to specific technical points and enable the Court
         to give a useful reply even where the national court has not given an exhaustive description of the legal and factual situation
         (Case C-316/Vaneetveld  [1994] ECR I-763, paragraph 13). 
         
            
However, that is not the case here. 
         
            
The order for reference contains no indication which meets the abovementioned requirements. 
         
            
Thus, the order for reference contains no indication by the national court of the factual and legal situation in the case
         before it or of the reasons why it considers that the answers to the questions specified by the defendants in the main proceedings
         are necessary in order to settle the dispute.  The factual and legislative context can be established only by analysing the
         submissions of the parties to the main proceedings. 
         
            
It must therefore be held, pursuant to Article of the Rules of Procedure, that the questions referred to the Court for
         a preliminary ruling are manifestly inadmissible. 
         
Costs
            
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT
hereby orders:
         The request for a preliminary ruling submitted by the Tribunal Cível da Comarca de Lisboa is inadmissible.Luxembourg, March 1996. 
         
R. Grass 
G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: Portuguese.
Top  
 