
Case C-140/Commission of the European Communities
v
Hellenic Republic
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Articles EC and EC – Opticians – Conditions of establishment – Establishment and operation of opticians’ shops – Restrictions – Justification – Principle of proportionality)
Opinion of Advocate General Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer delivered on December Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), April 2005. 
Summary of the Judgment
1.     Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Restrictions – National legislation prohibiting a qualified optician
            from operating more than one optician’s shop – Not permitted – Justification – None
(Art. EC)
2.     Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Restrictions – National legislation limiting the possibility
            for a natural person of opening an optician’s shop – Not permitted – Justification – None
(Arts EC and EC)
1.     By enacting and maintaining in force a national law which does not permit a qualified optician as a natural person to operate
         more than one optician’s shop, a Member State fails to fulfil its obligations under Article EC. Such a restriction on the
         freedom of establishment of natural persons cannot be justified by the objective of protecting public health, in so far as
         it goes beyond what is required in order to achieve that objective.
      
(see paras 35-36, 38, operative part 1)
2.     By enacting and maintaining in force a national law which makes the possibility for a natural person of opening an optician’s
         shop subject to the following conditions
      
- authorisation for the establishment and operation of the optician’s shop must have been granted to a recognised optician
         who is a natural person, the person holding the authorisation to operate the shop must hold at least 50% of the company’s
         share capital and must participate at least to that extent in the profits and losses of the company, and the company must
         be in the form of a collective or limited partnership, and
      
- the optician in question may participate at most in one other company owning an optician’s shop, subject to the condition
         that the authorisation for the establishment and operation of that shop is in the name of another authorised optician.
      
a Member State fails to fulfil its obligations under Article 43EC and EC.
Such a restriction on the freedom of establishment of natural persons cannot be justified by the objective of protecting public
         health where it goes beyond what is required in order to achieve that objective.
      
(see paras 35-36, 38, operative part 2)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Failure by a Member State to fulfil obligations – Articles EC and EC – Opticians – Conditions of establishment – Establishment and operation of opticians’ shops – Restrictions – Justification – Principle of proportionality)
In Case C-140/03,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on March 2003,
Commission of the European Communities,  represented by M. Patakia, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Hellenic Republic, represented by E. Skandalou, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg, 
      
defendant,
 
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, R. Silva de Lapuerta, C. Gulmann (Rapporteur), P. Kūris and G. Arestis,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,
Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2004, 
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on December 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities asks the Court of Justice to declare that:
–      by enacting and maintaining in force Law No 971/on the exercise of the profession of optician and on opticians’ shops (FEK
         A’ 223, hereinafter referred to as ‘Law No 971/79’), which does not permit a qualified optician as a natural person to operate
         more than one optician’s shop, the Hellenic Republic has restricted the conditions of establishment of natural persons working
         as opticians, in breach of Article EC, and 
      
–      by enacting and maintaining in force Law No 971/and Law No 2646/on the development of a national social welfare system
         and other provisions (FEK A’ 236, p. 3455, hereinafter ‘Law No 2646/98’) under which the establishment by a legal person of
         an optician’s shop in Greece is subject to the following conditions: 
      
–       authorisation for the establishment and operation of the optician’s shop must have been granted to a recognised optician who
         is a natural person, the person holding the authorisation to operate the shop must hold at least 50% of the company’s share
         capital and must participate at least to that extent in the profits and losses of the company, and the company must be in
         the form of a collective or limited partnership, and
      
–       the optician in question may participate at most in one other company owning an optician’s shop, subject to the condition
         that the authorisation for the establishment and operation of that shop is in the name of another authorised optician, 
      
the Hellenic Republic has restricted the conditions of establishment of legal persons operating as opticians in Greece in
         a manner inconsistent with Article EC and has infringed Article EC in conjunction with Article EC by imposing on
         legal persons conditions not applicable to natural persons. 
      
 The national legal framework
Article 6(6) of Law No 971/provides: 
‘Subject to the provisions of paragraph of this article (establishment in pharmacies) and of paragraph of Article (transfer
         to family members), opticians’ shops shall be personally managed by the person to whom authorisation for their operation has
         been granted. Each optician may manage only one optician’s shop …’ 
      
Article 7(1) of the same law states: 
‘Opticians’ shops may only be established by persons holding an optician’s licence and their operation is subject to the grant
         of authorisation by the competent public authorities.’ 
      
Article 8(1) stipulates that: 
‘Authorisation for the operation of an optician’s shop is personal and non-transferable.’
Article 27(4) of Law No 2646/provides: 
‘Only qualified opticians may form a collective or limited partnership in order to operate an optician’s shop, provided that
         the person holding the authorisation to operate the shop holds at least 50% of the share capital. An optician may participate
         at most in one other company but the authorisation to establish and operate that shop must be in the name of another qualified
         optician.’
      
 Pre-litigation procedure
Following a complaint lodged by two limited companies (one of which is registered in a Member State other than the Hellenic
         Republic) which, on the basis of Law No 971/79, had been refused authorisation to open an optician’s shop, the Commission,
         by letter of January 1998, drew the attention of the Greek Government to the incompatibility of the legislation with Article
         of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) and with Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC). 
      
On April 1998, the Greek Government replied that Law No 971/was being amended.
On November 1998, the Commission sent the Hellenic Republic a letter of formal notice, emphasising that Law No 971/did
         not comply with the Treaty provisions referred to in its previous letter of January 1998. The Commission invited the Hellenic
         Republic to submit its observations in that respect within two months. 
      
On January 1999, the Greek Government replied, informing the Commission of Law No 2646/98, which supplements Law No 971/79.
         
      
On August 1999, the Commission sent a further letter of formal notice to the Greek Government, in which it argued that Law
         No 2646/did not dispose of the complaint set out in the first formal notice, as that law itself conflicted with Articles
         EC and EC. On January 2000, the Commission sent a second supplementary letter of formal notice, reiterating the complaints
         against the Hellenic Republic. 
      
On May 2000, the Greek Government replied that, in the absence of harmonisation at Community level, each Member State remains
         free to regulate the exercise of professions within its territory. It claimed that the alleged restrictions were essential
         in order to guarantee a high level of protection of health. It maintained that the disputed legislation was neither discriminatory
         nor disproportionate in relation to its objective. 
      
On January 2001, the Commission sent the Hellenic Republic a reasoned opinion rejecting those arguments, setting out its
         complaints concerning infringement of Articles EC and EC, and inviting the Member State to whom the opinion was addressed
         to take the necessary steps to comply within two months. 
      
On May 2001, the Greek Government replied that its position remained the same. On December 2002, it informed the Commission
         of its intention to amend the legislation to allow opticians from within the Community and, subject to certain conditions,
         commercial undertakings, irrespective of their legal form (collective or limited partnership, private limited company or public
         limited company) to establish and operate opticians’ shops. 
      
The Commission brought this action on March 2003. 
 The action
The following matters must be considered in turn: 
–       the effect on the present action of Law No 3204/03, amending and supplementing the legislation relating to the national health
         system and regulating other matters within the remit of the Minister for Health and Welfare (FEK A’ 296, p. 4997), which was
         pleaded by the Hellenic Republic at the oral hearing; 
      
–       the existence of restrictions on the freedom of establishment of natural and legal persons; 
–       the possible justification for such restrictions. 
 The effect of Law No 3204/03, pleaded by the Hellenic Republic
 Arguments of the parties
During the oral proceedings, the Hellenic Republic claimed that Law No 3204/03, of which the Commission had recently been
         notified, had disposed of the alleged infringements of Articles EC and EC. 
      
Under that law, opticians who are natural persons are now authorised to operate more than one optician’s shop, provided that
         each shop is managed by a qualified optician. 
      
As regards legal persons, Law No 3204/currently allows companies, whatever their legal form, to establish opticians’ shops.
         
      
However, that law requires: 
–      in relation to collective partnerships, that the majority of partners and the manager, or the majority of managers, should
         be opticians;
      
–      in relation to private limited companies, that more than half of the shareholders representing more than half of the share
         capital should be opticians; 
      
–      in relation to public limited companies, that at least 51% of the share capital should be held by opticians. 
The Commission observes that the current proceedings relate to the legal framework provided by Laws Nos 971/and 2646/98,
         and that, in any event, a preliminary analysis of Law No 3204/shows that certain restrictions on the freedom of establishment
         concerned in the action continue to exist. 
      
 Findings of the Court
It is settled case-law that the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations must be determined by
         reference to the situation obtaining in the Member State at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion and that
         account cannot be taken of any subsequent changes (see, in particular, Case C‑103/Commission v Greece [2002] ECR I-1147, paragraph 23, and Case C‑97/Commission v Luxembourg [2003] ECR I-5797, paragraph 30). 
      
That being the case, Law No 3204/03, which was adopted after the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion addressed
         to the Hellenic Republic in this case, cannot be taken into account in the consideration of the merits of this action for
         failure to fulfil obligations. 
      
 The existence of restrictions on the freedom of establishment of natural and legal persons
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission claims that Law No 971/79, in so far as it does not permit an optician who is a natural person to operate an
         optician’s shop, constitutes a restriction on the freedom of establishment provided for in Article EC. 
      
As regards legal persons, the Commission maintains that Law No 2646/also restricts the freedom of establishment, contrary
         to Article EC, in that it makes the establishment of an optician’s shop subject to the conditions set out in Article 27(4)
         of that law. 
      
The Hellenic Republic considers that Article 6(6) of Law No 971/does not give rise to any direct or indirect discrimination
         as between national and foreign professionals. Therefore, that provision does not infringe Article EC. 
      
As regards natural persons, the Hellenic Republic does not deny that Greek law imposes restrictions upon them. 
 Findings of the Court
According to settled case-law, Article EC precludes any national measure which, even though it is applicable without discrimination
         on grounds of nationality, is liable to hinder or render less attractive the exercise by Community nationals of the freedom
         of establishment that is guaranteed by the Treaty (see, in particular, Case C-19/Kraus [1993] ECR I-1663, paragraph 32, and Case C‑299/Commission v Netherlands [2004] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 15). 
      
In this case, it should be noted that the measure prohibiting qualified opticians from operating more than one optician’s
         shop effectively amounts to a restriction on the freedom of establishment of natural persons within the meaning of Article
         EC, notwithstanding the alleged absence of discrimination on grounds of the nationality of the professionals concerned.
         
      
As far as legal persons are concerned, it must also be noted that, as the Hellenic Republic has moreover acknowledged, their
         freedom of establishment is restricted by the conditions laid down in Article 27(4) of Law No 2646/and, in exercising that
         freedom, legal persons are treated in the same way as natural persons under Article EC. 
      
 Justification for the restrictions on the freedom of establishment found to exist
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission considers that the restrictions on the freedom of establishment in this case are either inadequate for the
         attainment of the claimed objective of protecting public health, or are disproportionate in relation to that objective. Public
         health could be protected by guaranteeing that certain actions will be carried out by qualified, salaried opticians or under
         their supervision. As far as the question of liability is concerned, it would be possible to lay down less restrictive legal
         provisions to protect the interests of the customers who might be the victims of opticians’ professional activities. 
      
The Hellenic Republic claims that the prohibition of the operation of more than one shop by any natural person was enacted
         for overriding reasons of general interest in relation to the protection of public health. The Greek legislature wished to
         safeguard the personal relationship of trust within the optician’s shop, as well as, in case of fault, the absolute and unlimited
         liability of the optician who operates or owns the shop. Only an optician, a qualified specialist, who participates directly
         in the running of his shop without expending physical and mental energy on running other shops can guarantee the desired result.
         
      
According to the Greek Government, the objectives pursued could not have been attained by measures less restrictive of the
         freedom of establishment. 
      
As regards legal persons, the high level of participation of opticians in the share capital that is required by Law No 2646/reduces the risk of the complete commercialisation of opticians’ shops. The principle of proportionality must be reconciled
         with the need to protect public health. To achieve such protection, the Hellenic Republic will continue to try to preserve
         personal contact between opticians and their customers, and to require absolute and unlimited liability on the part of opticians.
         
      
 Findings of the Court
A national measure which, even though it is applicable without discrimination on grounds of nationality, is liable to hinder
         or render less attractive the exercise by Community nationals of fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty may be justified
         by overriding reasons of general interest, provided that the measure in question is appropriate for ensuring attainment of
         the objective pursued and does not go beyond what is necessary for that purpose (see, in particular, Kraus, cited above, paragraph 32). 
      
In this case, it is sufficient to note that the objective of protecting public health upon which the Hellenic Republic relies
         may be achieved by measures which are less restrictive of the freedom of establishment both for natural and legal persons,
         for example by requiring the presence of qualified, salaried opticians or associates in each optician’s shop, rules concerning
         civil liability for the actions of others, and rules requiring professional indemnity insurance. 
      
It is thus clear that the disputed restrictions go beyond what is required in order to achieve the objective pursued. There
         is therefore no justification for them. 
      
It follows that the complaints which the Commission has put forward are well founded. 
That being the case, it should be declared that, 
–      by enacting and maintaining in force Law No 971/79, which does not permit a qualified optician as a natural person to operate
         more than one optician’s shop, the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC, and that, 
      
–      by enacting and maintaining in force Law No 971/and Law No 2646/98, under which the establishment by a legal person of
         an optician’s shop in Greece is subject to the following conditions: 
      
–       authorisation for the establishment and operation of the optician’s shop must have been granted to a recognised optician who
         is a natural person, the person holding the authorisation to operate the shop must hold at least 50% of the company’s share
         capital and must participate at least to that extent in the profits and losses of the company, and the company must be in
         the form of a collective or limited partnership, and 
      
–       the optician in question may participate at most in one other company owning an optician’s shop, subject to the condition
         that the authorisation for the establishment and operation of that shop is in the name of another authorised optician, 
      
the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles EC and EC. 
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Hellenic Republic has been unsuccessful, it must be ordered to
         pay the costs, in accordance with the form of order sought by the Commission. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that by enacting and maintaining in force Law No 971/on the exercise of the profession of optician and on shops
            for the sale of optical articles, which does not permit a qualified optician as a natural person to operate more than one
            optician’s shop, the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC;
2.      Declares that by enacting and maintaining in force Law No 971/and Law No 2646/on the development of a national social
            security system and other provisions, under which the establishment by a legal person of an optician’s shop in Greece is subject
            to the following conditions: 
–       authorisation for the establishment and operation of the optician’s shop must have been granted to a recognised optician who
            is a natural person, the person holding the authorisation to operate the shop must hold at least 50% of the company’s share
            capital and must participate at least to that extent in the profits and losses of the company, and the company must be in
            the form of a collective or limited partnership, and 
–       the optician in question may participate at most in one other company owning an optician’s shop, subject to the condition
            that the authorisation for the establishment and operation of that shop is in the name of another authorised optician,
the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles EC and EC;
3.      Orders the Hellenic Republic to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Greek.
      
Top  
 