
Case C-586/Angelo Rubino
v
Ministero dell'Università e della Ricerca
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Tribunale amministrativo regionale del Lazio)
(Directive 2005/36/EC – Recognition of diplomas – ‘Regulated profession’ – Selection of a predefined number of persons on the basis of a comparative assessment conferring a qualification limited in
         time – National academic qualification for appointment – University lecturer)
      
Summary of the Judgment
Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Workers – Recognition of professional qualifications – Scope
            of Directive 2005/(Arts EC and EC; European Parliament and Council Directive 2005/36, Art. 3(1)(a))
The fact that access to a profession is reserved to candidates who have been successful in a procedure to select a predefined
         number of persons on the basis of a comparative assessment of the candidates rather than by application of absolute criteria,
         which confers a qualification the validity of which is strictly limited in time, does not mean that that profession constitutes
         a regulated profession within the meaning of Article 3(1)(a) of Directive 2005/on the recognition of professional qualifications.
      
Nevertheless, in the context of such a selection procedure, Articles EC and EC, which guarantee to the nationals of
         the Member States access to activities, in a self-employed or employed capacity, without discrimination based on nationality,
         require qualifications obtained in other Member States to be accorded their proper value and to be duly taken into account.
      
(see paras 34-36, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Eighth Chamber)
December (*)
      
(Directive 2005/36/EC – Recognition of diplomas – ‘Regulated profession’ – Selection of a predefined number of persons on the basis of a comparative assessment conferring a qualification limited in
         time – National academic qualification for appointment – University lecturer)
      
In Case C‑586/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Tribunale amministrativo regionale del Lazio (Italy), made
         by decision of July 2008, received at the Court on December 2008, in the proceedings
      
Angelo Rubino
v
Ministero dell’Università e della Ricerca,
THE COURT (Eighth Chamber),
composed of C. Toader, President of the Chamber, K. Schiemann (Rapporteur) and P. Kūris, Judges,
Advocate General: N. Jääskinen,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Mr Rubino, by F. Brunello, avvocato,
–        the Italian Government, by G. Palmieri, acting as Agent, and by F. Quadri, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Greek Government, by E. Skandalou and S. Vodina, acting as Agents,
–        the Slovak Government, by B. Ricziová, acting as Agent,
–        the European Commission, by H. Støvlbæk and L. Prete, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles 3(1)(c) EC and 47(1) EC, and of Directive 2005/36/EC
         of the European Parliament and of the Council of September on the recognition of professional qualifications (OJ L 255, p. 22).
      
The reference has been made in the course of proceedings between Mr Rubino and the Ministero dell’Università e della Ricerca
         (Ministry for Universities and Research; ‘the Ministry’) concerning the Ministry’s rejection of Mr Rubino’s request to be
         included in the list of holders of the national academic qualification for appointment as a lecturer (‘the NAQ’) held by the
         Ministry.
      
 Legal context
 Directive 2005/Directive 2005/reorganised and rationalised the provisions of earlier directives and, in particular, replaces Council Directive 89/48/EEC
         of December on a general system for the recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of professional
         education and training of at least three years’ duration (OJ L 19, p. 16) and Council Directive 92/51/EEC of June
         on a second general system for the recognition of professional education and training to supplement Directive 89/(OJ
         L 209, p. 25). In accordance with recital in the preamble to Directive 2005/36, the recasting by that directive does
         not affect the mechanism of recognition established by Directives 89/and 92/51.
      
It is apparent from Article 2(1) of Directive 2005/that it is to apply to all nationals of a Member State wishing to pursue
         a ‘regulated profession’ in a Member State other than that in which they obtained their professional qualifications.
      
Article 3(1)(a) and (b) of Directive 2005/contains the following definitions:
      
‘For the purposes of this Directive, the following definitions apply:
(a)      “regulated profession”: a professional activity or group of professional activities, access to which, the pursuit of which,
         or one of the modes of pursuit of which is subject, directly or indirectly, by virtue of legislative, regulatory or administrative
         provisions to the possession of specific professional qualifications; in particular, the use of a professional title limited
         by legislative, regulatory or administrative provisions to holders of a given professional qualification shall constitute
         a mode of pursuit ... 
      
(b)      “professional qualifications”: qualifications attested by evidence of formal qualifications, an attestation of competence
         referred to in Article 11, point (a)(i) and/or professional experience’.
      
Article of Directive 2005/is headed ‘Levels of qualification’. Article 11(a)(i) provides:
      
‘For the purpose of applying Article 13, the professional qualifications are grouped under the following levels as described
         below: 
      
(a)      an attestation of competence issued by a competent authority in the home Member State designated pursuant to legislative,
         regulatory or administrative provisions of that Member State, on the basis of: 
      
(i)      … a specific examination without prior training …’
Article of Directive 2005/36, headed ‘Conditions for recognition’, provides in paragraph thereof:
      
‘If access to or pursuit of a regulated profession in a host Member State is contingent upon possession of specific professional
         qualifications, the competent authority of that Member State shall permit access to and pursuit of that profession, under
         the same conditions as apply to its nationals, to applicants possessing the attestation of competence or evidence of formal
         qualifications required by another Member State in order to gain access to and pursue that profession on its territory. 
      
Attestations of competence or evidence of formal qualifications shall satisfy the following conditions:
…
(b)      they shall attest a level of professional qualification at least equivalent to the level immediately prior to that which is
         required in the host Member State, as described in Article 11.’
      
 National legislation
On November 2007, Legislative Decree No implementing Directive 2005/36/EC on the recognition of professional qualifications
         and Directive 2006/100/EC adapting certain Directives in the field of freedom of movement of persons, by reason of the accession
         of Bulgaria and Romania (decreto legislativo n. – Attuazione della direttiva 2005/36/CE relativa al riconoscimento delle
         qualifiche professionali, nonché della direttiva 2006/100/CE che adegua determinate direttive sulla libera circolazione delle
         persone a seguito dell’adesione di Bulgaria e Romania) was adopted (ordinary supplement to GURI No of November 2007;
         ‘Legislative Decree No 206/2007’).
      
However, according to the national court’s interpretation of that legislative decree, it is not applicable to the profession
         of university lecturer.
      
In Italy, it is not necessary either to hold a formal qualification or have professional experience to join that profession.
      
The selection process for university lecturers is governed in Italy by Law No laying down new provisions concerning university
         lecturers and researchers and authorising the Government to reorganise recruitment of university lecturers (legge n. –
         Nuove disposizioni concernenti i professori e i ricercatori universitari e delega al Governo per il riordino del reclutamento
         dei professori universitari) of November (GURI No of November 2005; ‘Law No 230/2005’) and by Legislative Decree
         No reforming the rules governing the recruitment of university lecturers in accordance with Article 1(5) of Law No of November (decreto legislativo n. – Riordino della disciplina del reclutamento dei professori universitari, a
         norma dell’articolo 1, comma della legge novembre 2005, n. 230) of April (GURI No of May 2006; ‘Legislative
         Decree No 164/2006’). 
      
Article 1(5) to (9) of Law No 230/provides as follows:
      
‘5.      In order to reform the rules governing the recruitment of university lecturers, while ensuring a selection process suitable
         for the type of functions to be carried out, the Government shall have authority to adopt, within six months of the date of
         entry into force of this law and having regard to the autonomy of the universities, one or more legislative decrees, in compliance
         with the following principles and criteria:
      
(a)      before June each year, the Minister for Education, Universities and Research shall institute, by decree and by academic
         sector and discipline, procedures to award the [NAQ], separately for first-level lecturers and associate professors, by laying
         down, inter alia: 
      
(i)      the detailed rules for defining the maximum number of persons who can obtain the [NAQ] for each category and discipline, according
         to requirements; that number shall be indicated by the universities, increased by a maximum quota of 40%, financial cover
         being guaranteed, with the proviso that the [NAQ] shall not imply any entitlement to teach; procedures and time-limits in
         respect of the invitation to take part in, performance of and conclusion of the aptitude tests which are held at the universities,
         ensuring that the measures and decisions taken by the selection boards are published; in each discipline, at least one post
         must, however, be offered to the holders of the [NAQ] per 5-year period for each category; 
      
…
6.      Candidates considered suitable and not called upon following procedures already organised or whose files have been approved
         shall retain the [NAQ] for a period of five years from its award. Appointment to first-level lecturer or associate professor
         posts by the various universities, by calling upon successful candidates found to be suitable … must in any event be made
         in accordance with the procedures … 
      
…
8.      The universities shall fill first-level lecturer and associate professor posts following procedures governed by their own
         regulations, which ensure a comparative assessment of the candidates and publication of decisions, and are reserved to those
         persons who hold the [NAQ] referred to in paragraph 5(a) … 
      
9.      The universities … may fill a percentage not exceeding 10% of first-level lecturer and associate professor posts by direct
         appointment of foreign or Italian specialist researchers employed abroad who have obtained abroad a teaching qualification
         at the same level …’ 
      
Article of Legislative Decree No 164/2006, entitled ‘National academic qualification’, provides:
      
‘1.      The [NAQ] shall be obtained following procedures instituted by Ministerial Decree, for each academic sector and separately
         for the categories of first-level lecturer and associate professor. 
      
2.      The [NAQ] shall be awarded within the limits of the quotas set in the notice sent to candidates who hold the ‘piena maturità
         scientifica’ for the category of first-level lecturer and the ‘maturità scientifica’ for the category of associate professor.
      
3.      Possession of the [NAQ] shall constitute a mandatory condition for participation in the procedures referred to in Article 1(8)
         of the law and shall not imply any entitlement to hold a post as a university lecturer. 
      
4.      For the purposes of participation in the recruitment procedures, the [NAQ] shall be valid for four years from its award.’
         
      
Article of Legislative Decree No 164/2006, entitled ‘Work of the evaluation committees’, provides:
      
‘1.      The committees which sit at the universities where the aptitude tests are held shall elect their chairperson and define the
         general criteria and procedures for comparative assessment of the candidates applying, so far as is possible, nationally and
         internationally recognised parameters.
      
…
3.      In order to assess academic output, other academic qualifications and the general curriculum vitae of the candidate, including
         teaching activity and any professional and organisational experience, the committee shall take account of the following criteria:
      
(a)      the originality and innovation of the candidate’s academic output including publications, patents and innovative projects
         and methodological rigour;
      
(b)      the individual contribution of the candidate, ascertained analytically, to group work, where [that contribution] can be identified;
(c)      leadership and coordination of research groups;
(d)      the suitability of the candidate’s activity as regards the disciplines in the sector for which the procedure has been instituted
         or the interdisciplinary matters which they cover;
      
(e)      the academic importance of publications and their distribution within the academic community;
(f)      whether academic output has been continuous over time, with regard also to the development of knowledge in the specific sector;
(g)      the importance and nature of teaching posts, certified by the bodies concerned;
(h)      the importance and nature of activities carried out in the clinical and therapeutic domain and in any other professional or
         occupational domain in which associated experience and competence are expressly required or supplement the candidate’s general
         profile. 
      
4.      The committee’s decision as to the candidate’s academic output, qualifications and overall merit shall be reached by reference
         specifically to the criteria set out in paragraphs and 3.
      
5.      After assessment of academic output and qualifications, in the context of the aptitude tests for the category of associate
         professor, the candidates shall take a teaching test and defend their academic output. The call for candidates may provide
         that the tests are to be taken in the foreign language which is the object of the comparative assessment. In [the context
         of] the tests for the category of first-level lecturers, the candidates shall defend their academic output and those who do
         not hold the qualification of associate professor shall also take a teaching test which supplements the general assessment.
      
…
9.      On completion of its work, the committee shall indicate, after a comparative assessment, by decision of the majority of its
         members, the candidates considered worthy of the qualification of [NAQ] within the limits of the quotas fixed in the call
         for candidates.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
After working as an academic since 1991, in Mr Rubino, an Italian national, obtained the ‘Habilitation’ (Facultas Legendi)
         in the discipline of oceanography and the ‘Lehrbefugnis’ (Venia Legendi) in the Faculty of Earth Sciences, University of Hamburg
         (Germany), which qualify him to teach at a university as a full professor in the German higher education system. 
      
Mr Rubino currently works as a physical oceanographer at the Cà Foscari University of Venice (Italy) and since has been
         on the roll of university researchers.
      
Since September 2007, Mr Rubino has, on a number of occasions, applied to have the qualifications he acquired in Germany
         recognised in Italy, in order to be entered on the register of holders of the NAQ.
      
The Ministry has, however, rejected those applications, by decision of January 2008. It disputes the equivalence of the
         ‘Lehrbefugnis’ obtained in Germany to the NAQ in the Italian university system, taking the view that Legislative Decree No 206/was not applicable. It is of the view that the profession of lecturer does not constitute a regulated profession in Italy,
         as it concerns staff recruited by means of a selection procedure in which candidates may participate without being required
         to hold a specific educational qualification.
      
Mr Rubino brought an action before the Tribunale amministrativo regionale del Lazio (Regional Administrative Court of Lazio)
         against the decision of the Ministry, submitting that it was contrary to Community law, in particular to Directive 2005/36.
         
      
Taking the view that there was some doubt as to whether the Italian rules were compatible with Community law, the Tribunale
         amministrativo regionale del Lazio decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following question to the Court for a preliminary
         ruling:
      
‘Is it contrary to the Community principles concerning the abolition of obstacles to the free movement of persons and services
         between Member States of the [European] Community, and the mutual recognition of diplomas, certificates and other evidence
         of formal qualifications, set out in Articles 3(1)(c) [EC] and 47(1) [EC], and the provisions contained in Directive 2005/… for national legislation, such as the [national] rules laid down in Legislative Decree No 206/2007, to exclude university
         lecturers from the scope of the regulated professions for purposes of the recognition of professional qualifications?’
      
 The question referred
According to the national court, it is not necessary either to hold a formal qualification or have professional experience
         in order to have access to or pursue the profession of university lecturer in Italy.
      
Accordingly, the question referred must be understood as asking, essentially, whether the fact that access to that profession
         is reserved to candidates who have been successful in a selection procedure such as that leading to the NAQ means that that
         profession constitutes a regulated profession within the meaning of Article 3(1)(a) of Directive 2005/36.
      
It should be borne in mind, in that context, that the definition of ‘regulated profession’ for the purposes of Directive 2005/is a matter of Community law (see, by analogy, with regard to Directive 89/48, Case C‑234/Fernández de Bobadilla [1999] ECR I‑4773, paragraph 14, and Case C‑285/Burbaud [2003] ECR I‑8219, paragraph 43). 
      
It follows from Article 3(1)(a) of Directive 2005/that where the conditions for taking up or pursuing a professional activity
         are directly or indirectly governed by laws, regulations or administrative provisions requiring possession of certain professional
         qualifications, that activity constitutes a regulated profession. 
      
Under Articles 3(1)(b) and 11(a)(i) of Directive 2005/36, the professional qualifications in question may, inter alia, consist
         of qualifications attested by evidence of formal qualifications or an attestation of competence issued on the basis of a specific
         examination without prior training. 
      
Mr Rubino submits that the NAQ constitutes an attestation of competence issued on the basis of a specific examination without
         prior training within the meaning of Article 11(a)(i) of Directive 2005/36. He infers that it is a professional qualification
         within the meaning of Article 3(1)(b) of that directive and that, consequently, the profession of university lecturer is,
         in Italy, a regulated profession within the meaning of Article 3(1)(a) of that directive. Mr Rubino concludes that, by virtue
         of Article 13(1) thereof, the qualifications which he obtained in Germany entitle him to be entered in the register of holders
         of the NAQ.
      
It must, however, be noted that it follows from case-law that the general systems for the recognition of diplomas laid down
         by Directives 89/and 92/do not concern the choice of selection and recruitment procedures for filling posts and they
         cannot be relied on as the basis for a right actually to be recruited. Those systems do no more than require the recognition
         of qualifications obtained in one Member State in order to allow their holder to apply for a job in another Member State,
         in accordance with the selection and recruitment procedures which govern access to regulated professions in that Member State
         (see, to that effect, with regard to Directive 89/48, Burbaud, paragraph 91). Those principles remain unchanged following the reorganisation and rationalisation resulting from the adoption
         of Directive 2005/36.
      
Accordingly, an applicant cannot rely on Directive 2005/to obtain a dispensation from part of a selection and recruitment
         procedure.
      
It is apparent from the documents before the Court and from the Italian rules cited by the national court that obtaining the
         NAQ constitutes a selection stage in the recruitment procedure for university lecturers.
      
That procedure comprises two stages the first of which consists in obtaining the NAQ. The names of the holders of that qualification
         are entered in a register and can subsequently, in the second stage of the selection procedure, apply for a specific post
         in a university and, consequently, be recruited on the basis of criteria which vary from university to university.
      
With regard, more particularly, to the selection procedure leading to obtaining the NAQ, Article 1(5)(a)(1) of Law No 230/and Articles 3(2) and 9(9) of Legislative Decree No 164/provide that the maximum number of persons who can obtain that
         qualification is fixed in advance for each discipline according to the needs indicated by the universities. In addition, it
         follows from Article 1(8) of Law No 230/and Article of Legislative Decree No 164/that selection is on the basis
         of a comparative assessment of the candidates who sit the tests rather than by application of absolute criteria. Furthermore,
         by virtue of Articles 1(6) of Law No 230/and 3(4) of Legislative Decree No 164/2006, the NAQ is valid for a limited period
         of time. 
      
It must be pointed out that the fact of having been successful in a procedure to select a predefined number of persons on
         the basis of a comparative assessment of the candidates rather than by application of absolute criteria, which confers a qualification
         the validity of which is strictly limited in time, cannot be regarded as a professional qualification within the meaning of
         Article 3(1)(b) of Directive 2005/36.
      
In that context, the fact cited by Mr Rubino that Article 1(9) of Law No 230/permits universities, in derogation from
         the rules normally applicable, to fill 10% of lecturer positions by direct appointment of foreign or Italian specialist researchers
         employed abroad who have obtained abroad a teaching qualification at the same level is not in itself relevant to the answer
         to be given to the question referred in respect of Directive 2005/36. Moreover, it is not in dispute that, in the main proceedings,
         Mr Rubino does not rely on that derogating provision, but seeks to be included in the register of holders of the NAQ without
         having to undergo the selection procedure laid down by the applicable national rules.
      
Having regard to the reference in the question referred to the Court to the provisions of the EC Treaty concerning fundamental
         freedoms, it must nevertheless be recalled that Articles EC and EC guarantee to the nationals of the Member States access
         to activities, in a self-employed or employed capacity, without discrimination based on nationality. Consequently, it is for
         the national authorities to ensure, in particular, that, in the context of a selection procedure such as that leading to registration
         as a holder of the NAQ, qualifications obtained in other Member States are accorded their proper value and are duly taken
         into account (see, by analogy, Burbaud, paragraphs and 100). 
      
In the light of all of the foregoing, the answer to the question referred to the Court is that the fact that access to a profession
         is reserved to candidates who have been successful in a procedure to select a predefined number of persons on the basis of
         a comparative assessment of the candidates rather than by application of absolute criteria, which confers a qualification
         the validity of which is strictly limited in time, does not mean that that profession constitutes a regulated profession within
         the meaning of Article 3(1)(a) of Directive 2005/36.
      
Nevertheless, Articles EC and EC require qualifications obtained in other Member States to be accorded their proper
         value and to be duly taken into account in such a procedure.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Eighth Chamber) hereby rules:
The fact that access to a profession is reserved to candidates who have been successful in a procedure to select a predefined
            number of persons on the basis of a comparative assessment of the candidates rather than by application of absolute criteria,
            which confers a qualification the validity of which is strictly limited in time, does not mean that that profession constitutes
            a regulated profession within the meaning of Article 3(1)(a) of Directive 2005/36/EC of the European Parliament and of the
            Council of September on the recognition of professional qualifications. 
Nevertheless, Articles EC and EC require qualifications obtained in other Member States to be accorded their proper
            value and to be duly taken into account in such a procedure. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 