
Case C-370/Criminal proceedings
against
Uwe Kay Festersen
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Vestre Landsret)
(Freedom of establishment – Free movement of capital – Articles EC and EC – Restrictions on the acquisition of agricultural property – Requirement that the acquirer take up fixed residence on the agricultural property)
Opinion of Advocate General Stix-Hackl delivered on October Judgment of the Court (Third Chamber), January Summary of the Judgment
Free movement of capital – Restrictions on the acquisition of agricultural property
(Art. EC)
Article EC precludes national legislation from laying down as a condition for acquiring an agricultural property the requirement
         that the acquirer take up his fixed residence on that property for eight years, irrespective of particular circumstances relating
         to individual characteristics of the agricultural land concerned.
      
It can be accepted that national legislation containing such a requirement, which seeks to avoid the acquisition of agricultural
         land for purely speculative reasons, and which is thus likely to facilitate the preferential appropriation of that land by
         persons wishing to farm it does pursue a public interest objective in a Member State in which agricultural land is a limited
         natural resource. However, the residence requirement constitutes a measure which goes beyond what is necessary to attain such
         an objective. First, it turns out to be particularly restrictive in that it restricts not only the free movement of capital
         but also the right of the acquirer to choose his place of residence freely, guaranteed by the European Convention on Human
         Rights and protected in the Community legal order, thereby adversely affecting a fundamental right. Nor is there anything
         to indicate that other measures less restrictive than that requirement could not have have been adopted in order to attain
         the objective pursued. Such a requirement, a fortiori when accompanied by a condition that residence be maintained for several
         years, goes beyond what could be regarded as necessary.
      
(see paras 33-37, 41-42, 50, operative part 1)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
January (*)
      
(Freedom of establishment – Free movement of capital – Articles EC and EC – Restrictions on the acquisition of agricultural property – Requirement that the acquirer take up fixed residence on the agricultural property)
In Case C-370/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Vestre Landsret (Denmark), made by decision of October
         2005, received at the Court on October 2005, in the criminal proceedings against
      
Uwe Kay Festersen,
      
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of A. Rosas, President of the Chamber, A. Tizzano, A. Borg Barthet, J. Malenovský (Rapporteur) and U. Lõhmus, Judges,
Advocate General: C. Stix-Hackl,
Registrar: B. Fülöp, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on July 2006,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Mr Festersen, by K. Berning, advokat,
–       the Danish Government, by J. Molde, acting as Agent, and P. Biering, advokat, 
–       the Norwegian Government, by K. Moen and I. Holten, acting as Agents,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by H. Støvlbæk, acting as Agent,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on October 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles EC and EC. 
The reference was made in the context of criminal proceedings brought against Mr Festersen for breach of the obligation to
         take up fixed residence on the agricultural property which he had acquired on the territory of the municipality of Bov in
         southern Jutland (Denmark).
      
 National law
Under Paragraph of the Danish Law on agriculture (landbrugsloven), in the version resulting from Codified Law No (lovbekendtgørelse
         nr. 598) of July (‘the Law on agriculture’): 
      
‘1.      Agricultural properties shall be subject to an agricultural-use obligation under the provisions of this Law.
2.      “Agricultural property” shall mean property which is registered as such in the land register. 
…’
Paragraph 4(6) of the Law on agriculture provides: 
‘When an agricultural property is divided up or otherwise reduced to a surface area of less than hectares, the agricultural-use
         obligation shall no longer be applicable unless the owner wishes it still to apply. …’
      
Under Paragraph of that law:
‘1.      An agricultural property shall be maintained as an independent business and provided with an appropriate residential building
         from which the land shall be farmed by the residents, subject to Paragraph 8(4) and (6), Paragraph 9(1) and (2) and Paragraph
         10.
      
2.      The property shall be farmed properly having regard to the opportunities for commercial exploitation, the livestock health
         requirements, nature and the environment. 
      
…’
Paragraph of that law states: 
‘1.      Title to an agricultural property which is situated in an agricultural zone and has an area exceeding hectares may be acquired
         if:
      
…
(4)      the acquirer takes up fixed residence on the property within six months after acquisition,
(5)      the acquirer farms the property himself 
… 
2.      Title to an agricultural property which has an area not exceeding hectares may be acquired if the acquirer fulfils the
         requirements of subparagraph 1(1) to (4).
      
…’
Under Paragraph of the Law on agriculture: 
‘1.      Without prejudice to the cases covered by Paragraphs 16, and 17a, title to an agricultural property in an agricultural
         zone may be acquired only with the authorisation of the Minister for Food, Agriculture and Fisheries.
      
…
4. The Minister may authorise the acquisition of an agricultural property, if:
(1)      the acquisition is for the purposes of a use within the meaning of Paragraph 4(1)(1) and it is expected that the property
         will be used for the relevant purpose in the near future;
      
(2)      the acquisition is for business purposes relating to a non‑agricultural use which is otherwise to be regarded as desirable
         taking into account the general interests of society;
      
(3)      the acquisition is for particular purposes, including use for scientific, training, general social, health or general recreational
         purposes;
      
(4)      the acquisition is in connection with the creation of water meadows, the restoration of the environment or similar circumstances,
         or
      
(5)      other special circumstances mitigate in its favour.
…’
Paragraph 27(2) of the Law on agriculture states:
‘Where an application for authorisation to acquire or lease agricultural land is not submitted in due time, the competent
         minister may impose on the owner an order to dispose of the property within a period of a minimum of six months and a maximum
         of one year or impose on the tenant or lessee an order to cease use within a similar period. The same applies where authorisation
         is refused or lapses or the conditions placed on authorisation are not satisfied …’
      
Paragraph of that law provides: 
‘1. A fine shall be imposed on any person who:
…
(3)      fails to comply with an order under Paragraph 8(5) and (7), Paragraph 9(5) or Paragraph 27.
…’
Under Paragraph of Circular No of February relating to the Law on agriculture: 
‘Authorisation under Paragraph of the Law [on agriculture] for the acquisition of agricultural property with an exemption
         from the residence requirement for an indefinite period may be granted only in exceptional cases (see Paragraph 16(1)(4) of
         the Law on agriculture). This applies for example in cases where due to the characteristics of the site it is physically impossible
         to fulfil the residence requirement for a large part of the year. The provision must be applied restrictively.’
      
According to Paragraph 4(1) of Decree No of July relating to training and residence requirements in connection
         with the Law on agriculture (bekendtgørelse nr. af juli om uddannelseskrav og bopælskrav m.v. i henhold til landbrugsloven),
         the requirement of fixed residence on an agricultural property presupposes that the person lives in a settled and continuous
         manner on that property and that he spends the night there, except in the event of special circumstances of fixed duration.
         That person must be listed in the local authority’s population register as residing at the property in such a way that it
         constitutes his principal residence for tax purposes. 
      
Paragraph 4(2) of that decree provides that the acquirer must fulfil the residence requirement for eight years from the acquisition
         of an agricultural property.
      
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Mr Festersen, a German national, acquired, in 1998, a property in southern Jutland which, according to the land register,
         is designated an agricultural property. It consists of two plots: one of an area of 0.hectares situated in an urban zone
         with buildings on it and the other, a piece of meadow land, of an area of 3.hectares situated in an agricultural zone.
      
Since Mr Festersen did not satisfy the requirement that residence be taken up on that property, the Agricultural Committee
         for Southern Jutland gave him notice to put his situation in order by ordering him, on September 2000, to dispose of the
         property within six months, unless he had placed the ownership on a legal footing beforehand by acquiring an exemption from
         the agricultural-use obligation or by fulfilling the residence requirement. 
      
On July that committee gave Mr Festersen a new period of six months within which to dispose of the property, unless
         he took the necessary measures before that period expired, either to reduce the area of the property to under hectares and
         at the same time seek an exemption from the agricultural-use obligation or to take up residence on the property.
      
On August 2003, Mr Festersen was ordered by the District Court of Gråsten to pay a fine of DKK on account of infringement
         of Paragraphs 33(1)(3) and 27(2) of the Law on agriculture, in that he had failed to comply with the order of the Agricultural
         Committee for Southern Jutland. He was also ordered to pay a penalty payment of DKK for each month of delay if he failed
         to comply with that order by December 2003.
      
Mr Festersen, who took up residence at the property on June 2003, has been listed in the population register of the municipality
         of Bov as resident at that address since September 2003.
      
He brought an appeal against his conviction before the Vestre Landsret (Western Regional Court) and claimed that it should
         be set aside. The prosecuting authorities contended that the judgment at first instance should be upheld.
      
Mr Festersen and the prosecuting authorities disagreed as to whether the residence requirement under the Law on agriculture
         was compatible with the principles of the freedom of establishment and the free movement of capital as enshrined in Articles
         EC and EC. 
      
Those were the circumstances in which the Vestre Landsret decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Do Article EC and Article EC preclude a Member State from laying down as a condition for acquiring an agricultural property
         the requirement that the acquirer take up fixed residence on that property?
      
Does it matter, as regards the answer to Question 1, that the property cannot constitute a self-sustaining unit and that the
         property’s residential building is situated in an urban zone?’
      
 The questions referred 
 The first question 
By its first question the national court is effectively asking whether the provisions of the EC Treaty concerning the right
         of establishment (Article EC) and the free movement of capital (Article EC) preclude national legislation such as that
         at issue in the main proceedings from laying down as a condition for acquiring an agricultural property the requirement that
         the acquirer take up his fixed residence on that property. 
      
It should be recalled at the outset that the right to acquire, use or dispose of immovable property on the territory of another
         Member State, which is the corollary of freedom of establishment, as is apparent from Article 44(2)(e) EC (Case 305/Commission v Greece [1989] ECR 1461, paragraph 22), generates capital movements when it is exercised (Joined Cases C-515/99, C-519/to C-524/and C-526/to C-540/Reisch and Others [2002] ECR I‑2157, paragraph 29).
      
As is clear from the nomenclature of capital movements set out in Annex I to Council Directive 88/361/EEC of June for the implementation of Article of the Treaty (article repealed by the Treaty of Amsterdam) (OJ L 178, p. 5), capital
         movements include investments in real estate on the territory of a Member State by non-residents. That nomenclature still
         has the same indicative value for the purposes of defining the notion of capital movements (see Case C‑222/Trummer and Mayer [1999] ECR I-1661, paragraph 21; Case C-464/Stefan [2001] ECR I-173, paragraph 5; Reisch and Others, paragraph 30; and Case C‑386/Centro di Musicologia Walter Stauffer [2006] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 22). 
      
It must thus be examined whether national legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings constitutes a restriction
         on capital movements. In that regard, it follows from settled case‑law that the measures prohibited by Article 56(1) EC, as
         restrictions on the movement of capital, include those which are likely to discourage non‑residents from making investments
         in a Member State or to discourage that Member State’s residents to do so in other States (see, to that effect, Case C‑513/Van Hilten-van der Heijden [2006] ECR I‑1957, paragraph 44). 
      
Although the Danish legislation on agriculture does not discriminate between Danish nationals and nationals of the other Member
         States of the European Union or the European Economic Area the fact nevertheless remains that the residence requirement which
         it imposes and which may be waived only with the authorisation of the minister responsible for agriculture restricts the free
         movement of capital. 
      
Such a measure may nevertheless be permitted provided that it pursues an objective in the public interest, that it is applied
         in a non‑discriminatory way and that it respects the principle of proportionality, that is to say that it is appropriate for
         ensuring that the aim pursued is achieved and does not go beyond what is necessary for that purpose (Case C‑302/Konle [1999] ECR I‑3099, paragraph 40; Reisch and Others, paragraph 33; and Case C‑452/Ospelt and Schlössle Weissenberg [2003] ECR I‑9743, paragraph 34). 
      
As regards the condition relating to the pursuance of an objective in the public interest, the Danish Government submits that
         the national legislation seeks, first, to preserve the farming of agricultural land by means of owner-occupancy, which constitutes
         one of the traditional forms of farming in Denmark, and to ensure that agricultural property be occupied and farmed predominantly
         by the owners, second, as a town and country planning measure, to preserve a permanent agricultural community and, third,
         to encourage a reasonable use of the available land by resisting pressure on land. 
      
Such objectives are themselves in the public interest and are capable of justifying restrictions to the free movement of capital
         (see, to that effect, Konle, paragraph 40; Reisch and Others, paragraph 34; and Ospelt and Schlössle Weissenberg, paragraphs and 39). In addition, as the Danish Government and the Commission of the European Communities maintain, those
         objectives are consistent with those of the common agricultural policy which, under Article 33(1)(b) EC, aims ‘to ensure a
         fair standard of living for the agricultural community’ in the working-out of which, according to Article 33(2)(a), account
         must be taken ‘of the particular nature of agricultural activity, which results from the social structure of agriculture and
         from structural and natural disparities between the various agricultural regions’ (see, to that effect, Ospelt and Schlössle Weissenberg, paragraph 40). 
      
As regards the condition of proportionality, it is necessary to check whether the requirement that the acquirer take up his
         fixed residence on the agricultural property acquired constitutes, as submitted by the Danish and Norwegian Governments, an
         appropriate and necessary measure for the attainment of the objectives mentioned in paragraph above. 
      
As regards whether the national measure at issue in the main proceedings is appropriate, it must be observed that it contains
         only a residence requirement and is not coupled, for an acquirer of an agricultural property of less than hectares, with
         a requirement to farm the property personally. Such a measure thus does not appear, in itself, to ensure the attainment of
         the alleged objective seeking to preserve the traditional form of farming by owner-occupiers. 
      
It is true that, as regards the second aim assigned to the Law on agriculture, the residence requirement is likely to contribute,
         by definition, to preserving an agricultural community and it can be met even further by farmers who, in accordance with one
         of the general objectives of the Law on agriculture seeking to encourage the owner-occupancy form of farming, personally farm
         their own land. 
      
However, in the light of the phenomena of both reduction of the number of farms and regrouping of farms, as is apparent from
         the written observations lodged before the Court, and which were not challenged at the hearing, the objective of preserving
         an agricultural community cannot be met where the acquisition is made by a farmer who is already resident on another farm.
         In such a situation, the residence requirement does not guarantee the attainment of that objective, and thus it does not appear
         that that requirement is, in actual fact, appropriate, in itself, for the purpose of attaining such an objective. 
      
In relation to the third aim which the Law on agriculture seeks to attain, it must be found that the residence requirement
         can reduce the number of potential acquirers of agricultural property and, consequently, it is capable of reducing the pressure
         on that land. It can therefore be accepted that national legislation containing such a requirement, which seeks to avoid the
         acquisition of agricultural land for purely speculative reasons, and which is thus likely to facilitate the preferential appropriation
         of that land by persons wishing to farm it does pursue a public interest objective in a Member State in which agricultural
         land is, and this is not challenged, a limited natural resource. 
      
It is thus necessary to ascertain whether the residence requirement constitutes a measure which does not go beyond what is
         necessary to attain such an objective. 
      
In such an assessment account must be taken of the fact that that requirement restricts not only the free movement of capital
         but also the right of the acquirer to choose his place of residence freely, a right which he is, however, guaranteed by Article
         2(1) of Protocol No to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, signed in Rome on November
         (‘the ECHR’). 
      
Article 6(2) EU states that ‘the Union shall respect fundamental rights, as guaranteed by the [ECHR] and as they result from
         the constitutional traditions common to the Member States, as general principles of Community law’ (Case C‑540/Parliament v Council [2006] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 36). 
      
Given that the residence requirement thus adversely affects a fundamental right guaranteed by the ECHR, it therefore turns
         out to be particularly restrictive. The question thus arises whether other measures less restrictive than that requirement
         could have been adopted. 
      
In that regard, the Danish Government submits that the requirement in question cannot be replaced by less restrictive measures
         which would be equally effective in preventing prices of agricultural land intended for production from being affected by
         an application motivated only by the desire to make investments to the detriment of professional farmers. 
      
Although that government submits that the only solution remaining for maintaining prices at the desired level is State regulation
         of those prices, it does not state, however, in what way such a measure would be more restrictive than the residence requirement
         adopted. Nor did it justify in what way another measure, mentioned in the file, of incentives to lease residences acquired
         on agricultural property would prove to be more restrictive than that requirement. In the Danish Government’s observations
         there was also no mention or evaluation of other measures capable, in some circumstances, of being less detrimental to the
         free movement of capital, such as provisions for higher tax on resale of land occurring shortly after acquisition, or even
         the requirement of a substantial minimum duration for leases of agricultural land. 
      
Thus, none of the above enables the Court to find that the residence requirement is necessary to meet the objective sought.
         
      
Even supposing that that requirement is recognised as a measure necessary for meeting the objective sought on the ground that
         it would produce, by itself, positive effects on the property market (in the light of the constraints involved in any change
         of residence which in turn discourage property speculation), it must be pointed out that by coupling that requirement with
         a condition that residence be maintained for at least eight years, such an additional condition clearly goes beyond that which
         could be regarded as necessary, in particular as it implies a long-term suspension of the exercise of the fundamental freedom
         to choose one’s place of residence. 
      
It is true that, as submitted by the Danish Government, Paragraph of the Law on agriculture enables the Minister for Food,
         Agriculture and Fisheries to authorise the acquisition of agricultural land with an indefinite exemption from the residence
         requirement. However, according to Circular No 26, the exercise of that power is strictly limited to ‘exceptional cases’ and
         must be ‘applied restrictively’. 
      
In addition, in providing only one example of such cases, that circular does not inform potential acquirers about the specific
         and objective situations in which a derogation from the residence requirement will be granted or refused. Such vagueness does
         not enable individuals to become familiar with the extent of their rights and obligations resulting from Article EC, so
         that a system of that nature must be regarded as being contrary to the principle of legal certainty (see, to that effect,
         Case C‑483/Commission v France [2002] ECR I‑4781, paragraph 50, and Case C‑463/Commission v Spain [2003] ECR I‑4581, paragraphs and 75). In any event, it does not appear that that system has taken into account the situation
         of citizens of the Union who are not resident in Denmark in order to avoid discriminatory application. 
      
Accordingly, the residence requirement, particularly since it is coupled in this case with a condition that residence be maintained
         for eight years, to which the acquisition of agricultural properties of less than hectares is made subject by the national
         legislation at issue in the main proceedings does not appear to be a measure which is proportionate to the objective pursued
         and therefore constitutes a restriction to the free movement of capital which is incompatible with Article EC. 
      
The Danish Government must be considered still to be claiming that the residence requirement at issue in the main proceedings
         must also fall within the derogation laid down in Protocol No annexed to the Treaty, according to which ‘notwithstanding
         the provisions of this Treaty, Denmark may maintain the existing legislation on the acquisition of second homes’.
      
It must however be found, in that regard, that the requirement to take up residence on the agricultural property acquired
         applies irrespective of whether the residence at issue is a principal or second home. Protocol No cannot, therefore, effectively
         be relied on to justify such a requirement. 
      
In the light of all the foregoing, there is no need to examine the questions concerning the interpretation of Article EC.
         
      
The answer to the first question must therefore be that Article EC precludes national legislation such as that at issue
         in the main proceedings from laying down as a condition for acquiring an agricultural property the requirement that the acquirer
         take up fixed residence on that property
      
 The second question
By its second question the national court is effectively asking whether the interpretation of Article EC required by the
         first question would be different where the agricultural property acquired did not constitute a viable farm and the residential
         building was situated in an urban zone. 
      
It results from the answer to the first question that Article EC precludes the residence requirement at issue, irrespective
         of particular circumstances relating to individual characteristics of the agricultural land concerned. Circumstances of that
         nature, such as those raised by the national court in its second question, are therefore irrelevant for the interpretation
         of that article. 
      
Consequently, the answer to the second question must be that that interpretation of Article EC would not be different where
         the agricultural property acquired did not constitute a viable farm and the residential building was situated in an urban
         zone. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article EC precludes national legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings from laying down as a condition
            for acquiring an agricultural property the requirement that the acquirer take up fixed residence on that property.
2.      That interpretation of Article EC would not be different where the agricultural property acquired did not constitute a
            viable farm and the residential building was situated in an urban zone.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Danish.
      
Top  
 