
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-110/Commission of the European Communities
v
Council of the European Union
(Aid granted by the Portuguese Government to pig farmers – Aid intended to allow the repayment of aid declared incompatible with the common market – Council decision declaring such aid compatible with the common market – Illegality – Third subparagraph of Article 88(2) EC)
Summary of the Judgment
State aid – Power of the Council to authorise aid by way of derogation in view of exceptional circumstances – Conditions for
            exercise – Application to the Council by the Member State concerned before a decision by the Commission declaring the aid
            incompatible with the common market and taking of a decision within a period of three months – Limit – Thwarting of a previous
            decision by the Commission
(Arts EC, EC and EC)
The intention of the EC Treaty, in providing through Article EC for aid to be kept under constant review and supervised
         by the Commission, is that the finding that aid may be incompatible with the common market is to be arrived at, subject to
         review by the Community judicature, by means of an appropriate procedure which it is the Commission’s responsibility to set
         in motion. Articles EC and EC thus reserve a central role for the Commission in determining whether aid is incompatible.
         
      
As is clear from its very wording, the third subparagraph of Article 88(2) EC covers an exceptional case. In fact, the Council,
         acting unanimously, ‘on application by a Member State’, may decide that aid which that State is granting or intends to grant
         must be regarded as compatible with the common market ‘in derogation from the provisions of Article or from the regulations
         provided for in Article 89’, if such a decision is justified by ‘exceptional circumstances’.
      
The power conferred upon the Council by the third subparagraph of Article 88(2) EC being therefore clearly exceptional in
         character, the further provisions in the third and fourth subparagraphs of Article 88(2), whereby, on the one hand, application
         to the Council by a Member State suspends examination in progress at the Commission for a period of three months, and, on
         the other, in the absence of a decision by the Council within that period, the Commission is to give a ruling, undeniably
         indicate that, where that period has expired, the Council is no longer competent to adopt a decision under that third subparagraph
         in relation to the aid concerned. The taking of decisions the operative parts of which might prove contradictory is thereby
         avoided.
      
Consequently, if the Member State concerned has made no application to the Council under the third subparagraph of Article
         88(2) EC before the Commission declares the aid in question incompatible with the common market and thereby closes the procedure
         referred to in the first subparagraph of Article 88(2), the Council is no longer authorised to exercise the exceptional power
         conferred upon it by the third subparagraph in order to declare such aid compatible with the common market.
      
Nor can the Council thwart the effectiveness of such a decision by declaring compatible with the common market, in accordance
         with that provision, an aid designed to compensate the beneficiaries of the unlawful aid declared incompatible with the common
         market for the repayments they are required to make pursuant to that decision.
      
(see paras 29-33, 45)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Full Court)June 2004(1)
(Aid granted by the Portuguese Government to pig farmers  –  Aid intended to allow the repayment of aid declared incompatible with the common market  –  Council decision declaring such aid compatible with the common market  –  Illegality  –  Third subparagraph of Article 88(2) EC)
 In Case C-110/02,
            
Commission of the European Communities,  represented by F. Santaolalla Gadea, D. Triantafyllou and V. Di Bucci, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant,
v
Council of the European Union, represented by J. Carbery and F. Florindo Gijón, acting as Agents, 
            
defendant, supported byPortuguese Republic, represented by L. Fernandes and I. Palma, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
and andandFrench Republic, represented by  G. de Bergues and F. Million, acting as Agents, 
            
 APPLICATION for the annulment of Council Decision 2002/114/EC of January authorising the Government of Portugal to
            grant aid to Portuguese pig farmers who were beneficiaries of the measures granted in and (OJ L 43, p. 18),
            
THE COURT (Full Court),,
 composed of:  V. Skouris, President,  P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas, C. Gulmann, J.-P. Puissochet and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues,
             Presidents of Chambers,  A. La Pergola, R. Schintgen,  F. Macken, N. Colneric,  S. von Bahr and K. Lenaerts  (Rapporteur),
             Judges,
            
 Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs, Registrar: R. Grass,
            
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By an application lodged at the Registry of the Court of Justice on March 2002, the Commission of the European Communities
         sought the annulment, pursuant to Article EC, of Council Decision 2002/114/EC of January authorising the Government
         of Portugal to grant aid to Portuguese pig farmers who were beneficiaries of the measures granted in and (OJ L 43, p. 18).
         
            
 By orders of the President of the Court of Justice of and September 2002, the Portuguese Republic and the French Republic
         were each granted leave to intervene in support of the Council, the latter, however, being authorised to submit observations
         only in the event of oral proceedings taking place . 
         
Legal background
            
 Article 88(2) and (3) EC provide:
         ‘(2)   If, after giving notice to the parties concerned to submit their comments, the Commission finds that aid granted by a State
         or through State resources is not compatible with the common market having regard to Article 87, or that such aid is being
         misused, it shall decide that the State concerned shall abolish or alter such aid within a period of time to be determined
         by the Commission.
          If the State concerned does not comply with this decision within the prescribed time, the Commission or any other interested
         State may, in derogation from the provisions of Articles and 227, refer the matter to the Court of Justice direct.
          On application by a Member State, the Council may, acting unanimously, decide that aid which that State is granting or intends
         to grant shall be considered to be compatible with the common market, in derogation from the provisions of Article or from
         the regulations provided for in Article 89, if such a decision is justified by exceptional circumstances. If, as regards the
         aid in question, the Commission has already initiated the procedure provided for in the first subparagraph of this paragraph,
         the fact that the State concerned has made its application to the Council shall have the effect of suspending that procedure
         until the Council has made its attitude known.
          If, however, the Council has not made its attitude known within three months of the said application being made, the Commission
         shall give its decision on the case.
         (3)     The Commission shall be informed, in sufficient time to enable it to submit its comments, of any plans to grant or alter aid.
         If it considers that any such plan is not compatible with the common market having regard to Article 87, it shall without
         delay initiate the procedure provided for in paragraph 2. The Member State concerned shall not put its proposed measures into
         effect until this procedure has resulted in a final decision.’
         
The contested decision and its context
            
 By Decree-Law No 146/of May (Diário da República I, series A, No 120, of May 1994; ‘the Decree-Law of 1994’), the Portuguese Republic established an aid scheme setting
         up lines of credit for reducing the debt burden on intensive stock farms and assisting the recovery of pig farming. That aid
         system was not notified to the Commission.
         
            
 Acting under the first paragraph of Article 88(2) EC, the Commission adopted Decision 2000/200/EC of November concerning
         an aid scheme implemented by Portugal with a view to reducing the debt burden of intensive stock farms and assisting recovery
         in the pig-farming sector (OJ L 66, p. 20). Under Article 1(1) of that decision, it declared the credit line for reducing
         the debt burden on intensive stock farms incompatible with the common market in cases where, together with the investment
         aid received, the grant equivalent exceeded 35% in farming areas other than less-favoured farming areas. Article 1(2) declared
         the credit line for assisting recovery in the pig-farming sector incompatible with the common market. Repayment of the aid
         already unlawfully paid to the beneficiaries, with interest, was ordered under Article of that decision.
         
            
 By Decree-Law No 4/of January (Diário da República I, Series A, No 2, of January 1999; ‘the Decree-Law of 1999’), the Portuguese Republic further introduced a moratorium
         extending by one year the period for repayment of certain loans contracted by pig farms which produced, fattened and slaughtered
         pigs in a closed cycle, and also introduced short-term financing for such farms by means of loans at favourable rates. Although
         those measures were notified to the Commission, they were put into effect before the Commission stated its position in respect
         of them.
         
            
 Those aid measures were declared incompatible with the common market, and their repayment was ordered by Commission Decision
         2001/86/EC of October on the aid scheme implemented by Portugal in favour of the pigfarming sector (OJ L 29, p.
         49).
         
            
 On November 2001, the Portuguese Republic requested the Council of the European Union to adopt, on the basis of the third
         subparagraph of Article 88(2) EC, a ‘decision authorising it to grant aid to Portuguese pig farmers obliged to repay the aid
         granted in and and [declaring] that aid compatible with the common market’.
         
            
 Acceding to that request, the Council adopted the contested decision, Article of which is worded as follows:
         ‘Exceptional aid by the Portuguese Government to the Portuguese pig sector involving the grant of aid to beneficiaries covered
         by the Commission Decisions of November and October 2000, totalling not more than EUR 16,million, equivalent to
         the amounts which those beneficiaries must reimburse under those Decisions, shall be considered compatible with the common
         market.’
         
            
 After setting out the particular circumstances and features of the Portuguese pig farming industry which had led the Portuguese
         Republic to adopt the Decree-Laws of and 1999, the grounds for the contested decision state, in paragraph 9, that ‘…
         as the pattern of trade shows, [the aid instituted under those Decree-Laws] did not have any particular effect on intra-Community
         trade and consequently did not cause any distortion of competition’.
         
            
 According to paragraphs to of the grounds for the contested decision:
         
‘(12)
In its decisions of November and October 2000, the Commission held that the measures in question were not compatible
               with the common market. Pursuant to those decisions, the Portuguese authorities initiated a procedure to recover the aid granted.
            
 (13)
However, refunding the aid granted threatens the economic viability of not a few beneficiaries and would have extremely damaging
               social effects in certain regions because 50% of the pig herd is concentrated in less than 5% of the territory.
            
 (14)
Exceptional circumstances therefore exist, making it possible to consider such aid, by way of derogation and to the extent
               strictly necessary to remedy the imbalance which has arisen, to be compatible with the common market on the terms specified
               in this Decision.’
            
The action
            
 The Commission makes five pleas in law in support in its action, claiming that the Council did not have the power to adopt
         the contested decision, misuse of powers and procedure, infringement of the EC Treaty and various general principles, manifest
         error of assessment, and failure to state sufficient reasons for the contested decision.
         
The first plea Arguments of the parties
         
            
 The Commission argues in its first plea that the Council did not have the power to adopt the contested decision, and its reasoning
         in that respect is in two stages.
         
            
 First, the Commission argues that the contested decision has effects identical to a revocation or annulment of Decisions 2000/and 2001/86, whereby the Commission declared the aid paid under the Decree-Laws of and incompatible with the common
         market and ordered it to be repaid.
         
            
 By authorising the payment to the Portuguese pig farmers concerned of aid equivalent in amount to that which they had to repay
         in accordance with those Commission decisions, the contested decision nullified the effects of the latter. It prevented the
         effective withdrawal of aid which the Commission had declared incompatible with the common market and the return to the status
         quo required by the first subparagraph of Article 88(2) EC in order to preserve the market from distortions of competition.
         
            
 According to the Commission, the contested decision effectively amounted to an authorisation of the initial aid, which the
         Commission had previously declared incompatible.
         
            
 Secondly, the Commission argues that it is clear from the wording of Article EC that the Treaty intended to confer upon
         it, as a monopoly, the tasks of controlling and managing State aids. That, it maintains, is explained by the fact that only
         a body totally independent of Member States is capable of examining aid measures adopted by the latter with the required objectivity
         and impartiality, and of ensuring that competition is not distorted to an extent contrary to the common interest.
         
            
 As for the power conferred on the Council under Article 88(2) EC, the Commission argues that that is exceptional in character.
         That is clear from the wording both of the third subparagraph of that provision, which refers to ‘exceptional circumstances’,
         and of the fourth subparagraph, which lays down a period during which the Member State’s application is to suspend the procedure
         before the Commission, at the expiry of which period the Commission recovers its power to ‘give a decision’, that is to say
         decide definitively on the aids concerned. The granting to the Council of such a power of decision, taking precedence over
         that of the Commission for a limited period, would, moreover, be devoid of meaning if the Council’s decision could prevail
         over that of the Commission in all circumstances.
         
            
 It follows, in the Commission’s view, that the Council does not have the power to adopt a decision on the basis of the third
         subparagraph of Article 88(2) EC where an aid has been declared incompatible with the common market by a Commission decision.
         Nor, to that extent, did the Council have the power to override the effects of such a decision, by authorising the grant of
         aids designed to compensate the beneficiaries of the aid declared incompatible for the repayment which that decision obliged
         them to make.
         
            
 The Council argues, first, that the Commission’s reasoning is based entirely on the premiss that the contested decision annulled
         or revoked Decisions 2000/and 2001/86. In reality, the Council argues, the contested decision did not call into question
         the repayment obligations under those decisions, since it was, on the contrary, in the context of the full implementation
         of those obligations, and taking account of the social and economic consequences which such implementation would have, that
         the Council decided to authorise the new aid which the Portuguese Government was proposing to grant. 
         
            
 What counts as new aid, the Council argues, depends on formal and objective considerations. In this case the aid authorised
         by the contested decision consisted of an entirely new payment, arising from a national provision other than the Decree-Laws
         of and 1999, corresponding to different eligibility and payment conditions from those which applied to the aids granted
         under those Decree-Laws.
         
            
 According to the Council, the fact that the aid authorised by the contested decision constitutes new aid is also demonstrated
         by the definition of ‘new aid’ in Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 659/of March laying down detailed rules
         for the application of Article of the EC Treaty (OJ L 83, p. 1) as ‘aid schemes and individual aid, which is not existing
         aid, including alterations to existing aid’. The term ‘existing’ implies that the aid in question has already been authorised,
         which is precisely not the case with the aid to which the contested decision relates.
         
            
 Moreover, the third subparagraph of Article 11(2) of Regulation No 659/1999, which allows the possibility of authorising the
         Member State to accompany repayment of the illegal aid with an aid to rescue the undertaking concerned, also confirms that
         it is possible to adopt divergent decisions concerning State aids granted successively to the same operators. The same applies
         to Community case-law, which, the Council argues, has implicitly acknowledged that the Commission may make the payment of
         new aid declared compatible with the common market subject to the recovery of earlier aid declared incompatible (Joined Cases
         T-244/and T-486/TWD v Commission [1995] ECR II-2265; Case C-355/P TWD v Commission [1997] ECR I-2549).
         
            
 Finally, the Council argues that neither decisions of the Commission declaring an aid incompatible with the common market
         nor any other text constitute a prohibition against the beneficiaries of such aid receiving other aid sooner or later. The
         principle that each successive aid is to be examined individually should be complied with in all circumstances (Case C-441/P Wirtschaftsvereinigung Stahl v Commission [2000] ECR I-10293, paragraph 55). If the contested decision had not been taken, the aid which it authorised, which had, moreover,
         been notified to the Commission by the Portuguese Republic, would have had to have been examined by the Commission and to
         have given rise to a decision by the latter.
         
            
 Concerning, secondly, the scope of Article 88(2) EC, the Council argues that the three-month period referred to in the fourth
         subparagraph of that provision is laid down for purely suspensive purposes. It follows, in the Council’s submission, that
         it remained at liberty to authorise the aid concerned notwithstanding the expiry of that period.
         
            
 As for the conflict capable of arising in that respect between a previous decision of the Commission, finding aid incompatible
         with the common market, and a subsequent decision of the Council, authorising that aid, the Council argues that the principle
         to be applied when dealing with incompatible rules, in the absence of a hierarchy between them, is that the later rule derogates
         from the previous one.
         
            
 The Portuguese Republic essentially shares the analysis of the Council. The aid authorised by the contested decision was a
         new aid, distinct from those established by the Decree-Laws of and 1999, having been notified as new aid to the Commission.
         Portugal adds that the fact that the third subparagraph of Article 88(2) EC empowers the Council to rule not only on aid which
         a Member State ‘intends to grant’ but also on aid which it ‘is granting’ confirms that the Council is empowered to authorise
         aid even where the Commission has already expressed its view on it. Article 88(3) shows that any granting of aid requires
         prior examination by the Commission, with the result that the aid cannot be granted unless there has been a favourable decision
         by the Commission in that regard.
         
 Findings of the Court
         
            
 In order to rule on the Commission’s first plea in support of its action, it first needs to be determined whether, as the
         Commission has argued, Article 88(2) EC must be interpreted in such a way that, where the Commission has adopted a decision
         finding aid incompatible with the common market, the Council no longer has the power to decide, on the basis of the third
         subparagraph of that provision, that that aid must be regarded as compatible with the common market.
         
            
 In that respect, it should be noted that the intention of the Treaty, in providing through Article EC for aid to be kept
         under constant review and supervised by the Commission, is that the finding that aid may be incompatible with the common market
         is to be arrived at, subject to review by the Community judicature, by means of an appropriate procedure which it is the Commission’s
         responsibility to set in motion. Articles EC and EC thus reserve a central role for the Commission in determining whether
         aid is incompatible (Case C-354/Fédération nationale du commerce extérieur des produits alimentairesandSyndicat national des négociants et transformateurs de saumon [1991] ECR I-5505, paragraphs and 14).
         
            
 As is clear from its very wording, the third subparagraph of Article 88(2) EC covers an exceptional case (Case 156/Commission  v Belgium [1978] ECR 1881, paragraph 16). According to that provision, the Council acting unanimously, ‘on application by a Member
         State’, may decide that aid which that State is granting or intends to grant must be regarded as compatible with the common
         market ‘in derogation from the provisions of Article or from the regulations provided for in Article 89’, if such a decision
         is justified by ‘exceptional circumstances’.
         
            
 It follows that, as the Commission has rightly pointed out, the power conferred upon the Council by the third subparagraph
         of Article 88(2) EC is clearly exceptional in character.
         
            
 In such a context, the further provisions in the third and fourth subparagraphs of Article 88(2), whereby, on the one hand,
         application to the Council by a Member State suspends examination in progress at the Commission for a period of three months,
         and, on the other, in the absence of a decision by the Council within that period, the Commission is to give a ruling, undeniably
         indicate that, where that period has expired, the Council is no longer competent to adopt a decision under that third subparagraph
         in relation to the aid concerned. The taking of decisions the operative parts of which might prove contradictory is thereby
         avoided.
         
            
 The enactment of a temporal limitation of that kind on the Council’s competence where the Commission has already opened the
         procedure under the first subparagraph of Article 88(2) EC, without, however, yet having adopted a decision declaring the
         aid incompatible with the common market, and the fact that, at the end of the three-month period laid down by the fourth subparagraph
         of that provision, the Commission alone retains the competence to rule on the aid concerned, also demonstrate that, if the
         Member State concerned has made no application to the Council under the third subparagraph of Article 88(2) EC before the
         Commission declares the aid in question incompatible with the common market and thereby closes the procedure referred to in
         the first subparagraph of Article 88(2), the Council is no longer authorised to exercise the exceptional power conferred upon
         it by the third subparagraph in order to declare such aid compatible with the common market.
         
            
 It may be observed on that latter point that, in Case C-l22/Commission v Council [1996] ECR I-881, the contested decision of the Council did not follow a Commission decision declaring aid incompatible with
         the common market, the Commission in that case having merely taken the view on the basis of Article 88(3) EC that the aid
         project in question was not compatible with the common market and opened the procedure laid down by the first subparagraph
         of Article 88(2). 
         
            
 As the Commission has rightly pointed out, the interpretation adopted in paragraphs and of this judgment, which makes
         it possible to avoid the same State aid being the subject of contrary decisions taken successively by the Commission and the
         Council, contributes to legal certainty. It should be noted in particular that the definitive nature of an administrative
         decision which is acquired on the expiry of reasonable time-limits for bringing an action or by the exhaustion of remedies
         contributes to such certainty (Case C-453/Kühne & Heitz [2004] ECR I-0000, paragraph 24).
         
            
 As for the argument of the Portuguese Government that the third subparagraph of Article 88(2) EC also authorises the Council
         to rule on aid which a Member State is ‘granting’, whereas in accordance with Article 88(3) any ‘grant’ of aid requires precisely
         that the Commission should have expressed a view on it first, so that the Council has the power to rule on aid which has already
         been the subject of a previous decision by the Commission, the Court finds that this argument arises from a contradiction
         in terms. It cannot concomitantly be argued that an aid which a Member State is ‘granting’ within the meaning of the third
         subparagraph of Article 88(2) EC is an aid which must necessarily have been previously declared compatible with the common
         market by the Commission, pursuant to the provisions of Article EC, and that the Council has the power subsequently to
         declare such an aid compatible with the common market in derogation from those provisions.
         
            
 Secondly, the Court has to determine whether the fact that the Council does not have the power to rule on the compatibility
         with the common market of an aid in relation to which the Commission has already definitively ruled implies, as the latter
         argues, that the Council also lacks the power to rule on an aid measure whose aim is to allocate to beneficiaries of the illegal
         aid previously declared incompatible by a Commission decision an amount designed to compensate for the repayments which they
         are obliged to make pursuant to that decision.
         
            
 It should be noted first in that respect, contrary to what the Council maintains, that it cannot be inferred from the case-law
         of the Court of Justice that, in relation to such aid, the Community institutions retain full liberty to make such a ruling
         without being required to pay due regard to the previous decision of the Commission finding the aid originally granted to
         the persons concerned incompatible with the common market.
         
            
 The Court has, on the contrary, held that when the Commission considers the compatibility of a measure of State aid with the
         common market, it must take all the relevant factors into account, including, where relevant, the circumstances already considered
         in a prior decision and the obligations which that previous decision may have imposed on a Member State (see, in particular,
         Case C-261/Italy  v Commission [1991] ECR I-4437, paragraph 20; TWD v Commission, paragraph 26). The Court deduced in particular that, where the Commission has not been informed of any new fact allowing
         it to assess whether the aid in question might have the benefit of a derogation under the Treaty, it is justified in basing
         its decision on the assessments it has already made in its previous decision and the failure to comply with the condition
         it has imposed thereby (Italy v Commission, paragraph 23). 
         
            
 Similarly, the Court has held that a transitional system maintaining the effects of a State aid scheme not notified to the
         Commission and declared incompatible with Community law by a Commission decision – without, however, the Commission demanding
         repayment of the aid concerned – had to be interpreted as far as possible in such a way as to ensure its compatibility with
         that decision, namely in such a way that it does not authorise the granting of new State aid after the abrogation of the aid
         scheme censured by that Commission decision (order of July in Case C-297/Sicilcassa [2003] ECR I-7849, paragraph 44). 
         
            
 It has, moreover, consistently been held that the abolition, by means of recovery, of State aid which has been unlawfully
         granted is the logical consequence its being found unlawful (Case C-142/Belgium v Commission (Tubemeuse) [1990] ECR I-959, paragraph 66; Case C-310/Italy v Commission [2002] ECR I-2289, paragraph 98). 
         
            
 The aim of obliging the State concerned to abolish aid found by the Commission to be incompatible with the common market is
         to restore the previous situation, and that objective is attained once the aid in question, increased where appropriate by
         default interest, has been repaid by the recipient. By repaying the aid, the recipient forfeits the advantage which it had
         enjoyed over its competitors on the market, and the situation prior to payment of the aid is restored (see, in particular,
         Case C-350/Commission v Italy [1995] ECR I-699, paragraphs and 22, and Case C-310/Italy v Commission, paragraphs and 99).
         
            
 In those circumstances, to hold that a Member State is able to grant to beneficiaries of unlawful aid, which has previously
         been declared incompatible with the common market by a Commission decision, new aid in an amount equivalent to that of the
         unlawful aid, intended to neutralise the impact of the repayments which the beneficiaries are obliged to make pursuant to
         that decision, would clearly amount to thwarting the effectiveness of decisions taken by the Commission under Articles EC and EC (see, by analogy, Case C-5/Commission v Germany [1990] ECR I-3437, paragraph 17; Case C-310/Italy v Commission, paragraph 104).
         
            
 Finally, it should be noted that, as is clear from paragraphs and of this judgment, where a decision finding an aid
         incompatible with the common market has been adopted by the Commission, the Council cannot paralyse the effectiveness of that
         decision by itself declaring the aid compatible with the common market on the basis of the third subparagraph of Article 88(2)
         EC.
         
            
 Nor, therefore, can the Council thwart the effectiveness of such a decision by declaring compatible with the common market,
         in accordance with that provision, an aid designed to compensate the beneficiaries of the unlawful aid declared incompatible
         with the common market for the repayments they are required to make pursuant to that decision.
         
            
 In such circumstances, moreover, the aid granted in the second instance is so indissolubly linked to that previously found
         by the Commission to be incompatible with the common market that it appears largely artificial to claim to make a distinction
         between those aids for the purposes of applying Article 88(2) EC.
         
            
 It follows from the whole of the above considerations that, on a proper interpretation of the third subparagraph of Article
         88(2) EC, the Council cannot, on the basis of that provision, validly declare compatible with the common market an aid which
         allocates to the beneficiaries of an unlawful aid, which a Commission decision has previously declared incompatible with the
         common market, an amount designed to compensate for the repayments which they are required to make pursuant to that decision.
         
            
 In this case, it is undisputed that the Portuguese Republic has not applied to the Council under the third subparagraph of
         Article 88(2) EC for a declaration that the aids granted by the Decree-Laws of and are compatible with the common
         market. It is also undisputed that those aids have been declared incompatible with the common market and that their recovery
         has been ordered by Decisions 2000/and 2001/86.
         
            
 As for the contested decision, it is obvious from the very wording of its title, and from the wording of Article thereof,
         that the aid which it sought to declare compatible with the common market was specifically designed to grant to the beneficiaries
         of the aids previously declared incompatible with that market, by Decisions 2000/and 2001/86, an amount intended to allow
         them to meet the repayments which they are required to make pursuant to those two decisions.
         
            
 As is clear from paragraph of this judgment, the Council could not validly adopt such a decision.
         
            
 It follows that the Commission’s first plea in support of its action, arguing that the Council lacked the competence to adopt
         the contested decision, is well founded, and that the latter must therefore be annulled.
         The second, third, fourth and fifth pleas
            
 Since the Commission’s first plea has been accepted, and the contested decision must be annulled on that account, it is not
         necessary to examine the Commission’s other pleas in support of its action.
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Council has been unsuccessful,
         the Council must be ordered to pay the costs. Pursuant to the first paragraph of Article 69(4), the Portuguese Republic and
         the French Republic must bear their own costs.
         
On those grounds,
THE COURT
 hereby:
         
 
1.
Annuls Council Decision 2002//EC of January authorising the Government of Portugal to grant aid to Portuguese
                     pig farmers who were beneficiaries of the measures granted in and 1998;
                  
 
2.
Orders the Council of the European Union to pay the costs;
 
3.
Orders the Portuguese Republic and the French Republic to bear their own costs.
Skouris
Jann
Timmermans
Rosas
Gulmann
Puissochet
Cunha Rodrigues
La Pergola
Schintgen
Macken
Colneric
von Bahr
Lenaerts
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on  June 2004.
         
Registrar
President
R. Grass
V. Skouris
 –
            
Language of the case: French.
Top  
 