
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-472/P Commission of the European CommunitiesvFresh Marine Company A/S
«(Appeal – Non-contractual liability of the Community – Provisional anti-dumping and countervailing duties imposed on imports of farmed Atlantic salmon originating in Norway)»
Opinion of Advocate General Stix-Hackl delivered on November I - Judgment of the Court, July I - Summary of the Judgment
1..
Non-contractual liability – Conditions – Sufficiently serious breach of Community law – Discretion available to an institution when adopting measures  (EC Treaty, Art. 215, second para. (now Art. 288, second para., EC)) 
2..
Non-contractual liability – Sufficiently serious breach of Community law – Imposition of provisional anti-dumping and countervailing duties on the exports of a company which has entered into undertakings
                     with respect to the minimum price of exports – Imposition despite the existence of a report of the company concerned indicating that the undertakings entered into have been
                     complied with but which has been unilaterally amended by the Commission without prior consultation of that company – Community liability incurred  
                  (EC Treaty, Art. 215, second para. (now Art. 288, second para., EC)) 
3..
Appeals – Grounds of appeal – Incorrect assessment of the facts – Inadmissible – Review by the Court of Justice of assessment of evidence – Excluded unless the clear sense of the evidence has been distorted  (Art. EC; Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, Art. 58) 
1.
 Community law confers a right to reparation where three conditions are met: the rule of law infringed must be intended to
         confer rights on individuals; the breach must be sufficiently serious; and there must be a direct causal link between the
         breach of the obligation resting on the author of the act and the damage sustained by the injured parties. As regards the
         second condition, the decisive test for finding that a breach of Community law is sufficiently serious is whether the Community
         institution concerned manifestly and gravely disregarded the limits on its discretion. Where that institution has only considerably
         reduced, or even no, discretion, the mere infringement of Community law may be sufficient to establish the existence of a
         sufficiently serious breach. It follows that the determining factor in deciding whether there has been such an infringement
         is not the individual nature of the act in question but the discretion available to the institution when adopting it. see paras 25-2.
 Article 8(10) of Regulation No 384/on protection against dumped imports from countries not members of the European Community
         and Article 13(10) of Regulation No 2026/on protection against subsidised imports from countries not members of the European
         Community, while granting the Commission the power to impose provisional anti-dumping and countervailing duties on products
         exported to the Community by a company established in a non-Member State, require at the same time that there be reason to
         believe that the undertaking to comply with a minimum price has been breached and that the decision imposing such duties be
         taken on the basis of the best information available. The Commission thus adopts conduct which must be regarded as a sufficiently
         serious breach of a rule of Community law satisfying one of the conditions for the incurring of non-contractual liability
         by the Community where it imposes such duties, relying solely on the analysis of a report drawn up by the exporting company
         concerned which gave reason to believe that that company had complied with its undertaking not to make sales below a minimum
         average price, but which the Commission had amended on its own initiative, without asking the company what impact its unilateral
         action might have on the reliability of the information which that company had provided to it. see paras 29-3.
 Under Article EC and Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, an appeal lies on a point of law only. It follows
         that, save where the clear sense of the evidence has been distorted, the Court has no jurisdiction to review the assessment
         of the facts made by the Court of First Instance. see para. JUDGMENT OF THE COURTJuly (1)
((Appeal – Non-contractual liability of the Community – Provisional anti-dumping and countervailing duties imposed on imports of farmed Atlantic salmon originating in Norway))
In Case C-472/P, 
            
 Commission of the European Communities,  represented by V. Kreuschitz and S. Meany, acting as Agents, and N. Khan, Barrister, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
appellant, 
APPEAL against the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities (Third Chamber, Extended Composition)
            of October in Case T-178/Fresh Marine  v  
             Commission  [2000] ECR II-3331, seeking to have that judgment set aside,
            
the other party to the proceedings being:  Fresh Marine Company A/S, established in Trondheim (Norway), represented by J.-F.
            Bellis and B. Servais, avocats, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant at first instance, 
THE COURT,,
composed of: G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias, President, J.-P. Puissochet, R. Schintgen and C.W.A. Timmermans (Presidents of Chambers), C. Gulmann, D.A.O. Edward, A. La Pergola, V. Skouris, S. von Bahr, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur) and A. Rosas, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: C. Stix-Hackl, Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator, 
            
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,after hearing oral argument from the parties at the hearing on September 2002,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on November 2002,
gives the following
Judgment
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on December 2000, the Commission of the European Communities brought an appeal
         under Article of the EC Statute of the Court of Justice against the judgment of the Court of First Instance of October
         in Case T-178/Fresh Marine  v  
          Commission  [2000] ECR II-(
         the contested judgment), by which the Commission was ordered to pay Fresh Marine Company A/S (
         Fresh Marine), established in Trondheim (Norway), the sum of NOK in damages. 
         
Legal background
            
As stated in Article 8(10) of Council Regulation (EC) No 384/of December on protection against dumped imports from
         countries not members of the European Community (OJ L 56, p. 1): A provisional duty may, after consultation, be imposed in accordance with Article on the basis of the best information available,
         where there is reason to believe that an undertaking is being breached, or in case of breach or withdrawal of an undertaking
         where the investigation which led to the undertaking has not been concluded.
         
            
Article 13(10) of Council Regulation (EC) No 2026/of October on protection against subsidised imports from countries
         not members of the European Community (OJ L 288, p. 1) provides: A provisional duty may, after consultation, be imposed in accordance with Article on the basis of the best information
         available, where there is reason to believe that an undertaking is being breached, or in case of breach or withdrawal of an
         undertaking where the investigation which led to the undertaking has not been concluded.
         Facts
            
The factual background to the dispute is set out at paragraphs to of the contested judgment as follows: 
         
            
[Fresh Marine] is a company established in and incorporated under Norwegian law, which specialises in the sale of farmed
         Atlantic salmon. 
         
            
Following complaints lodged in July by the Scottish Salmon Growers' Association Ltd and the Shetland Salmon Farmers'
         Association on behalf of their members, the Commission announced on August 1996, by two separate notices published in the
          
          Official Journal of the European Communities , the initiation of an anti-dumping and an anti-subsidy proceeding concerning imports of farmed Atlantic salmon originating
         in Norway (OJ C 253, pp. and 20). 
         
            
The Commission ... found that it was necessary to impose definitive anti-dumping and countervailing measures ... 
         
            
On June 1997, [Fresh Marine], having been informed of the Commission's findings, offered an undertaking pursuant to Article
         of [Regulation No 384/96] and Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 3284/of December on protection against
         subsidised imports from countries not members of the European Community (OJ L 349, p. 22). ... 
         
            
By Decision 97/634/EC of September accepting undertakings offered in connection with the anti-dumping and anti-subsidy
         proceedings concerning imports of farmed Atlantic salmon originating in Norway (OJ L 267, p. 81), the Commission accepted
         the undertakings offered by a number of Norwegian exporters of farmed Atlantic salmon, including that of [Fresh Marine]. ...
         [Fresh Marine]'s undertaking entered into force on July 1997. 
         
            
On the same day, the Council adopted Regulation (EC) No 1890/of September imposing a definitive anti-dumping duty
         on imports of farmed Atlantic salmon originating in Norway (OJ L 267, p. 1) and Council Regulation (EC) No 1891/of
         September imposing a definitive countervailing duty on imports of farmed Atlantic salmon originating in Norway (OJ
         L 267, p. 19). Pursuant to Article 1(2) of each of those two regulations, imports into the Community of farmed Atlantic
         salmon originating in Norway produced by [Fresh Marine] were exempt from those duties on account of the acceptance of its
         undertaking by the Commission. 
         
            
On October 1997, [Fresh Marine] sent the Commission a report on all its exports of farmed Atlantic salmon to the Community
         during the third quarter of (
         the October report). 
         
            
On December 1997, the Commission adopted, on the basis of Council Regulation No 384/and [Regulation No 2026/97], Regulation
         (EC) No 2529/of December imposing provisional anti-dumping and countervailing duties on certain imports of farmed
         Atlantic salmon originating in Norway (OJ L 346, p. 63). That regulation imposed a provisional anti-dumping duty ...
         and a provisional countervailing duty ... on imports, into the Community, of farmed Atlantic salmon originating in Norway
         produced by [Fresh Marine] ... The regulation entered into force on December 1997. ... 
         
            
By letter of December 1997, the Commission informed [Fresh Marine] of the ... facts ... It stated that examination of the
         data disclosed in the October report had shown that [Fresh Marine] had exported farmed Atlantic salmon, gutted head-on,
         at an average price ... lower than the minimum average price set in its undertaking of June 1997, which led it to believe
         that it had not observed that undertaking. ... 
         
            
By fax of December 1997, [Fresh Marine] complained that the Commission had manipulated the October report by deleting
         a number of lines which were intended to cancel lines containing errors. Pointing out that it had ceased all exports to the
         Community since the entry into force of Regulation No 2529/97, and as a result was suffering considerable harm, it asked for
         the immediate lifting of the sanctions taken against it. 
         
            
In its letter of January 1998, the Commission explained to [Fresh Marine] the reasons why it had decided to delete a number
         of lines from the October report containing quantities and values preceded by a minus sign, which, in the absence of
         explanations in the report, could not be offset against the corresponding invoices. It added that, if [Fresh Marine] sent
         it in good time a proper report showing that all sales transactions, net of credit notes, during the third quarter of were, on average, above the minimum price, the Commission would be prepared to reconsider its position. It again emphasised
         the provisional nature of the duties imposed by Regulation 2529/and pointed out to [Fresh Marine] that it could have chosen
         to continue to export to the Community by providing the relevant customs authorities of the Member States concerned with an
         appropriate guarantee in regard to its  
         DDP (
         delivered duty paid) sales. 
         
            
On January 1998, [Fresh Marine] sent to the Commission an amended version of the October report. 
         ...
         
            
By letter of January 1998, the Commission informed [Fresh Marine] that it now took the view that [Fresh Marine] had, during
         the third quarter of 1997, complied with the minimum export price fixed in its undertaking in respect of salmon, gutted head-on,
         and that, accordingly, there was no longer any reason to believe that the undertaking had been broken. 
         
            
By letter of February the Commission informed [Fresh Marine] that it intended to propose to the Council that it should
         not impose definitive duties and that, accordingly, the provisional duties imposed by Regulation No 2529/ought not to be
         confirmed. It added that, under Article 10(2) of Regulation No 384/96, the amounts lodged as provisional duties were to be
         released in so far as there was no decision by the Council to collect all or part of them definitively. 
         
            
On March 1998, the Commission adopted Regulation (EC) No 651/amending Regulations Nos 1890/97, 1891/and 2529/and
         Decision 97/(OJ L 88, p. 31). Under Regulation No 651/98, the provisional anti-dumping and countervailing duties
         imposed by Regulation No 2529/were repealed so far as concerned imports of [Fresh Marine]'s products ... Its undertaking
         was moreover reinstated with effect from March ...
         
The proceedings before the Court of First Instance and the contested judgment
            
On October 1998, Fresh Marine brought an action before the Court of First Instance seeking an order requiring the Commission
         to make good the damage it had suffered following the adoption of the provisional measures prescribed by Regulation No 2529/97,
         totalling NOK 000. 
         
            
The Commission claimed that the action should be dismissed as inadmissible or, in the alternative, as unfounded. 
         
            
Having declared the action to be admissible, the Court of First Instance pointed out, at paragraph of the contested judgment,
         that, in order for the Community to incur non-contractual liability, the applicant must prove the unlawfulness of the alleged
         conduct of the institution concerned, actual damage and the existence of a causal link between that conduct and the alleged
         damage. 
         
            
In that connection, the Court of First Instance found as follows:  Unlawfulness of the conduct alleged against the Commission ...
         
            
Although the measures of the Council and Commission in connection with a proceeding relating to the possible adoption of anti-dumping
         measures must in principle be regarded as constituting legislative action involving choices of economic policy, so that the
         Community can incur liability by virtue of such measures only if there has been a sufficiently serious breach of a superior
         rule of law for the protection of individuals ([Case T-167/94]  
          Nölle  v  
          Council and Commission  [[1995] ECR II-2589], paragraph 51), the special features of the present case must be pointed out. In the present case, the
         damage at issue arose from the allegedly unlawful conduct of the Commission when it examined the October report with
         the intention of checking whether [Fresh Marine] had complied during the third quarter of with the undertaking, the acceptance
         of which had brought to an end the anti-dumping and anti-subsidy investigation in regard to it. That allegedly unlawful conduct
         led the Commission to believe that [Fresh Marine] had broken its undertaking. It took place in the course of an administrative
         operation which specifically and exclusively concerned [Fresh Marine]. That operation did not involve any choices of economic
         policy and conferred on the Commission only very little or no discretion. 
         
            
It is true that the alleged unlawfulness of the Commission's conduct caused the alleged damage only when, and because, it
         was confirmed by the adoption of provisional measures against imports of [Fresh Marine]'s products within the framework of
         Regulation No 2529/97. However, the Commission, in that regulation, did no more with regard to [Fresh Marine] than draw the
         appropriate provisional conclusions from its analysis of the abovementioned report, in particular from the level of the average
         price of exports charged by [Fresh Marine] during the period covered by that report (see the ninth recital in the preamble
         to Regulation No 2529/97). 
         
            
Furthermore, the background to the cases giving rise to the judgments relied on by the Commission in its written submissions
         ..., in which the Community judicature characterised the measures of the Council and the Commission in an anti-dumping proceeding
         as legislative acts involving choices of economic policy, was radically different from that of the present dispute. In those
         cases, unlike the present case, the applicants sought compensation for damage, the operative event for which was a choice
         of economic policy made by the Community authorities in the context of their legislative power. 
         
            
Thus, in [Case C-122/86]  
          Epicheiriseon Metalleftikon Viomichanikon kai Naftiliakon and Others  v  
          Commission and Council  [[1989] ECR 3959], the applicants sought compensation for the damage which they claimed to have suffered as a result of the
         Council's decision to close an anti-dumping proceeding without adopting the regulation proposed by the Commission for the
         imposition of a definitive anti-dumping duty on the relevant imports. In  
          Nölle  v  
          Council and Commission , cited ... above, a Community importer sought compensation for damage allegedly suffered as a result of the adoption by the
         Council of a regulation introducing a definitive anti-dumping duty and definitively collecting the provisional anti-dumping
         duty, a regulation which had been declared invalid by the Court of Justice on grounds relating to the conditions under which
         the Community authorities had chosen the reference country when determining the normal value of the products at issue. 
         
            
In conclusion, mere infringement of Community law will be sufficient, in the present case, to lead to the non-contractual
         liability of the Community (see [Case C-352/P]  
          Bergaderm and Goupil  v  
          Commission  [[2000] ECR I-5291], paragraph 44). In particular, a finding of an error which, in analogous circumstances, an administrative
         authority exercising ordinary care and diligence would not have committed will support the conclusion that the conduct of
         the Community institution was unlawful in such a way as to render the Community liable under Article of the [EC] Treaty
         [now Article EC]. 
         
            
It is therefore necessary to examine whether the Commission, when monitoring compliance by [Fresh Marine] with its undertaking
         on the basis of the October report, committed an error which an administrative authority exercising ordinary care and
         diligence would not have committed in the same circumstances. 
         ...
         
            
At first sight, on reading [the] final entries in the October report, it was possible to adopt the view that [Fresh Marine]
         had observed its undertaking during the period covered by that report. ... 
         
            
Even if it is accepted that the terms of [Fresh Marine]'s undertaking did not provide for the possibility of including negative
         values in the quarterly sales reports, the Commission could not, when faced with a report which, at first glance, suggested
         that [Fresh Marine] had complied with its undertaking, take it upon itself, as it did in the present case ..., unilaterally
         to change the content of that report by deleting lines containing negative values and replacing the final entries ... with
         its own calculations, carried out on the basis of the report thus amended, of the average export price charged by [Fresh Marine]
         during the period in question, without explaining to it the reasons prompting it to ignore those final entries and without
         checking with it whether the changes so made affected the reliability of the information provided in order to monitor compliance
         with the undertaking. Having decided not to accept the first impression given by the October report, which was favourable
         to [Fresh Marine], the Commission was bound to exercise due care in interpreting correctly the data provided in that report,
         on which it intended to base its finding as to whether or not [Fresh Marine]'s conduct amounted to compliance with the undertaking
         during the period in question. 
         
            
It cannot, in that connection, rely on the provisions of Article 8(10) of Regulation No 384/or Article 13(10) of Regulation
         No 2026/97. 
         
            
Those provisions aim to enable the Commission, where there are grounds for believing on the basis of the best information
         available to it that an undertaking which it has initially accepted in the context of an anti-dumping or anti-subsidy proceeding
         has been breached, to take in good time any necessary provisional measures in order to protect the interests of the Community
         industry, without prejudice to a subsequent examination of the merits in order to check whether the undertaking in question
         has in fact been breached. 
         
            
However, in the present case, the Court holds that the October report, in particular its final entries, suggested that
         [Fresh Marine] had complied with its undertaking ... 
         
            
It was after it had amended that report on its own initiative, without taking the precaution of asking [Fresh Marine] what
         possible impact its unilateral action might have on the reliability of the information which [Fresh Marine] had provided,
         that the Commission concluded that there had been an apparent breach of the undertaking by [Fresh Marine]. The data contained
         in the October report, amended in that way, evidently cannot therefore be considered the best information, within the
         meaning of the provisions referred to in paragraph above, available to the Commission at the time on which to base its
         conclusion as to whether [Fresh Marine] had complied with its undertaking. 
         ...
         
            
It must therefore be held that, when analysing the October report, the Commission committed an error which would not
         have been committed in similar circumstances by an administrative authority exercising ordinary care and diligence. 
         ...
         
            
However, it must be pointed out that [Fresh Marine]'s conduct is not blameless either. ... 
         ...
         
            
In view of the complexity of its October report, the lack of obvious links between the erroneous lines and those containing
         negative values and the ambiguity of those values, [Fresh Marine], without being prompted, should have sent to the Commission,
         with the report, the explanations necessary in order to understand that report. By sending the October report without
         any comment to that effect, [Fresh Marine] was guilty of negligence which, as the letter which the Commission sent it on January shows ..., confused the Commission's officials. ... 
         ...
         
            
... the Court holds that [Fresh Marine] and the Commission were equally at fault during the investigation as to whether [Fresh
         Marine] had complied with its undertaking during the third quarter of and at the end of which the Commission found that
         there had been an apparent breach of the undertaking making it necessary to take provisional measures against imports of [Fresh
         Marine]'s products in the framework of Regulation No 2529/97. For its part, [Fresh Marine], by failing of its own accord to
         append to its October report the explanations required for the correct understanding of the negative values appearing
         in it, showed such negligence as would never have been committed by a trader exercising ordinary care and diligence. Even
         taking into consideration such irregular conduct on the part of [Fresh Marine] and the confusion which such conduct may have
         caused when the report was read, the Court holds that the Commission's reaction, in unilaterally amending that report even
         though it suggested, prima facie, that [Fresh Marine] had complied with its undertaking during the period in question, was
         disproportionate and therefore unlawful, and could not be excused in any circumstances. 
         
            
If the damage alleged by [Fresh Marine] is proved, even in part, and if it is apparent that a causal link exists between that
         damage and the events leading to the imposition of provisional measures on imports of its products, the question which must
         now be considered, it will be appropriate, when determining the Commission's obligation to make reparation, to take account
         of the fact that each party bears half of the responsibility for those events. 
          The alleged damage and the causal link between it and   the wrongful conduct of the Commission ...
         
            
So far as concerns, first, loss of profit between December and March 1998, it must be observed that the figures
         given by the Commission for exports of farmed Atlantic salmon by [Fresh Marine] to the Community between July and September
         show that [Fresh Marine] wholly suspended its exports during the period from approximately mid-December to the end
         of March 1998. ... 
         ...
         
            
In light of those circumstances, it is necessary to assess the amount of the loss of profit suffered by [Fresh Marine] as
         a result of the suspension of its exports to the Community between December and March 1998. That loss of profit
         must be considered to equate to the profit which it would have made if it had continued to export to the Community during
         that period. 
         ...
         
            
The loss of profit suffered by [Fresh Marine] will therefore be fixed at NOK in respect of the period between December
         and January 1998, NOK in respect of February and NOK in respect of the period from to March
         1998. 
         ...
         
            
It is necessary now to determine whether there is a causal link between the loss or damage to [Fresh Marine]'s business ...
         and the wrongful conduct of the Commission, confirmed by Regulation No 2529/97... 
         
            
There is a causal link for the purposes of the second paragraph of Article of the Treaty where there is a direct causal
         nexus between the fault committed by the institution concerned and the injury pleaded, the burden of proof of which rests
         on the applicant (Case T-149/Coldiretti and Others  v  
          Council and Commission  [1998] ECR II-3841, paragraph 101, and the cited case-law). The Community cannot be held liable for any damage other than
         that which is a sufficiently direct consequence of the misconduct of the institution concerned (see, in particular, Joined
         Cases 64/and 113/76, 167/and 239/78, 27/79, 28/and 45/Dumortier and Others  v  
          Council  [1979] ECR 3091, paragraph 21; Case T-168/Blackspur and Others  v  
          Council and Commission  [1995] ECR II-2627, paragraph 52, and [Case T-13/96]  
          TEAM  v  
          Commission  [[1998] ECR II-4073], paragraph 68). 
         
            
In the present case, ... the period during which [Fresh Marine] suspended its exports to the Community coincides with that
         during which the provisional measures imposed by Regulation No 2529/applied to imports of its products. That must be interpreted
         as evidence of the existence of a causal link between the irregularities, in particular those committed by the Commission,
         giving rise to the imposition of provisional measures, on the one hand, and the loss of profit, on the other. 
         
            
It is, indeed, undeniable that, were it not for such irregularities and the provisional measures which followed them, [Fresh
         Marine] would have continued its exports to the Community in compliance with its undertaking. It would thus have suffered
         no loss of profit on the Community market. The misconduct of the Commission, when analysing the October report, and which
         was confirmed by Regulation No 2529/97, is therefore causally linked, within the meaning of the case-law referred to in paragraph
         above, with the loss or damage to [Fresh Marine]'s business. 
         
            
... In that regard, it is necessary to ascertain whether, as the case-law requires, [Fresh Marine] showed reasonable diligence
         in limiting the extent of the damage which it claims to have suffered, a matter which the Commission disputes (see, Joined
         Cases C-104/and C-37/Mulder and Others  v  
          Council and Commission  [1992] ECR I-3061, paragraph 33; Joined Cases C-46/and C-48/Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame [1996] ECR I-1029, paragraph 85; and Case C-284/P  
          Parliament  v  
          Bieber  [2000] ECR I-1527, paragraph 57). 
         
            
The Commission's argument is that, in view of the fact that the duties imposed by Regulation No 2529/were provisional,
         [Fresh Marine] could, by providing a modest amount for the setting-up of a bank guarantee, have continued to export to the
         Community at unchanged prices. 
         ...
         
            
However, even supposing that [Fresh Marine], which has not disputed the Commission's statements regarding the cost of such
         a bank guarantee, had obtained one, the Court holds that it would have run an unusual commercial risk, beyond the level of
         risk inherent in any commercial enterprise, by exporting to the Community during the period when Regulation No 2529/was
         applicable to imports of its products. If, once that bank guarantee had been issued, it had, as the Commission suggests, decided
         to export to the Community at unchanged prices without passing on to its Community customers the amount of the provisional
         duties through the prices it charged, it would have run the risk of having to bear on its own the burden of those duties should
         they ever have been collected definitively. Since it was not able to tell at that time whether that would eventually be the
         case, it therefore had no option but to increase its export prices by the amount of those provisional duties. Having regard
         in particular to competition from Community companies selling salmon and from the numerous Norwegian exporters which had been
         able to continue to sell on the Community market within the terms of their undertakings during the period in question, [Fresh
         Marine] could reasonably have taken the view that there was no chance of finding an outlet for its products on that market
         during that period. 
         
            
In view of those circumstances, the absence of any attempt by [Fresh Marine] to export its products to the Community during
         the period in question cannot be regarded as a failure to fulfil the obligation, laid down in the case-law referred to in
         paragraph above, to show reasonable diligence in mitigating the extent of the damage which it claims to have suffered.
         
         ...
         
            
... the Court holds, on reading the letters of January and February ..., that the Commission did not take the necessary
         and appropriate measures which the party causing the damage must take where damage, such as that at issue here, is ongoing
         (see, to that effect,  
          Parliament  v  
          Bieber , cited in paragraph above, paragraph 57) in order to limit the extent of the damage to which its misconduct, when it
         was verifying compliance by [Fresh Marine] with its undertaking, had contributed. 
         
            
It is clear from the case-file that, following the explanations provided by [Fresh Marine] at the beginning of January ... and the investigation carried out at its premises at the end of that month ..., the Commission had become convinced, at
         least as from January 1998, as attested by its letter of that date, that [Fresh Marine] had complied with its undertaking
         in the course of the third quarter of 1997. However, the Commission, which, in its own words ... and as is shown moreover
         by the fact that it adopted Regulation No 651/98, was alone entitled in the present case to lift the provisional measures
         imposed on imports of [Fresh Marine]'s products by Regulation No 2529/97, for no obvious reason delayed until March before giving [Fresh Marine], by means of Regulation No 651/98, the formal legal reassurance which it could have given at
         the end of January 1998. Although it could have realised during the abovementioned investigation at the [Fresh Marine]'s premises
         that [Fresh Marine] was suffering considerable commercial loss as a result of the application of those provisional measures
         ..., by its letter of February it unjustifiably perpetuated the doubts as to the final outcome regarding the provisional
         duties imposed by Regulation No 2529/97. It thus dissuaded [Fresh Marine] from resuming commercial activities on the Community
         market. 
         ...
         
            
For having thus failed to take the necessary measures as soon as the irregularities giving rise to the imposition of provisional
         measures on imports of [Fresh Marine]'s products were definitively rectified, the Commission must be held solely responsible
         for [Fresh Marine]'s loss of profit, at least as from the end of January 1998. 
         
            
It must therefore be held that, although, as is apparent from the grounds set out in paragraphs to above, [Fresh Marine]
         contributed to the same extent as the Commission in causing loss or damage to its business, continuation of that loss after
         the end of January is, on the other hand, exclusively due to a failure by the Commission to exercise due care; even though
         the explanations which it had obtained from [Fresh Marine] had definitely made it possible to correct their respective prior
         errors and removed any reason to continue to believe that the undertaking had been breached, the Commission delayed, for no
         apparent reason, in regularising [Fresh Marine]'s situation by withdrawing the provisional measures originally imposed against
         it. 
         
            
It follows that the Commission must be held to be liable for one half of the loss of profit suffered by [Fresh Marine] between
         December and January and for all the loss caused to [Fresh Marine] from February to March ... 
         
            
In conclusion, the Commission will be ordered to pay to [Fresh Marine], first, one half of NOK in respect of [Fresh
         Marine]'s loss of profit between December and January and, second, NOK (NOK + NOK 000) as
         compensation for the damage caused to [Fresh Marine] from February to March 1998, that is a total amount of NOK 000.
         The remainder of the application will be dismissed.
         
Forms of order sought before the Court of Justice
            
The Commission claims that the Court should: 
         
─
set aside the contested judgment; 
         
─
in giving final judgment itself, dismiss Fresh Marine's application at first instance and order it to pay the costs; 
         
─
in the alternative, refer the case back to the Court of First Instance. 
         
            
Fresh Marine contends that the Court should: 
         
─
dismiss the Commission's appeal in its entirety; 
         
─
set aside the contested judgment in that it held that Fresh Marine bore half of the responsibility for the events that caused
            the damage; 
         
─
accordingly, order the Commission to pay Fresh Marine damages of NOK 000; 
         
─
order the Commission to bear the costs incurred by Fresh Marine both at first instance and on appeal; 
         
─
order the Commission to pay interest at the annual rate of 8% from the date of the contested judgment on the sum of NOK and on the costs of Fresh Marine to be paid by the Commission. 
         
The main appealThe first and second grounds of appeal, relating to the cause of the damage and to the seriousness of the breach of Community
         law
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
By its first two grounds of appeal, which it is appropriate to examine together, the Commission submits that the Court of
         First Instance erred in law by holding, first, at paragraph of the contested judgment, that the damage pleaded by Fresh
         Marine arose from the allegedly unlawful conduct of the Commission when examining the October report and, second, at
         paragraphs and of the contested judgment, that the judgments of the Community judicature cited by the Commission in
         the proceedings at first instance, in which anti-dumping measures are characterised as legislative acts involving choices
         of economic policy, concerned cases with a  
         radically different background and by concluding therefore, at paragraph of the contested judgment, that mere infringement of Community law
         was sufficient, in the present case, to lead to liability of the Community under Article of the Treaty. 
         
            
According to the Commission, the administrative act of analysing the October report could not, in itself, have been the
         cause of any damage suffered by Fresh Marine since it was only on the entry into force of Regulation No 2529/that the undertaking
         from which its exports had benefited was withdrawn and that anti-dumping and countervailing duties were imposed. It is well
         established that an action for damages can be brought under Article of the Treaty only where the loss is  
         actual and certain (see Joined Cases 67/to 85/Lesieur Cotelle and Others  v  
          Commission  [1976] ECR 391). The Commission submits that any loss suffered by Fresh Marine could have become actual and certain only
         on adoption of Regulation No 2529/97. 
         
            
Moreover, it is clear from the wording of Article 8(10) of Regulation No 384/that, with respect to the imposition of provisional
         duties, the Commission has a wide discretion in determining the circumstances in which it has reason to believe that an undertaking
         has been breached. That point was not addressed by the Court of First Instance since it found, at paragraph of the contested
         judgment, that the analysis of the October report  
         did not involve any choices of economic policy and conferred on the Commission only very little or no discretion. The contested judgment is therefore inconsistent with the Court of First Instance's own case-law (see Case T-489/Unifruit Hellas  v  
          Commission  [1994] ECR II-and Case T-51/Miwon  v  
          Council  [2000] ECR II-1841). 
         
            
According to the Commission, the decisive question is whether the act adopted by it was the result of an exercise of discretion
         since, under Community law, a loss flowing from such an act leads to liability only if the act satisfies the criterion laid
         down in Case 5/Zuckerfabrik Schöppenstedt  v  
          Council  [1971] ECR 975, namely a sufficiently serious breach of a superior rule of law for the protection of individuals. 
         
            
Fresh Marine contends that the damage was clearly caused by the unlawful conduct of the Commission when examining the October
         report. The adoption of Regulation No 2529/merely triggered the damage. Its adoption was the logical and inevitable
         consequence of the act of maladministration committed by the Commission when it unilaterally altered the October report
         without taking the precaution of asking Fresh Marine what impact that alteration might have on the reliability of the information
         provided by it. The fact that the loss became actual following the adoption of Regulation No 2529/does not imply  
          per se   that the adoption caused the damage to Fresh Marine. 
         
            
Fresh Marine also submits that, from the point of view of exporters, a regulation imposing anti-dumping measures has all the
         characteristics of a decision affecting them individually. Regulation No 2529/is therefore not a legislative act but, on
         the contrary, an administrative act adopted in the course of an administrative procedure which specifically and exclusively
         concerned particular exporters. The fact that the Commission imposed a provisional duty on Fresh Marine is merely the logical
         consequence of the erroneous finding that it had failed to comply with its undertaking. As the Court of First Instance found
         at paragraph of the contested judgment, the Commission, in adopting Regulation No 2529/97, did no more than draw provisional
         conclusions from its analysis of the October report. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
In order for the Community to incur liability under the second paragraph of Article of the Treaty, a number of conditions,
         including the existence of a causal link between the conduct alleged against the institution concerned and the damage complained
         of, must be satisfied (see,  
          inter alia , Case 4/Lütticke  v  
          Commission  [1971] ECR 325, paragraph 10). 
         
            
The Court of First Instance observed, at paragraph of the contested judgment, that the period during which Fresh Marine
         suspended its exports to the Community coincided with that during which the provisional measures imposed by Regulation No
         2529/applied to imports of its products. It also found, at paragraph of the contested judgment, that it was undeniable
         that, were it not for the irregularities committed by the Commission and the provisional measures which followed them, Fresh
         Marine would have continued to export to the Community in compliance with its undertaking. 
         
            
Moreover, at paragraph of the contested judgment, the Court of First Instance, after having found that the alleged unlawfulness
         of the Commission's conduct caused the damage alleged only when, and because, it was confirmed by the adoption of provisional
         measures against imports of Fresh Marine's products within the framework of Regulation No 2529/97, ruled that, in that regulation,
         the Commission had done no more with regard to Fresh Marine than draw the appropriate provisional conclusions from its analysis
         of the October report, in particular from the level of the average export price charged by Fresh Marine during the period
         covered by the report. 
         
            
Even if the latter finding is correct, the fact remains that it is only because Regulation No 2529/was adopted by the college
         of Commissioners that provisional duties were imposed and that Fresh Marine found it necessary to cease its exports to the
         Community. 
         
            
It is therefore undisputed that it was only after the entry into force of Regulation No 2529/that the loss suffered by
         Fresh Marine became actual and certain. 
         
            
At paragraph of the contested judgment, the Court of First Instance held, however, that the damage at issue arose from
         the allegedly unlawful conduct of the Commission when it examined the October report. 
         
            
Even if that finding is vitiated by an error of law, such an error will remain irrelevant provided the Court of First Instance
         correctly assessed the conditions under which the Community may incur non-contractual liability. 
         
            
In that regard, the system of rules which the Court of Justice has worked out in relation to the non-contractual liability
         of the Community takes into account,  
          inter alia , the complexity of the situations to be regulated, difficulties in the application or interpretation of the legislation and,
         more particularly, the margin of discretion available to the author of the act in question (see  
          Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame , cited above, paragraph 43;  
          Bergaderm and Goupil , cited above, paragraph 40; and Case C-312/P  
          Commission  v  
          Camar and Tico  [2002] ECR I-11355, paragraph 52). 
         
            
According to settled case-law, Community law confers a right to reparation where three conditions are met: the rule of law
         infringed must be intended to confer rights on individuals; the breach must be sufficiently serious; and there must be a direct
         causal link between the breach of the obligation resting on the author of the act and the damage sustained by the injured
         parties (see  
          Brasserie du Pêcheur and Factortame , paragraph 51,  
          Bergaderm and Goupil , paragraphs and 42, and  
          Commission  v  
          Camar and Tico , paragraph 53). 
         
            
As regards the second condition, the decisive test for finding that a breach of Community law is sufficiently serious is whether
         the Community institution concerned manifestly and gravely disregarded the limits on its discretion. Where that institution
         has only considerably reduced, or even no, discretion, the mere infringement of Community law may be sufficient to establish
         the existence of a sufficiently serious breach (see,  
          inter alia ,  
          Bergaderm and Goupil , paragraphs and 44, and  
          Commission  v  
          Camar and Tico , paragraph 54). 
         
            
Therefore, the determining factor in deciding whether there has been such an infringement is not the general or individual
         nature of the act in question but the discretion available to the institution concerned (see, to that effect,  
          Bergaderm and Goupil , paragraph 46, and  
          Commission  v  
          Camar and Tico , paragraph 55). 
         
            
Since the provisional anti-dumping and countervailing duties were imposed on the basis of Article 8(10) of Regulation No 384/and Article 13(10) of Regulation No 2026/respectively, the limits to which the Commission's discretion was subject in this
         case must be determined. 
         
            
The provisions referred to in the preceding paragraph, while granting the Commission the power to impose provisional anti-dumping
         and countervailing duties, require at the same time that there be reason to believe that the undertaking has been breached
         and that the decision imposing such duties be taken on the basis of the best information available. 
         
            
In the present case, the Commission, when adopting Regulation No 2529/97, which imposed provisional duties on Fresh Marine's
         imports, relied solely on the analysis of a report which, as the Court of First Instance found at paragraphs and of
         the contested judgment, gave reason to believe that that company had complied with its undertaking not to make sales on the
         Community market below a minimum average price, but which the Commission had amended on its own initiative, without taking
         the precaution of asking Fresh Marine what impact its unilateral action might have on the reliability of the information which
         Fresh Marine had provided to it. 
         
            
It follows that the Commission clearly did not comply with its obligation to impose provisional duties only where there is
         reason to believe that the undertaking has been breached. In the circumstances of the present case, such conduct must be regarded
         as a sufficiently serious breach of a rule of Community law satisfying one of the conditions for the incurring of non-contractual
         liability by the Community (see,  
          inter alia ,  
          Bergaderm and Goupil , paragraphs to 44, and  
          Commission  v  
          Camar and Tico , paragraphs and 54). 
         
            
Accordingly, the first two grounds of appeal must be rejected. 
         The third ground of appeal, relating to the Commission's actions in assessing the October report
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
The Commission complains that the Court of First Instance erred in law in finding that the October report suggested that
         Fresh Marine had complied with its undertaking and in holding, therefore, that the Commission's reaction in amending that
         report had been disproportionate and that it had committed an error which it would have avoided if it had exercised ordinary
         care and diligence. 
         
            
The Commission submits, first, that if the Court of First Instance had properly understood the nature of the final entries
         in the October report, it would not have described it, at paragraph of the contested judgment, as a document suggesting
         that Fresh Marine had complied with its undertaking. 
         
            
Second, according to the Commission, the Court of First Instance did not evaluate its conduct within the context of Article
         8(10) of Regulation No 384/96. Since that provision lays down a test to be applied by the Commission in these circumstances,
         it is submitted that, by failing to have regard to that test, the Court of First Instance erred in law. In the Commission's
         view, it was essential that the Court of First Instance determine which party was to bear the burden of proof as to Fresh
         Marine's compliance with its undertaking before deciding whether or not the October report contained the best information
         available. 
         
            
Fresh Marine contends that the Commission's argument concerning the Court of First Instance's alleged misunderstanding of
         the final entries in the October report is inadmissible since appeals are limited to points of law and thus exclude points
         of fact. 
         
            
Finally, Fresh Marine submits that the discretion conferred on the Commission by Article 8(3) of Regulation No 384/with
         respect to the decision whether or not to accept an undertaking cannot be stretched to allow it to manipulate unilaterally
         a monitoring report and to conclude, on that basis, that an exporter has apparently breached its undertaking. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
It need only be stated that, even if the third ground of appeal is admissible, it is of no consequence. 
         
            
The Court has held, at paragraph of the present judgment, that, in imposing provisional anti-dumping and countervailing
         duties, the Commission committed a sufficiently serious breach of Community law for non-contractual liability to be incurred
         by the Community. 
         
            
Accordingly, it is irrelevant whether or not the Court of First Instance's assessment of the Commission's actions when analysing
         the October report is vitiated by an error. 
         
            
Consequently, the third ground of appeal must be rejected. 
         The fourth ground of appeal, relating to the diligence shown by Fresh Marine in mitigating the loss
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
The Commission submits that the Court of First Instance erred in law in finding that, despite its not providing a bank guarantee
         to cover the payment of the provisional duties imposed by Regulation No 2529/and to continue to export to the Community,
         Fresh Marine was not in breach of its duty to mitigate the loss suffered. 
         
            
The Commission observes that the Court of First Instance justified that finding by stating, at paragraph of the contested
         judgment, that, if Fresh Marine had continued to export, it would have run the risk of having to bear on its own the burden
         of those duties should they ever have been collected definitively. In the Commission's view, that reasoning is contradicted
         by the other findings made by the Court of First Instance. If, as the Court of First Instance held, the conduct giving rise
         to the Commission's liability was the unilateral amendment of the October report even though the report suggested that
         Fresh Marine had complied with its undertaking, the contested judgment does not explain how the Court of First Instance was
         therefore able to find that there was a risk of the provisional duty being collected definitively in such circumstances. 
         
            
Fresh Marine contends that this ground of appeal is inadmissible on the ground that it relates solely to a point of fact.
         In any event, if it were so obvious, in the present case, that the provisional duties imposed by Regulation No 2529/would
         not be collected definitively, the Commission should explain why it considered it necessary to impose them in the first place.
         The Commission's reasoning is likewise flawed in that it fails to take into account the fact that it is for the Council and
         not the Commission to decide to collect provisional duties definitively. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
Under Article EC and Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, an appeal lies on a point of law only. It follows
         that, save where the clear sense of the evidence has been distorted, the Court has no jurisdiction to review the assessment
         of the facts made by the Court of First Instance (see,  
          inter alia , Joined Cases C-280/P, C-281/P and C-282/P  
          Moccia Irme and Others  v  
          Commission  [2001] ECR I-4717, paragraph 78, and Case C-104/P  
          DKV  v  
          OHIM  [2002] ECR I-7561, paragraph 22). 
         
            
The Commission's arguments seek to call into question the Court of First Instance's assessment of the facts in the light of
         which it held that Fresh Marine had not breached its duty to show the necessary diligence in mitigating the extent of its
         loss. 
         
            
In the present case, the Court of First Instance made a number of findings of fact at paragraph of the contested judgment.
         It pointed out, in the first place, that if, having provided a bank guarantee, Fresh Marine had decided to export to the Community
         at unchanged prices without passing on to its Community customers the amount of the provisional duties through the prices
         it charged, it would have run the risk of having to bear on its own the burden of those duties should they ever have been
         collected definitively. Since it was not able to tell at that time whether that would eventually be the case, Fresh Marine
         would have had no option, according to the Court of First Instance, but to increase its export prices by the amount of those
         provisional duties. However, the Court of First Instance further held that having regard, in particular, to competition from
         Community companies selling salmon and from the numerous Norwegian exporters which had been able to continue to sell on the
         Community market within the terms of their undertakings during the period in question, it was reasonable for Fresh Marine
         to take the view that there was no chance of finding an outlet for its products on that market during that period. The Court
         of First Instance concluded accordingly that Fresh Marine would have run an unusual commercial risk going beyond the level
         of risk inherent in the pursuit of any economic activity if it had continued to export to the Community over the period during
         which Regulation No 2529/applied to imports of its products. 
         
            
It is clear that the Commission has failed to demonstrate how those findings constitute a distortion of the sense of the evidence
         submitted to the Court of First Instance. 
         
            
Consequently, the fourth ground of appeal must be rejected as inadmissible. 
         The fifth ground of appeal, relating to infringement of the rights of the defence
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
At paragraph of the contested judgment, the Court of First Instance, after having found that the Commission had become
         convinced, at least from January 1998, that Fresh Marine had complied with its undertaking, held that the Commission had,
         for no obvious reason, delayed until March before giving Fresh Marine, by means of Regulation No 651/98, the formal
         legal reassurance which it could have given it at the end of January 1998. 
         
            
By its fifth ground of appeal, the Commission submits that the Court of First Instance infringed its rights of defence by
         failing to give it an opportunity to explain the alleged delay in adopting Regulation No 651/98. 
         
            
Fresh Marine submits that the Commission has misinterpreted the contested judgment. Contrary to what it claims, the Court
         of First Instance did not hold, at paragraphs and of the contested judgment, that the Commission should have adopted
         and published Regulation No 651/after it had decided that the undertaking should be reinstated, but reproached it for not
         having provided Fresh Marine at the end of January with a formal legal reassurance that its undertaking would be reinstated.
         Such a reassurance did not have to take the form of a Commission regulation, and a letter stating clearly that the provisional
         duties would not be collected would have been sufficient. Instead of doing so, the Commission, by its letter of February
         1998, unjustifiably perpetuated the doubts as to the collection of the provisional duties. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
As is clear from paragraph of the contested judgment, the Court of First Instance found that, although the Commission
         alone was competent to lift the provisional measures imposed on imports of Fresh Marine's products by Regulation No 2529/and although it had become convinced, at least from January 1998, that that company had complied with its undertaking,
         it unjustifiably perpetuated, by its letter of February 1998, the doubts as to the final outcome of the provisional duties
         imposed by that regulation, thus dissuading Fresh Marine from resuming its commercial activity on the Community market. 
         
            
The Commission has made no submissions in these appeal proceedings which might call into question either the Court of First
         Instance's findings or the validity of its reasoning. 
         
            
Both during the written procedure and at the hearing before the Court, the Commission submitted merely that, if the Court
         of First Instance had given it an opportunity to explain the procedural requirements for adopting Regulation No 651/98, it
         would not have found, as it did, that there had been an unjustifiable delay on the basis of the unfounded principle that,
         once it had been decided at a purely administrative stage to reinstate Fresh Marine's undertaking, the Commission should have
         adopted Regulation No 651/on the same day. 
         
            
The fifth ground of appeal must therefore be rejected as unfounded. 
         
            
It follows from all the above findings that the main appeal must be dismissed. 
         The cross-appealArguments of the parties
         
            
Fresh Marine submits that the Court of First Instance erred in law in holding, at paragraphs and of the contested judgment,
         that it bore half of the responsibility for the damage suffered by it between December and January because
         it failed to append to the October report explanations of the negative entries appearing in that report. 
         
            
The absence of such explanations did not, in Fresh Marine's submission, cause the damage which it suffered as a result of
         the Commission's conduct. Fresh Marine takes the view that the Commission was obliged under Article 18(4) of Regulation No
         384/to inform it of its intention to delete the negative entries from the October report before imposing provisional
         duties. Had the Commission complied with that provision, no damage would have been suffered by Fresh Marine as it would have
         immediately explained the meaning of the negative entries to the Commission. The Court of First Instance thus erred in law
         in failing to draw the appropriate conclusions from the Commission's failure to comply with its obligation under Article 18(4)
         of Regulation No 384/to inform Fresh Marine of the amendments which it intended to make to the report. 
         
            
Fresh Marine also claims that the Court should order the Commission to pay it interest, from the date of the contested judgment,
         on the sums which are to be paid to it. 
         
            
The Commission contends that Fresh Marine has misinterpreted the contested judgment in claiming that, according to that judgment,
         Article 18(4) of Regulation No 384/is applicable to the present case. Given that no reference is made to that provision
         either in the pleadings submitted to the Court of First Instance or in the contested judgment, the cross-appeal must be declared
         inadmissible because it is based on a plea not raised before the Court of First Instance. 
         
            
Alternatively, the Commission submits that Article 18(4) of Regulation No 384/is inapplicable to the circumstances of the
         present case. It is intended to govern situations where a party provides an unsatisfactory response to a questionnaire during
         an investigation and the Commission intends to reject the evidence supplied and rely on the best evidence available. In the
         present case, the Commission did not reject the October report. 
         
            
Furthermore, the Court of First Instance's finding that Fresh Marine contributed to the damage through its own negligence
         is not contradictory. The Court of First Instance having, at paragraphs to of the contested judgment, contradicted Fresh
         Marine's contention that the October report was clear, it is established that Fresh Marine was negligent in failing to
         attach any explanation to that report. 
         
            
Finally, the Commission contends that the claim for interest is inadmissible because Fresh Marine does not rely on any error
         in law on the part of the Court of First Instance. Alternatively, the Commission submits that such a claim is admissible only
         in relation to an award of damages which the Court might uphold, to the exclusion of any award of costs. Findings of the Court
         
            
Since Fresh Marine complains that the Court of First Instance erred in law in its assessment that Fresh Marine was partly
         responsible for its loss, the cross-appeal is admissible. 
         
            
As regards the substance, the Court of First Instance's reasoning, at paragraphs and of the contested judgment, is not
         contradictory. Having found that the Commission's reaction in unilaterally amending the October report was unlawful and
         that Fresh Marine's submission to the Commission of a report which did not contain the explanations necessary to understand
         it correctly was negligent, the Court of First Instance rightly held that, when determining the Commission's obligation to
         make reparation, account should be taken of the fact that each party bears half of the responsibility for the events. 
         
            
With respect to infringement by the Commission of Article 18(4) of Regulation No 384/and any error in law which the Court
         of First Instance may have committed in failing to draw the appropriate conclusions from such an infringement, it should be
         pointed out that Article 18(4) deals with failure to cooperate where evidence or information provided by traders is rejected
         by the Commission. Consequently, since Article 18(4) of Regulation No 384/concerns other aspects of the anti-dumping procedure,
         it is inapplicable to the facts of the present case. 
         
            
The claim for payment of interest is inadmissible on two grounds. First, it does not satisfy the requirements of Article 112(1)(c)
         of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice because it does not refer to the provisions or principles of Community law
         alleged to have been infringed by the Court of First Instance. Second, it must be regarded as a new claim which cannot be
         presented for the first time in an appeal (see, to that effect, Case C-282/P  
          Enso Española  v  
          Commission  [2000] ECR I-9817, paragraph 62). Before the Court of First Instance, Fresh Marine claimed only that the Commission should
         be ordered to make good the damage it suffered and to pay the costs. 
         
            
It follows from the above that the cross-appeal must be dismissed in its entirety. 
         
Costs
            
Under the first paragraph of Article of the Rules of Procedure, where the appeal is unfounded or where the appeal is well
         founded and the Court of Justice itself gives final judgment in the case, the Court is to make a decision as to costs. Under
         Article 69(2) of those Rules, which apply to appeal proceedings by virtue of Article 118, the unsuccessful party is to be
         ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party's pleadings. Since Fresh Marine has asked for
         the Commission to be ordered to pay the costs and the latter has been unsuccessful in its grounds of appeal, the Commission
         must be ordered to pay the costs relating to the main appeal. On the other hand, since the Commission has asked for Fresh
         Marine to be ordered to pay the costs of the cross-appeal and the latter has been unsuccessful in its grounds of appeal, Fresh
         Marine must be ordered to pay the costs relating to the cross-appeal. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT
hereby: 
         
1.
 Dismisses the main appeal and the cross-appeal; 
            
2.
 Orders the Commission of the European Communities to pay the costs relating to the main appeal; 
            
3.
 Orders Fresh Marine Company A/S to pay the costs relating to the cross-appeal. 
            
Rodríguez Iglesias
Puissochet 
Schintgen 
Timmermans
Gulmann 
Edward 
La Pergola
Skouris 
von Bahr 
Cunha Rodrigues
Rosas 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on July 2003. 
         
 R. Grass 
G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: English.
Top  
 