
Order of the Court (Seventh Chamber) of December – Platis v Council and Greece
(Case C‑513/P)
Appeal – Action for annulment – Council regulations laying down provisions on the introduction of the euro – National legislative measures laying down provisions to implement those regulations – Manifest inadmissibility of the action – General Court’s manifest lack of jurisdiction – Appeal in part clearly unfounded and in part clearly inadmissible – Article of the Rules of Procedure
1.                     Actions for annulment – Time-limits – Mandatory nature – Point from which time starts to run – Date on which the measure at
            issue was published – Measure continuing to have effects – No bearing (Art. 263, sixth para., TFEU; Statute of the Court of
            Justice, Art. 45, second para.; Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, Art. 81(1) and (2)) (see paras 8-9)
2.                     Procedure – Action brought by a natural or legal person seeking a declaration that a Member State has infringed Union law
            – Union judicature’s clear lack of jurisdiction – Inadmissibility (Arts TFEU, TFEU and TFEU) (see paras 13-15)
3.                     Appeals – Grounds – Mere repetition of the pleas and arguments put forward before the General Court – Error of law relied
            on not identified – Inadmissibility (Art. TFEU; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.; Rules of Procedure
            of the Court of Justice, Art. 112(1)(c)) (see para. 18)
Re: 
Appeal brought against the order of the General Court (First Chamber) of September in Case T‑311/Platis
 v 
Council and Greece
 whereby the General Court dismissed an action seeking annulment of several Council regulations adopted in 1997, 1998, and laying down provisions on the introduction of the euro, on unit values and technical specifications of euro coins
                  to enter circulation, and on conversion rates between the euro and the currencies of Member States adopting the euro, and
                  the annulment of the national laws 2842/and 2948/transposing the contested regulations into the Greek legal order
                  – Clearly inadmissible – Clear lack of jurisdiction.
               
Operative part 
1.
	The appeal is dismissed. 
2.
	Mr Platis is ordered to bear his own costs.
Top  
 