
Case C-204/Peter Rehder
v
Air Baltic Corporation
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Bundesgerichtshof)
(Regulation (EC) No 44/– Second indent of Article 5(1)(b) – Regulation (EC) No 261/– Articles 5(1)(c) and 7(1)(a) – Montreal Convention – Article 33(1) – Air transport – Passenger claims for compensation against airlines in the case of flight cancellation – Place of performance of the service – Jurisdiction in the case of air transport from one Member State to another Member State by an airline established in a third
         Member State)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Judicial cooperation in civil matters – Jurisdiction and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters – Regulation
            No 44/– Special jurisdiction – Court for the place of performance of the contractual obligation in question – Contract
            for the provision of services – Several places at which services are provided in different Member States – Jurisdiction of
            the court at the place of principal supply of services 
(Council Regulation No 44/2001, Art. 5(1)(b), 2nd indent)
2.        Judicial cooperation in civil matters – Jurisdiction and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters – Regulation
            No 44/– Special jurisdiction – Court for the place of performance of the contractual obligation in question – Contract
            for the provision of services – Air transport of passengers from one Member State to another Member State – Claim for compensation
            for flight cancellation founded on Regulation No 261/– Jurisdiction of the Court at the places of arrival and departure,
            at the applicant’s choice
(European Council and Parliament Regulation No 261/2004; Council Regulation No 44/2001, Art. 5(1)(b), 2nd indent)
1.        The rule of special jurisdiction in matters relating to a contract, set out in Article 5(1) of Regulation No 44/on jurisdiction
         and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters, reflects an objective of proximity and the
         reason for that rule is the existence of a close link between the contract and the court called upon to hear and determine
         the case. Where there are several places at which services are provided in different Member States, in the light of the objectives
         of proximity and predictability, it is necessary to identify the place with the closest linking factor between the contract
         in question and the court having jurisdiction, in particular the place where, pursuant to that contract, the main provision
         of services is to be carried out.
      
(see paras 32, 37-38)
2.        The second indent of Article 5(1)(b) of Regulation No 44/on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments
         in civil and commercial matters must be interpreted as meaning that, in the case of air transport of passengers from one Member
         State to another Member State, carried out on the basis of a contract with only one airline, which is the operating carrier,
         the court having jurisdiction to deal with a claim for compensation founded on that transport contract and on Regulation No 261/establishing common rules on compensation and assistance to passengers in the event of denied boarding and of cancellation
         or long delay of flights, and repealing Regulation No 295/91, is that, at the applicant’s choice, which has territorial jurisdiction
         over the place of departure or place of arrival of the aircraft, as those places are agreed in that contract. 
      
In this regard, the services the provision of which corresponds to the performance of obligations arising from a contract
         to transport passengers by air are the checking-in and boarding of passengers, the on-board reception of those passengers
         at the place of take-off agreed in the transport contract, the departure of the aircraft at the scheduled time, the transport
         of the passengers and their luggage from the place of departure to the place of arrival, the care of passengers during the
         flight, and, finally, the disembarkation of the passengers in conditions of safety at the place of landing and at the time
         scheduled in that contract. The only places which have a direct link to those services, provided in performance of obligations
         linked to the subject-matter of the contract, are those of the departure and arrival of the aircraft, understood as agreed
         in the contract of transport. Air transport consists, by its very nature, of services provided in an indivisible and identical
         manner from the place of departure to that of arrival of the aircraft, with the result that a separate part of the service
         which is the principal service, which is to be provided in a specific place, cannot be distinguished on the basis of an economic
         criterion. Each of those two places has a sufficiently close link of proximity to the material elements of the dispute to
         ensure the close connection between the contract and the court having jurisdiction, in accordance with the objectives of proximity
         and predictability, which are pursued by the centralisation of jurisdiction in the place of the provision of services and
         by the determination of sole jurisdiction for all claims arising out of a contract.
      
 (see paras 37, 40-44, 47, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Regulation (EC) No 44/– Second indent of Article 5(1)(b) – Regulation (EC) No 261/– Articles 5(1)(c) and 7(1)(a) – Montreal Convention – Article 33(1) – Air transport – Passenger claims for compensation against airlines in the case of flight cancellation – Place of performance of the service – Jurisdiction in the case of air transport from one Member State to another Member State by an airline established in a third
         Member State)
      
In Case C‑204/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Bundesgerichtshof (Germany), made by decision of April
         2008, received at the Court on May 2008, in the proceedings
      
Peter Rehder
v
Air Baltic Corporation,
      
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, R. Silva de Lapuerta, E. Juhász (Rapporteur), G. Arestis and J. Malenovský,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro,
Registrar: N. Nanchev, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on April 2009,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Mr Rehder, by J. Kummer, Rechtsanwalt,
–        Air Baltic Corporation, by G.‑S. Hök, Rechtsanwalt,
–        the German Government, by M. Lumma and J. Kemper, acting as Agents,
–        the Czech Government, by M. Smolek, acting as Agent,
–        the Latvian Government, by E. Eihmane and U. Dreimanis, acting as Agents,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by L. Seeboruth, acting as Agent,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by A.‑M. Rouchaud-Joët and S. Grünheid, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of the second indent of Article 5(1)(b) of Council Regulation
         (EC) No 44/of December on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial
         matters (OJ 2001, L 12, p. 1).
      
The reference has been made in the context of a dispute between Mr Rehder and Air Baltic Corporation (‘Air Baltic’) following
         the cancellation of a flight which he had booked with that company to take him from Munich (Germany) to Vilnius (Lithuania).
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
Regulation No 44/entered into force on March and, in accordance with Article 68(1) thereof, supersedes the Convention
         of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters, as subsequently amended
         (OJ C 27, p. 1; the ‘Brussels Convention’).
      
Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 44/states that ‘[t]he Community has set itself the objective of maintaining
         and developing an area of freedom, security and justice, in which the free movement of persons is ensured. In order to establish
         progressively such an area, the Community should adopt, amongst other things, the measures relating to judicial cooperation
         in civil matters which are necessary for the sound operation of the internal market’.
      
The second sentence of recital in the preamble to Regulation No 44/states that ‘[p]rovisions to unify the rules of
         conflict of jurisdiction in civil and commercial matters and to simplify the formalities with a view to rapid and simple recognition
         and enforcement of judgments from Member States bound by this Regulation are essential’.
      
The first sentence of recital in the preamble to that regulation states that ‘[t]he rules of jurisdiction must be highly
         predictable and founded on the principle that jurisdiction is generally based on the defendant’s domicile and jurisdiction
         must always be available on this ground save in a few well-defined situations in which the subject-matter of the litigation
         or the autonomy of the parties warrants a different linking factor’.
      
Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 44/states that ‘?i?n addition to the defendant’s domicile, there should be
         alternative grounds of jurisdiction based on a close link between the court and the action or in order to facilitate the sound
         administration of justice’.
      
The rules on jurisdiction laid down by Regulation No 44/are set out in Chapter II thereof, which consists of Articles
         to 31.
      
Article 2(1) of Regulation No 44/2001, which forms part of Section (‘General provisions’) of Chapter II, is worded as follows:
      
‘Subject to this Regulation, persons domiciled in a Member State shall, whatever their nationality, be sued in the courts
         of that Member State.’
      
Article 3(1) of Regulation No 44/2001, which also features in Section of Chapter II, provides:
      
‘Persons domiciled in a Member State may be sued in the courts of another Member State only by virtue of the rules set out
         in Sections to of this Chapter.’
      
Article 5(1) of Regulation No 44/2001, which falls under Chapter II, Section 2, entitled ‘Special jurisdiction’, states:
      
‘A person domiciled in a Member State may, in another Member State, be sued:
1.      (a)    in matters relating to a contract, in the courts for the place of performance of the obligation in question;
(b)       for the purpose of this provision and unless otherwise agreed, the place of performance of the obligation in question shall
         be:
      
–        in the case of the sale of goods, the place in a Member State where, under the contract, the goods were delivered or should
         have been delivered, 
      
–        in the case of the provision of services, the place in a Member State where, under the contract, the services were provided
         or should have been provided,
      
(c)       if subparagraph (b) does not apply then subparagraph (a) applies’.
Article 60(1) of Regulation No 44/provides: 
      
‘For the purposes of this Regulation, a company or other legal person or association of natural or legal persons is domiciled
         at the place where it has its:
      
(a)      statutory seat, or
(b)      central administration, or
(c)      principal place of business.’
Article 71(1) of Regulation No 44/states: 
      
‘This Regulation shall not affect any conventions to which the Member States are parties and which, in relation to particular
         matters, govern jurisdiction or the recognition or enforcement of judgments.’
      
Regulation (EC) No 261/of the European Parliament and of the Council of February establishing common rules on
         compensation and assistance to passengers in the event of denied boarding and of cancellation or long delay of flights, and
         repealing Regulation (EEC) No 295/(OJ L 46, p. 1) lays down the principle of compensation of passengers in the context
         of international air transport in the case where a flight is cancelled. Article of that regulation, entitled ‘Cancellation’,
         states: 
      
‘1.      In case of cancellation of a flight, the passengers concerned shall:
…
(c)      have the right to compensation by the operating air carrier in accordance with Article 7, unless … they are informed of the
         cancellation …’
      
Article 7(1) of Regulation No 261/2004, entitled ‘Right to compensation’, provides:
      
‘Where reference is made to this Article, passengers shall receive compensation amounting to:
(a)      EUR for all flights of kilometres or less;
…’
Article 12(1) of Regulation No 261/states: 
      
‘This Regulation shall apply without prejudice to a passenger’s rights to further compensation. The compensation granted under
         this Regulation may be deducted from such compensation’.
      
 The Montreal Convention
The Convention for the Unification of Certain Rules for International Carriage by Air, concluded in Montreal on May (‘the Montreal Convention’), was signed by the European Community on December 1999, approved on its behalf by Council Decision
         2001/539/EC of April (OJ L 194, p. 38) and entered into force, so far as the Community is concerned, on June
         2004. Article of that Convention, entitled ‘Delay’, provides:
      
‘The carrier is liable for damage occasioned by delay in the carriage by air of passengers, baggage or cargo. …’
Article 33(1) of the Montreal Convention, entitled ‘Jurisdiction’, is worded as following:
      
‘An action for damages must be brought, at the option of the plaintiff, in the territory of one of the States Parties, either
         before the court of the domicile of the carrier or of its principal place of business, or where it has a place of business
         through which the contract has been made or before the court at the place of destination.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Mr Rehder, who resides in Munich, booked a flight from Munich to Vilnius with Air Baltic, the registered office of which is
         in Riga (Latvia). The distance between Munich and Villnius is slightly less that kilometres. Approximately minutes
         before the scheduled time of departure from Munich, passengers were informed that their flight had been cancelled. After his
         booking had been changed by Air Baltic, the applicant took a flight via Copenhagen to Vilnius, where he arrived more than
         six hours after the flight which he had initially booked should have landed. 
      
By an application to the Amtsgericht Erding, the court having territorial jurisdiction over Munich airport, Mr Rehder requested
         that Air Baltic be ordered to pay him compensation in the amount of EUR in accordance with Articles 5(1)(c) and 7(1)(a)
         of Regulation No 261/2004. Holding that the air transport services are provided at the aircraft’s place of departure, which
         implies that the place of performance of the contractual obligation, within the terms of the second indent of Article 5(1)(b)
         of Regulation No 44/2001, is that of the airport of departure, in this case Munich airport, the Amtsgericht Erding held that
         it had jurisdiction to deal with Mr Rehder’s claim for compensation.
      
In an appeal by Air Baltic against that decision, the Oberlandesgericht München, taking the view that air transport services
         are provided at the place where the company operating the flight has its head office, overturned the decision of the first-instance
         court. Mr Rehder appealed to the Bundesgerichtshof on a point of law against the judgment of the Oberlandesgericht.
      
The referring court observes that the question whether the Amtsgericht Erding has jurisdiction in the circumstances of this
         case depends on the interpretation of the second indent of Article 5(1)(b) of Regulation No 44/2001. It maintains, with regard
         to the first indent of that provision, which deals with the sale of goods, that the Court of Justice first of all held that
         that rule of special jurisdiction in matters relating to a contract establishes the place of delivery as the autonomous linking
         factor to apply to all claims founded on one and the same contract for the sale of goods rather than merely to the claims
         founded on the obligation of delivery itself (Case C‑386/Color Drack [2007] ECR I-3699, paragraph 26). The Court then went on to hold that that rule is also applicable where there are several
         places of delivery of the goods and that in that case ‘place of performance’ must be understood as the place with the closest
         linking factor, which, as a general rule, will be at the place of the principal delivery, which must be determined on the
         basis of economic criteria (Color Drack, paragraph 40). The Court finally held that, if it is not possible to determine the place of principal delivery, each of
         the places of delivery has a sufficiently close link of proximity to the material elements of the dispute and, accordingly,
         a significant link as regards jurisdiction. In such a case, the applicant may sue the defendant in the court for the place
         of delivery of his choice (Color Drack, paragraph 42).
      
However, the Bundesgerischtshof points out that the Court also expressly stated at paragraph of Color Drack that its considerations applied solely to the case where there are several places of delivery within a single Member State
         and were without prejudice to the answer to be given where there are several places of delivery in a number of Member States.
      
The Bundesgerichtshof is thus unsure whether, regard being had to the objectives of Regulation No 44/2001, according to which
         the rules on jurisdiction should be harmonised and made predictable and according to which a single place of performance should
         be identified, if possible in the place presenting the closest connection between the dispute and the court having jurisdiction,
         the second indent of Article 5(1)(b) of Regulation No 44/should not be interpreted in the same way and, generally, whether
         jurisdiction in legal disputes concerning contractual obligations arising from contracts relating to air transport should
         not be concentrated in a single place of performance, despite the fact that, within the framework of such a contract, it is
         not easy to determine unequivocally the place where the services are mainly provided.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the Bundesgerichtshof decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Is the second indent of Article 5(1)(b) of Regulation [No 44/2001] to be interpreted as meaning that in the case also of journeys
         by air from one Member State to another Member State, the single place of performance for all contractual obligations must
         be taken to be the place of the main provision of services, determined according to economic criteria?
      
2.      Where a single place of performance is to be determined: what criteria are relevant for its determination; is the single place
         of performance determined, in particular, by the place of departure or the place of arrival of the aircraft?’
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Before examining the questions referred by the Bundesgerichtshof, it should be noted, as a preliminary point, that some of
         the observations submitted to the Court raised the question of the applicability, in a situation such as that which arises
         in the main proceedings, of Article of the Montreal Convention for the purpose of determining which court has jurisdiction.
      
In that regard, the right which the applicant in the main proceedings relies on in the present case, which is based on Article
         of Regulation No 261/2004, is a passenger’s right to a standardised and lump-sum payment following the cancellation of a
         flight, a right which is independent of compensation for damage in the context of Article of the Montreal Convention (see
         Case C‑344/IATA and ELFAA [2006] ECR I‑403, paragraphs to 46). The rights based respectively on those provisions of Regulation No 261/and of
         the Montreal Convention accordingly fall within different regulatory frameworks. 
      
It follows that, since it was introduced on the basis of Regulation No 261/alone, the claim in the main proceedings must
         be examined in the light of Regulation No 44/2001.
      
By its questions, which it is appropriate to examine together, the referring court essentially asks the Court to specify how
         the words ‘the place in a Member State where, under the contract, the services were provided or should have been provided’
         in the second indent of Article 5(1)(b) of Regulation No 44/are to be interpreted in the case of the air transport of
         persons from one Member State to another, in the context of a claim for compensation based on Regulation No 261/2004.
      
In reality, by those questions, the Court is being asked whether, in the case of a provision of services such as those at
         issue in the main proceedings, the same interpretation should be given to those words as that which the Court gave to the
         first indent of Article 5(1)(b) in Color Drack, in the case where there are several places of delivery within a single Member State.
      
In paragraph of Color Drack, in order to answer the question posed, the Court based itself on the origins, objectives and scheme of Regulation No 44/2001.
      
In that context, the Court noted, first, that the rule of special jurisdiction set out in Article 5(1) of Regulation No 44/in matters relating to a contract, which complements the rule that jurisdiction is generally based on the defendant’s domicile,
         reflects an objective of proximity and the reason for that rule is the existence of a close link between the contract and
         the court called upon to hear and determine the case (Color Drack, paragraph 22).
      
The Court next noted that, regarding the place of performance of the obligations arising from contracts for the sale of goods,
         Regulation No 44/2001, in the first indent of Article 5(1)(b), defines that criterion of a link autonomously, in order to
         reinforce the objectives of unification of the rules of jurisdiction and predictability. Accordingly, in such cases the place
         of delivery of the goods is established as the autonomous linking factor to apply to all claims founded on one and the same
         contract of sale (Color Drack, paragraphs and 26).
      
In the light of the objectives of proximity and predictability, the Court held that the rule set out in the first indent of
         Article 5(1)(b) of Regulation No 44/is also applicable where there are several places of delivery of goods within a single
         Member State, since one court must have jurisdiction to hear all the claims arising out of the contract (Color Drack, paragraphs and 38).
      
Finally, where there are several places of delivery of the goods in a single Member State, the Court took the view that the
         place with the closest linking factor between the contract and the court having jurisdiction is that of the principal delivery,
         which must be determined on the basis of economic criteria, and that, if it is not possible to determine the place of the
         principal delivery, each of the places of delivery has a sufficiently close link of proximity to the material elements of
         the dispute, in which case the applicant may sue the defendant in the court for the place of delivery of his choice (Color Drack, paragraphs and 42).
      
The factors on which the Court based itself in order to arrive at the interpretation set out in Color Drack are also valid with regard to contracts for the provision of services, including the cases where such provision is not effected
         in one single Member State. The rules of special jurisdiction provided for by Regulation No 44/for contracts for the
         sale of goods and the provision of services have the same origin, pursue the same objectives and occupy the same place in
         the scheme established by that regulation.
      
Where the services in question are provided at several places in different Member States, a differentiated approach cannot
         be applied to the objectives of proximity and predictability, which are pursued by the centralisation of jurisdiction in the
         place of the provision of services under the contract at issue and by the determination of sole jurisdiction for all claims
         arising out of that contract. Apart from the fact that there is no basis for it in the provisions of Regulation No 44/2001,
         such a differentiated approach would contradict the objectives for which it was adopted, which, through the unification of
         the rules governing conflict of jurisdiction in civil and commercial matters, contributes to the development of an area of
         freedom, security and justice, as well as to the proper functioning of the internal market within the Community (see recitals
         and in the preamble to Regulation No 44/2001). 
      
Consequently, where there are several places at which services are provided in different Member States, it is also necessary
         to identify the place with the closest linking factor between the contract in question and the court having jurisdiction,
         in particular the place where, pursuant to that contract, the main provision of services is to be carried out.
      
In that regard, it must be noted at the outset that, as has been pointed out by the national court, the place of the registered
         office or the principal place of establishment of the airline concerned does not have the necessary close link to the contract.
         The operations and activities undertaken from that place, such as, in particular, the provision of an adequate aircraft and
         crew, are logistical and preparatory measures for the purpose of carrying out a contract relating to air transport and are
         not services the provision of which is linked to the actual content of the contract. The same is true with regard to the place
         where the contract for air transport is concluded and the place where the ticket is issued.
      
The services the provision of which corresponds to the performance of obligations arising from a contract to transport passengers
         by air are the checking-in and boarding of passengers, the on-board reception of those passengers at the place of take-off
         agreed in the transport contract in question, the departure of the aircraft at the scheduled time, the transport of the passengers
         and their luggage from the place of departure to the place of arrival, the care of passengers during the flight, and, finally,
         the disembarkation of the passengers in conditions of safety at the place of landing and at the time scheduled in that contract.
         From that point of view, places where the aircraft may stop over also do not have a sufficient link to the essential nature
         of the services resulting from that contract.
      
The only places which have a direct link to those services, provided in performance of obligations linked to the subject-matter
         of the contract, are those of the departure and arrival of the aircraft, since the words ‘places of departure and arrival’
         must be understood as agreed in the contract of carriage in question, made with one sole airline which is the operating carrier.
      
It must, however, be pointed out in that regard that, unlike deliveries of goods to different locations, which are distinct
         and quantifiable operations for the purpose of determining the principal delivery on the basis of economic criteria, air transport
         consists, by its very nature, of services provided in an indivisible and identical manner from the place of departure to that
         of arrival of the aircraft, with the result that a separate part of the service which is the principal service, which is to
         be provided in a specific place, cannot be distinguished in such cases on the basis of an economic criterion.
      
In those circumstances, both the place of arrival and the place of departure of the aircraft must be considered, in the same
         respect, as the place of provision of the services which are the subject of an air transport contract.
      
Each of those two places has a sufficiently close link of proximity to the material elements of the dispute and, accordingly,
         the close connection required by the rules of special jurisdiction set out in Article 5(1) of Regulation No 44/2001. Accordingly,
         a person claiming compensation on the basis of Regulation No 261/may sue, as a matter of choice which he must make, the
         defendant in the court in whose jurisdiction one of those places may be found on the basis of the second indent of Article
         5(1)(b) of Regulation No 44/2001.
      
Such a choice granted to the applicant, apart from respecting the criterion of proximity, also satisfies the requirement of
         predictability, in so far as it allows the applicant, as well as the defendant, easily to identify the courts before which
         proceedings may be brought. What is more, it is consistent with the objective of legal certainty, since the applicant’s choice
         is limited to two possible judicial fora within the framework of the second indent of Article 5(1)(b) of Regulation No 44/2001.
         It must also be borne in mind that the applicant retains the option of bringing the matter before the courts of the defendant’s
         domicile, as provided for by Article 2(1) of Regulation No 44/2001, that is to say, in the circumstances of the present case,
         pursuant to Article 60(1) of that regulation, the court with the jurisdictional district of which the air carrier has its
         registered office, central administration or principal place of business, which is in conformity with Article of the Montreal
         Convention.
      
Furthermore, such a choice for an applicant, even when it concerns courts situated in different Member States, is also recognised
         by the Court’s established case-law, in the context of the special jurisdiction in tort, delict or quasi-delict, provided
         for in Article 5(3) of the Brussels Convention and also reiterated in Article 5(3) of Regulation No 44/(see, inter alia,
         Case 21/Bier ‘Mines de potasse d’Alsace’ [1976] ECR 1735, paragraphs and 25, and Case C-168/Kronhofer [2004] ECR I-6009, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Regard being had to all of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the questions referred is that the second indent of
         Article 5(1)(b) of Regulation No 44/must be interpreted as meaning that, in the case of air transport of passengers from
         one Member State to another Member State, carried out on the basis of a contract with only one airline, which is the operating
         carrier, the court having jurisdiction to deal with a claim for compensation founded on that transport contract and on Regulation
         No 261/is that, at the applicant’s choice, which has territorial jurisdiction over the place of departure or place of
         arrival of the aircraft, as those places are agreed in that contract.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
The second indent of Article 5(1)(b) of Council Regulation (EC) No 44/of December on jurisdiction and the recognition
            and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters must be interpreted as meaning that, in the case of air transport
            of passengers from one Member State to another Member State, carried out on the basis of a contract with only one airline,
            which is the operating carrier, the court having jurisdiction to deal with a claim for compensation founded on that transport
            contract and on Regulation (EC) No 261/of the European Parliament and of the Council of February establishing
            common rules on compensation and assistance to passengers in the event of denied boarding and of cancellation or long delay
            of flights, and repealing Regulation (EEC) No 295/91, is that, at the applicant’s choice, which has territorial jurisdiction
            over the place of departure or place of arrival of the aircraft, as those places are agreed in that contract.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
