
Case C-132/Beecham Group plc and Others
v
Andacon NV
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Rechtbank van Koophandel te Brussel)
(Removal from the register)
  
  
ORDER OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECOND CHAMBER OF THE COURT
March (*)
      
(Removal from the register)
In Case C-132/07,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the rechtbank van koophandel te Brussel (Belgium), made by decision
         of February 2007, received at the Court on March 2007, in the proceedings
      
Beecham Group plc and Others
v
Andacon NV,
THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECOND CHAMBER OF THE COURT,
after hearing Advocate General Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,
makes the following
Order
By decision of February 2007, received at the Court on March 2007, the rechtbank van koophandel te Brussel (Commercial
         Court, Brussels) referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC questions on the interpretation of Articles
         4(2), and 9(2) and (3) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1383/of July concerning customs action against goods suspected
         of infringing certain intellectual property rights and the measures to be taken against goods found to have infringed such
         rights (OJ L 196, p. 7) and of Article 9(1) of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1891/of October laying down
         provisions for the implementation of Council Regulation (EC) No 1383/concerning customs action against goods suspected
         of infringing certain intellectual property rights and the measures to be taken against goods found to have infringed such
         rights (OJ L 328, p. 16).
      
However, on May 2007, the claimants in the main proceedings appealed against that decision before the hof van beroep te
         Brussel (Court of Appeal, Brussels) (Belgium). Consequently, the national proceedings continued before that court.
      
By letters of March and March 2008, received at the Court on March and March respectively, the parties to the main
         proceedings notified the Court that they had resolved the matter amicably and that, accordingly, the questions referred for
         a preliminary ruling had become devoid of purpose.
      
Subsequently, the hof van beroep notified the Court of the judgment that it had delivered on June in the main proceedings,
         recording that the dispute had been settled amicably and ordering that the proceedings be removed from that court’s register.
      
In those circumstances, by letter of November 2008, the Court informed the rechtbank van koophandel that, subject to any
         objections received from it by December 2008, the Court intended to remove the case pending before it from the Register.
      
The rechtbank van koophandel did not reply to that letter.
      
In those circumstances, the present case must be removed from the Register of the Court.
      
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the President of the Second Chamber of the Court hereby orders:
Case C-132/is removed from the Register of the Court.
Luxembourg, March 2009.
R. Grass
 
      C.W.A. Timmermans
Registrar
 
      President of the Second Chamber
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 