
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-221/Commission of the European CommunitiesvRepublic of Austria
«(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Approximation of laws – Articles EC and EC – Directive 79/112/EEC – Labelling and presentation of foodstuffs)»
Opinion of Advocate General Geelhoed delivered on July I - Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), January I - Summary of the Judgment
Approximation of laws – Labelling and presentation of foodstuffs – Directive 79/– National legislation imposing a general prohibition of health-related information on the labelling of foodstuffs – National legislation subjecting such information to a prior authorisation procedure – Not permitted (Council Directive 79/112, Arts 2(1)(a) and (b) and 15(1) and (2), as amended by Directive 97/4) It follows from Articles 2(1)(a) and (b) and 15(1) of Directive 79/on the approximation of the laws of the Member States
         relating to the labelling, presentation and advertising of foodstuffs for sale to the ultimate consumer, as amended by Directive
         97/4, that foodstuffs whose labelling contains non-misleading health-related information must be regarded as complying with
         the rules of that directive, since Member States may not prohibit their marketing on grounds of a possible irregularity of
         that labelling. The power retained by the Member States to lay down rules in addition to those of Directive 79/is limited
         by Article 15(2) of the directive, which lists exhaustively the grounds on which the application of non-harmonised national
         provisions prohibiting trade in foodstuffs which comply with the directive may be justified, those grounds including  the
         protection of health and consumers.Those provisions consequently preclude national legislation of a Member State which lays down a general prohibition, subject
         to prior authorisation intended to prevent misleading statements relating to health, of all health-related information on
         the labelling and presentation of foodstuffs. Such national legislation laying down a procedure of prior authorisation for
         all health-related information on the labelling of foodstuffs, including those which are manufactured lawfully in other Member
         States and are in free circulation there, has the consequence in practice that foodstuffs bearing health-related information
         may not be marketed freely, even if the information is not liable to mislead the consumer, and thus cannot be regarded as
         proportionate to the aim pursued.see paras 37-38, 48, 51-52, 54-55, operative part
      
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)January (1)
((Failure by a Member State to fulfil its obligations – Approximation of laws – Articles EC and EC – Directive 79/112/EEC – Labelling and presentation of foodstuffs))
In Case C-221/00, 
            
 Commission of the European Communities,  represented by J.C. Schieferer, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, 
v
 Republic of Austria,  represented by H. Dossi, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
defendant, supported by Kingdom of Denmark,  represented by C.P. Kristensen, acting as Agent,
            
intervener, 
APPLICATION for a declaration that, by interpreting and applying Paragraph 9(1) and (3) of the Bundesgesetz über den Verkehr
            mit Lebensmitteln, Verzehrprodukten, Zusatzstoffen, kosmetischen Mitteln und Gebrauchsgegenständen (Lebensmittelgesetz 1975)
            (Federal Law on trade in foodstuffs, products intended for human consumption, additives, cosmetic products and consumer goods)
            of January as meaning that health-related information on foodstuffs for general consumption is prohibited in a general
            and absolute manner, and by subjecting the affixing of such information to a prior authorisation procedure, the Republic of
            Austria has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 2(1)(b) and 15(1) and (2) of Council Directive 79/112/EEC of December on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the labelling, presentation and advertising
            of foodstuffs (OJ L 33, p. 1), as amended by Directive 97/4/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of January
            (OJ L 43, p. 21), and under Article EC,
            
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
composed of: C. Gulmann, acting for the President of the Sixth Chamber, V. Skouris, F. Macken, N. Colneric and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed, Registrar: M.-F. Contet, Administrator, 
            
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,after hearing oral argument from the parties at the hearing on May 2002, at which the Commission was represented by J.C. Schieferer
            and the Republic of Austria by C. Pesendorfer, acting as Agent,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on July 2002, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on May 2000, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action under
         Article EC for a declaration that, by interpreting and applying Paragraph 9(1) and (3) of the Bundesgesetz über den Verkehr
         mit Lebensmitteln, Verzehrprodukten, Zusatzstoffen, kosmetischen Mitteln und Gebrauchsgegenständen (Lebensmittelgesetz 1975)
         (Federal Law on trade in foodstuffs, products intended for human consumption, additives, cosmetic products and consumer goods,
          
         the LMG) of January as meaning that health-related information on foodstuffs for general consumption is prohibited in a general
         and absolute manner, and by subjecting the affixing of such information to a prior authorisation procedure, the Republic of
         Austria has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 2(1)(b) and 15(1) and (2) of Council Directive 79/112/EEC of December on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the labelling, presentation and advertising
         of foodstuffs (OJ L 33, p. 1), as amended by Directive 97/4/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of January
         (OJ L 43, p. 21) (
         Directive 79/112), and under Article EC. 
         
            
By order of the President of the Court of November 2000, the Kingdom of Denmark was given leave to intervene in support
         of the form of order sought by the Republic of Austria. 
         
Legal background
Community legislation
         
            
Article EC provides: Quantitative restrictions on imports and all measures having equivalent effect shall be prohibited between Member States.
         
            
Article EC reads as follows: The provisions of Articles and shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports or goods in transit
         justified on grounds of public morality, public policy or public security; the protection of health and life of humans, animals
         or plants; the protection of national treasures possessing artistic, historic or archaeological value; or the protection of
         industrial and commercial property. Such prohibitions or restrictions shall not, however, constitute a means of arbitrary
         discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between Member States.
         
            
Article 2(1) of Directive 79/provides: The labelling and methods used must not:
         
(a)
be such as could mislead the purchaser to a material degree, particularly: 
         
(i)
as to the characteristics of the foodstuff and, in particular, as to its nature, identity, properties, composition, quantity,
         durability, origin or provenance, method of manufacture or production; 
         
(ii)
by attributing to the foodstuff effects or properties which it does not possess; 
         
(iii)
by suggesting that the foodstuff possesses special characteristics when in fact all similar foodstuffs possess such characteristics;
         
         
(b)
subject to Community provisions applicable to natural mineral waters and foodstuffs for particular nutritional uses, attribute
         to any foodstuff the property of preventing, treating or curing a human disease, or refer to such properties.
         
            
Article of Directive 79/provides: 
         
1.
 Member States may not forbid trade in foodstuffs which comply with the rules laid down in this Directive by the application
         of non-harmonised national provisions governing the labelling and presentation of certain foodstuffs or of foodstuffs in general.
         
2.
 Paragraph shall not apply to non-harmonised national provisions justified on grounds of:
         
─
protection of public health, 
         
─
prevention of fraud, unless such provisions are liable to impede the application of the definitions and rules laid down by
            this Directive, 
         
─
protection of industrial and commercial property rights, indications of provenance, registered designations of origin and
            prevention of unfair competition.
         
            
The first subparagraph of Article 4(1) of Council Directive 84/450/EEC of September concerning misleading and comparative
         advertising (OJ L 250, p. 17), as amended by Directive 97/55/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of October
         (OJ L 290, p. 18) (
         Directive 84/450), reads as follows: Member States shall ensure that adequate and effective means exist to combat misleading advertising and for the compliance
         with the provisions on comparative advertising in the interests of consumers as well as competitors and the general public.
         
            
Under Article 7(1) of Directive 84/450: This Directive shall not preclude Member States from retaining or adopting provisions with a view to ensuring more extensive
         protection, with regard to misleading advertising, for consumers, persons carrying on a trade, business, craft or profession,
         and the general public.
         National legislation
         
            
Paragraph of the LMG provides: 
         
1.
 In marketing foodstuffs, products intended for human consumption or additives, it is prohibited:
         
(a)
to refer to the prevention, relief or cure of illnesses or symptoms of illness, or to physiological or pharmacological effects,
         in particular effects which prolong youthfulness, slow down the symptoms of ageing, lead to weight loss or preserve health
         or to create the impression of any such effect; 
         
(b)
to refer to case histories, recommendations by doctors or expert medical opinions; 
         
(c)
to use health-related pictorial or stylised representations of organs of the human body, depictions of members of the health-care
         professions or of sanatoria or other pictures or illustrations referring to health-care activities; 
         
2.
 The prohibitions in subparagraph do not apply to traditional designations which leave no doubt as to the characteristics
         of the product.
         
3.
 The Federal Minister for Health and the Environment shall authorise, by decree and upon request, health-related information
         for certain foodstuffs or consumer products where that is consistent with the protection of consumers against fraud. The decree
         shall be revoked where the conditions of the authorisation are no longer met.
         
The administrative procedure
            
Having found that various foodstuffs which are lawfully manufactured in other Member States and are in free circulation there
         could not be marketed in Austria, on the ground that the statements relating to the health of consumers had not been authorised
         by the competent authorities in the context of the prior authorisation procedure, the Commission on February sent
         the Austrian Government a letter of formal notice informing it that that practice was contrary to Articles 2(1)(b) and 15(1)
         and (2) of Directive 79/and to the principle of the free movement of goods. 
         
            
By letter of April 1999, the Austrian authorities replied to the Commission that, while the prohibition in Paragraph 9(1)
         of the LMG did indeed go beyond that in Article 2(1)(b) of Directive 79/112, it was nevertheless justified by Article 15(2)
         of that directive. Moreover, the Austrian legislation was also compatible not only with Directive 84/but also with the
         case-law of the Court of Justice, in particular Case 120/Rewe-Zentral  (
          Cassis de Dijon ) [1979] ECR 649. 
         
            
Since it considered that the Republic of Austria had not taken any measures from which it could be concluded that an end had
         been put to the infringements referred to in the letter of formal notice, the Commission on November sent that Member
         State a reasoned opinion, stating that the procedure for failure to fulfil obligations concerned the general prohibition of
         placing health-related information on the labelling of foodstuffs and the need to submit products bearing such information
         to a prior authorisation procedure. 
         
            
By letter of December 1999, the Austrian Government replied to the Commission that the national legislation did not apply
         a general prohibition of health-related information on the labelling of foodstuffs, but on the contrary a system of prohibition
         subject to authorisation. It also stated that the object of the administrative procedure was to ensure that every applicant
         was entitled to obtain authorisation to display health-related information if it was compatible with the protection of consumers
         against fraud and was strictly accurate. 
         
            
Since it considered that the Republic of Austria had not complied with the reasoned opinion within the time-limit set, the
         Commission decided to bring the present action. 
         SubstanceArguments of the parties
         
            
The Commission submits that the general and absolute prohibition of health-related information on the labelling of foodstuffs
         is contrary to Articles 2(1)(b) and 15(1) and (2) of Directive 79/and that the prior authorisation procedure laid down
         for such information is incompatible with Articles EC and EC. 
         
            
Article 2(1)(b) of Directive 79/only allows the Member States to prohibit statements relating to diseases. It leaves room,
         however, for health-related information on the labelling of foodstuffs, subject to compliance with the other conditions laid
         down by that directive, in particular the condition that such information must not mislead the purchaser. 
         
            
According to the Commission, in addition to the prohibition of placing information relating to diseases on the labelling of
         foodstuffs, Paragraph 9(1)(a) to (c) of the LMG also prohibits the use of health-related information, for example references
         to physiological or pharmacological effects, in particular effects which prolong youthfulness, slow down the symptoms of ageing,
         lead to weight loss or preserve health. Such a prohibition cuts down the scope of Article 2(1)(b) of Directive 79/112. 
         
            
On this point, the Commission submits that, according to the Court's case-law (Case C-241/SARPP  [1990] I-4695, paragraph 15), because Directive 79/is general and applicable horizontally, it allows the Member States
         to maintain or adopt rules in addition to its own provisions. However, the directive lists exhaustively, in Article 15(2),
         the grounds on which the application of national provisions may be justified. 
         
            
It follows, according to the Commission, that the general and absolute prohibition in Paragraph of the LMG of displaying
         health-related information must be regarded as a non-harmonised national provision which may be applied only in cases in which
         it is justified on one of the grounds listed in Article 15(2) of Directive 79/112, namely protection of public health, protection
         of consumers and prevention of unfair competition. 
         
            
According to the Commission, contrary to the submissions of the Austrian Government, the protection of consumers may not be
         relied on to justify the prohibition in question, given that it extends also to correct statements which are not liable to
         mislead a reasonably well-informed consumer. 
         
            
A foodstuff whose labelling carries a health-related statement and which is lawfully marketed in another Member State with
         respect to Directive 79/cannot therefore, in the Commission's view, constitute fraud within the meaning of Article 15(2)
         of that directive and thus justify the application of non-harmonised national provisions. 
         
            
As regards the procedure for prior authorisation to place health-related information on the labelling of foodstuffs provided
         for in Paragraph 9(3) of the LMG, the Commission considers, first, that it is not covered by Directive 79/and, second,
         that it constitutes a measure having equivalent effect within the meaning of Article EC. 
         
            
In the Commission's view, the legislation has the consequence that products bearing health-related information which are lawfully
         produced or marketed in another Member State may be marketed in Austria only on condition of obtaining prior authorisation.
         
         
            
Moreover, the Commission submits that such an administrative procedure cannot be justified with respect to Directive 84/either, since the labelling and presentation of foodstuffs is definitively regulated by Directive 79/112. Article 2(1)(a)
         of the latter directive prohibits statements on the labelling of foodstuffs which mislead the purchaser. 
         
            
In addition, the Commission submits that the protection of consumers can be ensured by means which are less restrictive of
         the free movement of goods than the requirement of prior authorisation. Thus provision could be made for checks to identify
         in the market products carrying statements liable to mislead the purchaser. 
         
            
The Austrian Government concedes that the prohibition of health-related information laid down in Paragraph 9(1) of the LMG
         goes beyond the content of the prohibition in Article 2(1)(b) of Directive 79/112. It argues, however, that such a prohibition
         is compatible with Article 15(2) of that directive, as it pursues the objective of the protection of public health or of consumers.
         
         
            
It submits that the national law authorises, in an administrative procedure applicable to both domestic and imported goods,
         health-related information on the labelling of foodstuffs if it is accurate and liable to ensure the protection of consumers
         against fraud. The determination of whether or not such information is accurate cannot, however, be left to the subjective
         assessment of the party applying for authorisation to use it. 
         
            
Moreover, according to the Austrian Government, protection of consumers may lead to protection of health. Misleading statements
         on the labelling of a product, ascribing qualities to it which it does not possess, may have negative consequences for the
         condition of sick persons, in particular where an effective treatment for the diseases they suffer from is neglected because
         they have relied on the effect of a product so labelled. 
         
            
As regards the prior authorisation procedure laid down in Paragraph 9(3) of the LMG, the Austrian Government submits that
         Directive 79/does not regulate exhaustively the question of the labelling and presentation of foodstuffs. 
         
            
It considers that Article of Directive 79/is silent as regards the authorisation of health-related statements or advertisements
         which are not misleading, so that it is necessary to refer to Directive 84/on this point. That directive, Article of
         which adopts a broad interpretation of misleading advertising, applies also to advertising for a product whose misleading
         effect derives from the wording printed on the labelling of the product concerned. 
         
            
It argues that it may be inferred from the preamble to Directive 84/in combination with Article of that directive, which
         allows Member States to adopt provisions with a view to ensuring more extensive protection of consumers, with regard to misleading
         advertising, that a prior control of foodstuffs carrying health-related information is not contrary to Community law. 
         
            
Moreover, the Austrian Government considers that the system of prior authorisation may be applied, as a non-harmonised national
         provision, if it is justified on one of the grounds set out in Article 15(2) of Directive 79/112. The ground of protection
         of consumers is expressly mentioned in that provision. 
         
            
Finally, the Austrian authorities submit that the obligation of prior authorisation constitutes the least severe means of
         ensuring the necessary protection of the health of consumers, since the system of control  
          a posteriori  of foodstuffs already on the market is not capable of ensuring such protection. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
It should be noted, first, that Article 2(1)(a) of Directive 79/prohibits the labelling of foodstuffs and the methods
         used being such as could mislead the purchaser. Second, Article 2(1)(b) of that directive prohibits, subject to the provisions
         applicable to foodstuffs for particular nutritional uses, the labelling attributing to a foodstuff the property of preventing,
         treating or curing a disease. 
         
            
It follows that Directive 79/prohibits all statements relating to human diseases, regardless of whether or not they are
         liable to mislead the consumer, as well as statements which, although not containing any reference to diseases but referring
         rather to health, for example, prove to be misleading. 
         
            
It must also be noted that Article 15(1) of Directive 79/prevents Member States from enacting measures prohibiting trade
         in foodstuffs which comply with the rules laid down in that directive. 
         
            
Consequently, foodstuffs whose labelling contains non-misleading health-related information must be regarded as complying
         with the rules of Directive 79/112, since Member States may not prohibit their marketing on grounds of a possible irregularity
         of that labelling. 
         
            
However, as is apparent from the ninth recital in its preamble, because Directive 79/is general and applicable horizontally,
         it allows the Member States to lay down rules in addition to those of the directive. The limits of the power retained by the
         Member States are fixed by the directive itself inasmuch as it lists exhaustively, in Article 15(2), the grounds on which
         the application of non-harmonised national provisions prohibiting trade in foodstuffs which comply with the directive may
         be justified (see, to that effect,  
          SARPP , paragraph 15). Those grounds include  
          inter alia  the protection of health and consumers. 
         
            
Paragraph 9(1) of the LMG prohibits, in connection with the marketing of foodstuffs, not only statements referring to diseases
         but also those relating to health. It appears from the documents in the case that the Austrian courts interpret that provision
         as meaning that the prohibition applies even if the information concerning health is accurate. 
         
            
Under Paragraph 9(3) of the LMG, all statements relating to health are subject to a prior authorisation procedure which is
         intended to differentiate accurate information from information which is liable to mislead the consumer. Authorisation or
         prohibition of marketing the foodstuffs concerned depends on the differentiation operated by the competent national authorities.
         
         
            
The system thus laid down in Paragraph 9(1) and (3) of the LMG, which is characterised by a general prohibition subject to
         prior authorisation for health-related information, is more restrictive than that under Article 2(1) of Directive 79/112.
         Its lawfulness therefore depends on an assessment of the grounds on which it is based. 
         
            
On this point, it must be observed that, since Article 15(2) of Directive 79/carried out an exhaustive harmonisation of
         the grounds on which the application of national rules raising obstacles to trade in foodstuffs complying with the directive
         may be justified, any national measure relating thereto must be assessed in the light of the provisions of that harmonising
         measure and not of Articles EC and EC (see,  
          inter alia , Case C-37/Vanacker and Lesage  [1993] ECR I-4947, paragraph 9; Case C-324/DaimlerChrysler  [2001] ECR I-9897, paragraph 32; and Case C-99/Linhart and Biffl  [2002] ECR I-9375, paragraph 18). 
         
            
It must also be noted that Articles and of Directive 79/prohibit statements liable to mislead the purchaser. This
         is a specific provision intended to prevent fraud which must be interpreted as a special rule in relation to the general provisions
         on protection against misleading advertising laid down in Directive 84/(see, to that effect,  
          Linhart and Biffl , paragraphs and 20). 
         
            
In those circumstances, the compatibility of the national provisions in question with Community law must be assessed solely
         by reference to Directive 79/112. 
         
            
It is common ground that the system established by the LMG is based on the consideration that the protection of consumers
         against fraud necessarily requires that whether or not health-related information on the labelling of foodstuffs is misleading
         should be the subject of prior examination by the competent national authorities. 
         
            
It must therefore be ascertained whether the prior authorisation system laid down in Paragraph 9(3) of the LMG may be regarded
         as compatible with Article 15(2) of Directive 79/112, in so far as that provision authorises non-harmonised national provisions
         which are justified on grounds of the protection of public health and the prevention of fraud. 
         
            
For that to be the case, the system must be appropriate for securing the attainment of the objective which it pursues and
         must not go beyond what is necessary in order to attain it. 
         
            
While Article 2(1) of Directive 79/prohibits, first, all statements relating to the preventing, treating and curing of
         a human disease, even if they are not liable to mislead the purchaser, and, second, misleading statements relating to health,
         it is clear that the protection of public health, assuming that risks relating thereto are nevertheless conceivable in a particular
         situation, cannot justify a system as restrictive of the free movement of goods as that which results from a procedure of
         prior authorisation for all health-related information on the labelling of foodstuffs, including those which are manufactured
         lawfully in other Member States and are in free circulation. 
         
            
Less restrictive measures exist for the prevention of such residual risks to health, such as, for example, an obligation on
         the manufacturer or distributor of the product in question, in the event of any uncertainty, to furnish evidence of the accuracy
         of the facts mentioned on the labelling (see, to that effect, Case C-77/Unilever  [1999] ECR I-431, paragraph 35). 
         
            
The Austrian Government's argument based on the protection of consumers cannot be accepted either. 
         
            
The system established by Paragraph 9(1) and (3) of the LMG, which is intended to prohibit misleading statements relating
         to health, has the consequence in practice that foodstuffs bearing health-related information may not be marketed freely in
         Austria, even if the information is not liable to mislead the consumer. 
         
            
The Austrian Government has not produced any evidence to establish its claim that the system of control  
          a posteriori  of foodstuffs already on the market, such as that referred to in paragraph above, would be ineffective. It has confined
         itself to stating, without giving reasons, that such a system had negative results in the United States and would not be suited
         to the European approach to the protection of health and of consumers. The general prohibition established by Paragraph 9(1)
         and (3) of the LMG cannot therefore be regarded as proportionate to the aim pursued. 
         
            
It should be added that, in similar cases concerning information on the packaging of certain cosmetic products, in which the
         Austrian authorities likewise relied on the protection of the health of consumers and the prevention of fraud, the Court held
         that the need to obtain the authorisation laid down in Paragraph 9(3) of the LMG constituted a wholly unjustified obstacle
         to the free movement of the products in question (
          Unilever , paragraph 34, and  
          Linhart and Biffl , paragraph 45). 
         
            
Paragraph 9(1) and (3) of the LMG consequently establishes a system which goes beyond what is necessary to attain the objective
         pursued by that national legislation, and therefore does not comply with the principle of proportionality. 
         
            
Having regard to the above considerations, it must be held that, by laying down a general prohibition of health-related information
         on the labelling of foodstuffs for general consumption and by subjecting the display of such information to a prior authorisation
         procedure, the Republic of Austria has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 2(1)(b) and 15(1) and (2) of Directive
         79/112. 
         
Costs
            
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party's pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Republic of Austria has
         been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs. Under Article 69(4) of the Rules of Procedure, Member States
         and institutions which intervene in the proceedings must bear their own costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
hereby:  
         
1.
 Declares that, by laying down a general prohibition of health-related information on the labelling of foodstuffs for general
            consumption and by subjecting the display of such information to a prior authorisation procedure, the Republic of Austria
            has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 2(1)(b) and 15(1) and (2) of Council Directive 79/112/EEC of December
            on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the labelling, presentation and advertising of foodstuffs,
            as amended by Directive 97/4/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of January 1997; 
            
2.
 Orders the Republic of Austria to pay the costs; 
            
3.
 Orders the Kingdom of Denmark to bear its own costs. 
            
Gulmann
Skouris 
Macken 
Colneric
Cunha Rodrigues 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on January 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
J.-P. Puissochet  
Registrar
President of the Sixth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: German.
Top  
 