
Case C-104/Patrick Kelly
v
National University of Ireland (University College, Dublin)
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the High Court (Ireland))
(Directives 76/207/EEC, 97/80/EC and 2002/73/EC – Access to vocational training – Equal treatment for men and women – Rejection of candidature – Access of an applicant for vocational training to information on the qualifications of the other applicants)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Social policy – Male and female workers – Access to employment and working conditions – Equal treatment – Burden of proof
            in cases of discrimination
(Council Directive 97/80, Art. 4(1))
2.        Social policy – Male and female workers – Access to employment and working conditions – Equal treatment
(European Parliament and Council Directive 2002/73, Art. 1(3); Council Directive 76/207, art. 4)
3.        Social policy – Male and female workers – Access to employment and working conditions – Equal treatment – Burden of proof
            in cases of  discrimination
(European Parliament and Council Directives 95/and 2002/58; Council Directive 97/80)
4.        Preliminary rulings – Reference to the Court – Obligation to refer
(Art. 267(3), TFEU)
1.        Article 4(1) of Directive 97/on the burden of proof in cases of discrimination based on sex must be interpreted as meaning
         that it does not entitle an applicant for vocational training, who believes that his application was not accepted because
         of an infringement of the principle of equal treatment, to information held by the course provider on the qualifications of
         the other applicants for the course in question, in order that he may establish ‘facts from which it may be presumed that
         there has been direct or indirect discrimination’ in accordance with that provision.
      
Nevertheless, it cannot be ruled out that a refusal of disclosure by a defendant, in the context of establishing such facts,
         could risk compromising the achievement of the objective pursued by that directive and thus depriving, in particular, Article
         4(1) thereof of its effectiveness. It is for the national court to ascertain whether that is the case in the main proceedings.
      
(see paras 38-39, operative part 1)
2.        Article of Directive 76/on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards access
         to employment, vocational training and promotion, and working conditions and Article 1(3) of Directive 2002/73, amending Directive
         76/207, must be interpreted as meaning that they do not entitle an applicant for vocational training to information held by
         the course provider on the qualifications of the other applicants for the course in question, either because he believes that
         he has been denied access to vocational training on the basis of the same criteria as the other candidates and discriminated
         against on grounds of sex, referred to in Article of Directive 76/207, or because that applicant complains that he was discriminated
         against on the grounds of sex, referred to in Article 1(3) of Directive 2002/73, with regard to access to that vocational
         training.
      
(see para. 48, operative part 2)
3.        When an applicant for vocational training can rely on Directive 97/on the burden of proof in cases of discrimination based
         on sex in order to obtain access to information held by the course provider on the qualifications of the other applicants
         for the course in question, that entitlement to access can be affected by rules of Union law relating to confidentiality.
      
Thus, in assessing whether a refusal of disclosure by a defendant, in the context of establishing facts which permit a presumption
         that there has been discrimination, could risk compromising the achievement of the objective pursued by Directive 97/and
         thus depriving Article 4(1) thereof in particular of its effectiveness, national courts or other competent bodies must take
         into account the rules governing confidentiality which follow from measures of Union law, such as Directive 95/on the protection
         of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data and Directive 2002/concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector (Directive
         on privacy and electronic communications). The protection of personal data is also provided for in Article of the Charter
         of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. 
      
(see paras 54-56, operative part 3)
4.        The obligation laid down in the third paragraph of Article TFEU does not differ according to whether a Member State has
         an adversarial or an inquisitorial legal system.
      
Article TFEU confers on national courts the power and, in certain circumstances, an obligation, to make a reference to
         the Court once the national court considers, either of its own motion or at the request of the parties, that the substance
         of the dispute involves a question which falls within the scope of the first paragraph of that article. It follows that the
         national courts have the most extensive power to make a reference to the Court if they consider that a case pending before
         them raises issues involving an interpretation or assessment of the validity of provisions of Union law requiring a decision
         by them.
      
Moreover, the system of references for a preliminary ruling is based on a dialogue between one court and another, the initiation
         of which depends entirely on the national court’s assessment as to whether a reference is appropriate and necessary. Thus,
         not only is it for the national court to assess whether an interpretation of Union law is necessary to enable it to resolve
         the dispute before it, having regard to the procedural mechanism laid down in Article TFEU, but it is also for that court
         to decide the manner in which those questions are to be worded. Although that court is at liberty to request the parties to
         the dispute before it to suggest wording suitable for the questions to be referred, the fact remains that it is finally for
         the court alone to decide both the form and the content of those questions.
      
(see paras 61, 63-66, operative part 4)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Directives 76/207/EEC, 97/80/EC and 2002/73/EC – Access to vocational training – Equal treatment for men and women – Rejection of candidature – Access of an applicant for vocational training to information on the qualifications of the other applicants)
In Case C‑104/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the High Court (Ireland), made by decision of January 2010,
         received by the Court on February 2010, in the proceedings
      
Patrick Kelly
v
National University of Ireland (University College, Dublin),
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, President of the Chamber, A. Arabadjiev, A. Rosas (Rapporteur), U. Lõhmus and P. Lindh,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Mengozzi,
Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on January 2011,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Mr Kelly, in person,
–        the National University of Ireland (University College, Dublin), by M. Bolger SC, instructed by E. O’Sullivan, Solicitor,
–        the German Government, by J. Möller, acting as Agent,
–        the European Commission, by M. van Beek and N. Yerrell, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of European Union law and, in particular, of Article of Council Directive 76/207/EEC of February on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women
         as regards access to employment, vocational training and promotion, and working conditions (OJ L 39, p. 40), Article
         4(1) of Council Directive 97/80/EC of December on the burden of proof in cases of discrimination based on sex (OJ
         L 14, p. 6) and Article 1(3) of Directive 2002/73/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of September amending Directive 76/(OJ L 269, p. 15). 
      
The reference has been made in the course of legal proceedings brought by Mr Kelly against the National University of Ireland
         (University College Dublin) (‘UCD’), following the latter’s refusal to disclose unredacted documents relating to the selection
         procedure for a vocational training course.
      
 Legal context
 European Union legislation
 Directive 76/Directive 76/207, applicable at the time of the facts which gave rise to the complaint of discrimination on grounds of sex,
         that is to say, during March and April 2002, provided in Article as follows: 
      
‘Application of the principle of equal treatment with regard to access to all types and to all levels, of vocational guidance,
         vocational training, advanced vocational training and retraining, means that Member States shall take all necessary measures
         to ensure that:
      
(a)      any laws, regulations and administrative provisions contrary to the principle of equal treatment shall be abolished;
(b)      any provisions contrary to the principle of equal treatment which are included in collective agreements, individual contracts
         of employment, internal rules of undertakings or in rules governing the independent occupations and professions shall be,
         or may be declared, null and void or may be amended;
      
(c)      without prejudice to the freedom granted in certain Member States to certain private training establishments, vocational guidance,
         vocational training, advanced vocational training and retraining shall be accessible on the basis of the same criteria and
         at the same levels without any discrimination on grounds of sex.’
      
Article of that directive provided:
      
‘Member States shall introduce into their national legal systems such measures as are necessary to enable all persons who
         consider themselves wronged by failure to apply to them the principle of equal treatment within the meaning of Articles 3,
         and to pursue their claims by judicial process after possible recourse to other competent authorities.’
      
 Directive 2002/Directive 76/was amended by Directive 2002/73, the first subparagraph of Article 2(1) of which states that Member States
         were to bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with that directive by October at the latest. 
      
Directive 2002/revokes, in particular, Article of Directive 76/and, pursuant to Article 1(3), gives the following
         wording to Article of Directive 76/207:
      
‘1.      Application of the principle of equal treatment means that there shall be no direct or indirect discrimination on the grounds
         of sex in the public or private sectors, including public bodies, in relation to: 
      
…
(b)      access to all types and to all levels of vocational guidance, vocational training, advanced vocational training and retraining,
         including practical work experience;
      
…
2.      To that end, Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that: 
(a)      any laws, regulations and administrative provisions contrary to the principle of equal treatment are abolished; 
(b)      any provisions contrary to the principle of equal treatment which are included in contracts or collective agreements, internal
         rules of undertakings or rules governing the independent occupations and professions and workers’ and employers’ organisations
         shall be, or may be declared, null and void or are amended.’ 
      
Directive 97/Directive 97/80, the date of transposition of which was fixed at January 2001, institutes rules relating to the burden of
         proof in cases of discrimination based on sex. 
      
According to recital in the preamble to that directive, the appreciation of the facts from which it may be presumed that
         there has been direct or indirect discrimination is a matter for national judicial or other competent bodies, in accordance
         with national law or practice. 
      
Recital in the preamble to that directive states that the Court of Justice has held that the rules on the burden of proof
         must be adapted when there is a prima facie case of discrimination and that, for the principle of equal treatment to be applied
         effectively, the burden of proof must shift back to the respondent when evidence of such discrimination is brought.
      
Article of that directive states that its aim is to ensure that the measures taken by the Member States to implement the
         principle of equal treatment are made more effective, in order to enable all persons who consider themselves wronged because
         the principle of equal treatment has not been applied to them to have their rights asserted by judicial process after possible
         recourse to other competent bodies. 
      
Under Article 3(1)(a) of Directive 97/80, the directive is to apply to the situations covered by Directive 76/207. 
      
Article 4(1) of Directive 97/reads as follows:
      
‘Member States shall take such measures as are necessary, in accordance with their national judicial systems, to ensure that,
         when persons who consider themselves wronged because the principle of equal treatment has not been applied to them establish,
         before a court or other competent authority, facts from which it may be presumed that there has been direct or indirect discrimination,
         it shall be for the respondent to prove that there has been no breach of the principle of equal treatment.’ 
      
 National legislation
It is apparent from the decision for reference that the principles relating to disclosure of documents under Order 57A rule
         6(6) of the Circuit Court Rules correspond to the principles relating to discovery and inspection of documents under Order
         of the Rules of the Circuit 2001-and Order of the Rules of the Superior Courts 1986, as amended.
      
Pursuant to those rules, discovery will be granted where it can be shown that the documents sought are relevant to the issues
         in the proceedings and, in particular, necessary for disposing fairly of the matter.
      
Notwithstanding the fact that documents are considered both relevant and necessary, their production may be refused where
         the documents, inter alia, are privileged or subject to confidentiality.
      
In case of conflict between the right to obtain production of a document, on the one hand, and the duty to protect confidentiality
         or to uphold any other countervailing obligation or entitlement, on the other, the national court hearing the action must
         balance both the nature of the claim advanced and the degree of confidentiality alleged, as against the public interest in
         full disclosure as part of the administration of justice.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Mr Kelly is a qualified teacher and resident in Dublin.
      
UCD is a higher education establishment. For the academic period 2002-2004, it was offering a course entitled ‘Master’s degree
         in Social Science (Social Worker) mode A’. 
      
On December 2001, Mr Kelly submitted an application to UCD seeking admission to the course. At the end of the selection
         process he was informed by letter dated March that his application had not been successful.
      
Dissatisfied with that decision, Mr Kelly made a formal complaint of discrimination on grounds of sex to the Director of the
         Equality Tribunal in April 2002, claiming that he was better qualified than the least-qualified female candidate to be offered
         a place. 
      
On November 2006, an Equality Officer handling the complaint under the aegis of the Director of the Equality Tribunal reached
         a decision concluding that the complainant had failed to establish prima facie discrimination on grounds of sex. Mr Kelly
         appealed against that decision to the Circuit Court. 
      
On January Mr Kelly also applied to the Circuit Court, under Order 57A rule 6(6) of the Circuit Court Rules, seeking
         from UCD copies of certain specified documents (‘the disclosure application’). He requested copies of the retained applications,
         copies of the documents appended to or included with those applications, and copies of the ‘scoring sheets’ of the candidates
         whose application forms had been retained.
      
The President of the Circuit Court refused the disclosure application by order of March 2007. On March 2007, Mr. Kelly
         appealed against that order to the High Court.
      
On April 2007, Mr Kelly also applied to the High Court for a reference for a preliminary ruling to be made to the Court
         of Justice of the European Communities. On March 2008, the High Court decided that such a reference was premature since
         it had not finally determined whether access to the documents in question could be granted under national law. Once it had
         completed its examination, the High Court concluded that, pursuant to national law, UCD did not have to disclose, pursuant
         to Mr Kelly’s application, the documents in unredacted form. 
      
Being unsure as to whether refusal of the disclosure request is contrary to European Union law, the High Court referred the
         following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Does Article 4(1) of Council Directive 97/… entitle an applicant for vocational training, who believes that he or she has
         been denied access to vocational training because the principle of equal treatment was not applied to him or her, to information
         on the respective qualifications of the other applicants for the course in question and in particular the applicants who were
         not denied access to vocational training so that the applicant can “establish, before a court or other competent authority,
         facts from which it may be presumed that there has been direct or indirect discrimination”?
      
2.      Does Article of Council Directive 76/… entitle an applicant for vocational training, who believes that he or she has
         been denied access to vocational training “on the basis of the same criteria” and discriminated against “on grounds of sex”
         in terms of accessing vocational training, to information held by the course provider on the respective qualifications of
         the other applicants for the course in question and in particular the applicants who were not denied access to vocational
         training?
      
3.      Does Article [1(3)] of Council Directive 2002/… prohibiting “direct or indirect discrimination on the grounds of sex” in
         relation to “access” to vocational training entitle an applicant for vocational training, who claims to have been discriminated
         against “on the grounds of sex” in terms of accessing vocational training, to information held by the course provider on the
         respective qualifications of the other applicants for the course in question and in particular the applicants who were not
         denied access to vocational training?
      
4.      Does the nature of the obligation under paragraph of Article TFEU differ in a Member State with an adversarial (as opposed
         to inquisitorial) legal system and, if so, in what respect?
      
5.      Can any entitlement to information under the aforesaid directives be affected by the operation of national or European laws
         relating to confidentiality?’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred
 The first question
By its first question, the national court asks, in essence, whether Article 4(1) of Council Directive 97/must be interpreted
         as entitling an applicant for vocational training, who believes that his application was not accepted because of an infringement
         of the principle of equal treatment, to information held by the course provider on the qualifications of the other applicants
         for the course in question, in order that he may establish ‘facts from which it may be presumed that there has been direct
         or indirect discrimination’ in accordance with that provision. 
      
 Arguments of the parties 
Mr Kelly submits that under Article 4(1) of Directive 97/persons who consider themselves wronged because the principle
         of equal treatment has not been applied to them are entitled to information that would, if that principle has wrongly not
         been applied to them, establish, or assist in establishing, before a court or other competent authority, facts from which
         it may be presumed that there has been direct or indirect discrimination. For applicants for a course of vocational training
         who consider themselves wronged because that principle has not been applied to them, this includes information on the qualifications
         of the other applicants. 
      
The German Government contends that there is nothing in the wording of Article 4(1) of Directive 97/to indicate the grant
         of a right to disclosure. UCD and the Commission share its view that that provision sets out the conditions in which the burden
         of proof is shifted from the claimant to the respondent. According to those parties, that shift occurs only where a candidate
         has already established facts from which it may be presumed that there has been direct or indirect discrimination. 
      
 Findings of the Court
Directive 97/provides in Article 4(1) that the Member States are to take such measures as are necessary to ensure that,
         when persons who consider themselves wronged because the principle of equal treatment has not been applied to them establish,
         before a court or other competent authority, facts from which it may be presumed that there has been direct or indirect discrimination,
         it shall be for the respondent to prove that there has been no breach of that principle (see Case C‑196/Nikoloudi [2005] ECR I‑1789, paragraph 68). 
      
Thus, it is the person who considers himself to have been wronged because the principle of equal treatment has not been applied
         to him who must initially establish the facts from which it may be presumed that there has been direct or indirect discrimination.
         It is only where that person has established such facts that it is then for the defendant to prove that there has been no
         breach of the principle of non-discrimination. 
      
In that regard, it is apparent from recital in the preamble to Directive 97/that the appreciation of the facts from
         which it may be presumed that there has been direct or indirect discrimination is a matter for national judicial or other
         competent bodies, in accordance with national law or practice.
      
In consequence, it is for the national court or some other competent Irish body to assess, in accordance with Irish law and/or
         national practice, whether Mr Kelly has established the facts from which it may be presumed that there has been direct or
         indirect discrimination. 
      
Nevertheless, it must be stated that Directive 97/80, pursuant to Article thereof, seeks to ensure that the measures taken
         by the Member States to implement the principle of equal treatment are made more effective, in order to enable all persons
         who consider themselves wronged because the principle of equal treatment has not been applied to them to have their rights
         asserted by judicial process after possible recourse to other competent bodies. 
      
Thus, although Article 4(1) of that directive does not specifically entitle persons who consider themselves wronged because
         the principle of equal treatment has not been correctly applied to them to information in order that they may establish ‘facts
         from which it may be presumed that there has been direct or indirect discrimination’ in accordance with that provision, the
         fact remains that it cannot be excluded that a refusal of disclosure by the defendant, in the context of establishing such
         facts, could risk compromising the achievement of the objective pursued by that directive and thus depriving that provision
         in particular of its effectiveness. 
      
In that regard, it must be borne in mind that Member States may not apply rules which are liable to jeopardise the achievement
         of the objectives pursued by a directive and, therefore, deprive it of its effectiveness (see Case C‑61/PPU El Dridi [2011] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 55). 
      
According to the wording of the second and third subparagraphs respectively of Article 4(3) TEU, the Member States inter alia
         ‘shall take any appropriate measure, general or particular, to ensure fulfilment of the obligations arising out of the Treaties
         or resulting from the acts of the institutions of the Union’ and ‘shall … refrain from any measure which could jeopardise
         the attainment of the Union’s objectives’, including those pursued by directives (see El Dridi, paragraph 56).
      
In the present case, it is, however, apparent from the decision for reference that, although the President of the Circuit
         Court refused the disclosure application, UCD offered to provide Mr Kelly with part of the information requested, which he
         does not dispute. 
      
Accordingly, the answer to the first question is that Article 4(1) of Council Directive 97/must be interpreted as meaning
         that it does not entitle an applicant for vocational training, who believes that his application was not accepted because
         of an infringement of the principle of equal treatment, to information held by the course provider on the qualifications of
         the other applicants for the course in question, in order that he may establish ‘facts from which it may be presumed that
         there has been direct or indirect discrimination’ in accordance with that provision. 
      
Nevertheless, it cannot be ruled out that a refusal of disclosure by the defendant, in the context of establishing such facts,
         could risk compromising the achievement of the objective pursued by that directive and thus depriving, in particular, Article
         4(1) thereof of its effectiveness. It is for the national court to ascertain whether that is the case in the main proceedings.
         
      
 The second and third questions 
By its second and third questions, which should be examined together, the national court asks, in essence, whether Article
         of Directive 76/or Article 1(3) of Directive 2002/must be interpreted as entitling an applicant for vocational training
         to information held by the course provider on the qualifications of the other applicants for the course in question, either
         because he believes that he has been denied access to vocational training on the basis of the same criteria as the other candidates
         and discriminated against on grounds of sex, referred to in Article of Directive 76/207, or because that applicant complains
         that he was discriminated against on the grounds of sex, referred to in Article 1(3) of Directive 2002/73, in terms of accessing
         that vocational training.
      
 Arguments of the parties
Mr Kelly submits that Article of Directive 76/and Article 1(3) of Directive 2002/entitle persons who believe that
         they have been denied access to a vocational training course because of sex discrimination to information on the qualifications
         of the other applicants for that vocational training course.
      
The German Government and the Commission contend that those provisions contain substantive rules prohibiting discrimination
         on grounds of sex and that they do not extend to the issue of procedural rules. They argue that those provisions are not sufficiently
         specific to be understood as affording entitlement to a specific measure, such as entitlement to information. 
      
 Findings of the Court
It does not emerge from the wording of Article of Directive 76/or Article 1(3) of Directive 2002/that an applicant
         for vocational training is entitled to access to information held by the course provider concerning the qualifications of
         other applicants for that course. 
      
Article 4(c) of Directive 76/provides that application of the principle of equal treatment with regard to access to all
         types and to all levels, of vocational guidance, vocational training, advanced vocational training and retraining, means that
         Member States are to take all necessary measures to ensure that, without prejudice to the freedom granted in certain Member
         States to certain private training establishments, vocational training is to be accessible on the basis of the same criteria
         and at the same levels without any discrimination on grounds of sex.
      
Article 1(3) of Directive 2002/provides that application of the principle of equal treatment means that there is to be
         no direct or indirect discrimination on the grounds of sex in the public or private sectors, including public bodies, in relation
         to access to all types and to all levels of vocational guidance, vocational training, advanced vocational training and retraining,
         including practical work experience. To that end, Member States are to take the necessary measures to ensure that any laws,
         regulations and administrative provisions contrary to the principle of equal treatment are abolished. 
      
Those provisions seek to implement the application of the principle of equal treatment as regards access to training but,
         in accordance with the third paragraph of Article TFEU, leave it, as to form and methods, to the national authorities
         to take the necessary measures to ensure that ‘any laws, regulations and administrative provisions’ contrary to that principle
         are abolished.
      
Thus, it is not possible to derive from those provisions a specific obligation to grant an applicant for vocational training
         access to information concerning the qualifications of other applicants for that course. 
      
Accordingly, the answer to the second and third questions is that Article of Directive 76/and Article 1(3) of Directive
         2002/must be interpreted as meaning that they do not entitle an applicant for vocational training to information held by
         the course provider on the qualifications of the other applicants for the course in question, either because he believes that
         he has been denied access to vocational training on the basis of the same criteria as the other candidates and discriminated
         against on grounds of sex, referred to in Article of Directive 76/207, or because that applicant complains that he was discriminated
         against on the grounds of sex, referred to in Article 1(3) of Directive 2002/73, in terms of accessing that vocational training.
      
 The fifth question
By its fifth question, which it is appropriate to consider before the fourth question, the national court asks whether any
         entitlement to information under Directives 76/207, 97/and 2002/is affected by rules of national or European Union law
         relating to confidentiality. 
      
Having regard to the answer to the first three questions and given that, under the procedure laid down in Article TFEU,
         the Court has no jurisdiction to interpret national law, that task being exclusively for the national court (see Case C‑53/Marrosu and Sardino [2006] ECR I‑7213, paragraph 54, and Joined Cases C‑250/and C‑268/Georgiev [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 75), the fifth question must be understood as meaning that the national court asks, in essence,
         whether any right to rely on one of the directives referred to in the first three questions, in order to obtain access to
         the information held by the provider of vocational training concerning the qualifications of the applicants for that course,
         can be affected by rules of European Union law relating to confidentiality.
      
 Arguments of the parties
According to Mr Kelly, a legally binding European Union act, including a directive as defined in the third paragraph of Article
         TFEU, cannot be affected by national laws or their operation but only by another legally binding European Union act.
      
UCD and the German Government submit that that question should be answered only in the alternative since there is no entitlement
         to information as described by the plaintiff in the main proceedings pursuant to the provisions of Article of Directive
         76/or Article 1(3) of Directive 2002/73. However, if the Court were to conclude that the provisions at issue did afford
         Mr Kelly such entitlement, confidentiality, which is a concept recognised by European Union law and enshrined in a number
         of its acts, would take precedence over that entitlement.
      
 Findings of the Court
It must be borne in mind that the Court has held, in paragraph of the present judgment, that Article 4(1) of Council Directive
         97/does not entitle an applicant for vocational training, who believes that his application was not accepted because of
         an infringement of the principle of equal treatment, to information held by the course provider on the qualifications of the
         other applicants for the course in question, in order that he may establish ‘facts from which it may be presumed that there
         has been direct or indirect discrimination’ in accordance with that provision. 
      
Nevertheless, it has also been held, in paragraph of this judgment, that it cannot be excluded that a refusal of disclosure
         by the defendant, in the context of establishing such facts, could risk compromising the achievement of the objective pursued
         by that directive and thus depriving Article 4(1) thereof in particular of its effectiveness. 
      
In assessing such facts, national courts or other competent bodies must take into account the rules governing confidentiality
         which follow from European Union legal acts, such as Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of October on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such
         data (OJ L 281, p. 31) and Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of July concerning
         the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector (Directive on privacy
         and electronic communications) (OJ L 201, p. 37), as amended by Directive 2009/136/EC of the European Parliament and
         of the Council of November (OJ L 337, p. 11). The protection of personal data is also provided for in Article
         of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union.
      
Accordingly, the answer to the fifth question is that, where an applicant for vocational training can rely on Directive 97/in order to obtain access to information held by the course provider on the qualifications of the other applicants for the
         course in question, that entitlement to access can be affected by rules of European Union law relating to confidentiality.
      
 The fourth question
By its fourth question, the national court asks whether the nature of the obligation contained in the third paragraph of Article
         TFEU differs according to whether a Member State has an adversarial rather than an inquisitorial legal system and, if
         so, in what respect. 
      
 Arguments of the parties
Mr Kelly argues that a national court’s obligation to refer questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling is wider in scope
         in an adversarial legal system than that on a court of a Member State in which there is an inquisitorial legal system, since
         it is the parties and not the court who determine the form, content and timing of the proceedings in an adversarial legal
         system. Thus a national court in such a system cannot materially alter the content of a question raised by a party or submit
         to the court its own opinion suggesting an answer to the question.
      
UCD, the German Government and the Commission share the view that the nature of the obligation under the third paragraph of
         Article TFEU does not depend on the individual characteristics of Member States’ legal systems. Furthermore, according
         to Case 283/Cilfit and Others [1982] ECR 3415, it is for the national court to decide if and, where necessary, how, to make a reference for a preliminary
         ruling.
      
 Findings of the Court
It is apparent from the settled case-law of the Court that Article TFEU establishes a preliminary ruling mechanism which
         aims to avoid divergences in the interpretation of European Union law that the national courts have to apply and seeks to
         ensure this application by making available to national courts a means of eliminating difficulties which may be occasioned
         by the requirement of giving European Union law its full effect within the framework of the judicial systems of the Member
         States (see, to that effect, Opinion 1/[2011] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and the case-law cited). 
      
Article TFEU confers on national courts the power and, in certain circumstances, an obligation, to make a reference to
         the Court once the national court considers, either of its own motion or at the request of the parties, that the substance
         of the dispute involves a question which falls within the scope of the first paragraph of that article. It follows that the
         national courts have the most extensive power to make a reference to the Court if they consider that a case pending before
         them raises issues involving an interpretation or assessment of the validity of provisions of European Union law and requiring
         a decision by them (see, inter alia, Case C‑210/Cartesio [2008] ECR I‑9641, paragraph 88, and Joined Cases C‑188/and C‑189/Melki and Abdeli [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 41). 
      
Moreover, the Court has already held that the system established by Article TFEU with a view to ensuring that European
         Union law is interpreted uniformly throughout the Member States institutes direct cooperation between the Court of Justice
         and the national courts by means of a procedure which is completely independent of any initiative by the parties (see, inter
         alia, Cartesio, paragraph 90). 
      
In that regard, the system of references for a preliminary ruling is based on a dialogue between one court and another, the
         initiation of which depends entirely on the national court’s assessment as to whether a reference is appropriate and necessary
         (Cartesio, paragraph 91). 
      
Thus, not only is it for the national court to assess whether an interpretation of European Union law is necessary to enable
         it to resolve the dispute before it, having regard to the procedural mechanism laid down in Article TFEU, but it is also
         for that court to decide the manner in which those questions are to be worded. 
      
Although that court is at liberty to request the parties to the dispute before it to suggest wording suitable for the question
         to be referred, the fact remains that it is for it alone ultimately to decide both its form and content.
      
Consequently, the answer to the fourth question is that the obligation contained in the third paragraph of Article TFEU
         does not differ according to whether a Member State has an adversarial or an inquisitorial legal system.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article 4(1) of Council Directive 97/80/EC of December on the burden of proof in cases of discrimination based on
            sex must be interpreted as meaning that it does not entitle an applicant for vocational training, who believes that his application
            was not accepted because of an infringement of the principle of equal treatment, to information held by the course provider
            on the qualifications of the other applicants for the course in question, in order that he may establish ‘facts from which
            it may be presumed that there has been direct or indirect discrimination’ in accordance with that provision. 
Nevertheless, it cannot be ruled out that a refusal of disclosure by the defendant, in the context of establishing such facts,
            could risk compromising the achievement of the objective pursued by that directive and thus depriving Article 4(1) thereof
            in particular of its effectiveness. It is for the national court to ascertain whether that is the case in the main proceedings.
            
2.      Article of Council Directive 76/207/EEC of February on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for
            men and women as regards access to employment, vocational training and promotion, and working conditions and Article 1(3)
            of Directive 2002/73/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of September amending Directive 76/must
            be interpreted as meaning that they do not entitle an applicant for vocational training to information held by the course
            provider on the qualifications of the other applicants for the course in question, either because he believes that he has
            been denied access to vocational training on the basis of the same criteria as the other candidates and discriminated against
            on grounds of sex, referred to in Article of Directive 76/207, or because that applicant complains that he was discriminated
            against on the grounds of sex, referred to in Article 1(3) of Directive 2002/73, in terms of accessing that vocational training.
            
3.      Where an applicant for vocational training can rely on Directive 97/in order to obtain access to information held by the
            course provider on the qualifications of the other applicants for the course in question, that entitlement to access can be
            affected by rules of European Union law relating to confidentiality. 
4.      The obligation contained in the third paragraph of Article TFEU does not differ according to whether a Member State has
            an adversarial or an inquisitorial legal system. 
Signatures
*        Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 