
Case C-221/European Commission
v
Ireland
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 95/59/EC – Taxes other than turnover taxes which affect the consumption of manufactured tobacco – Article 9(1) – Free determination, by manufacturers and importers, of the maximum retail selling prices of their products – National legislation imposing a minimum retail selling price for cigarettes – Justification – Protection of public health – World Health Organisation Framework Convention on Tobacco Control)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Taxes other than turnover taxes which affect the consumption of manufactured tobacco
(Council Directive 95/59, as amended by Directive 2002/10, Art. 9(1))
2.        Member States – Obligations – Supervisory tasks assigned to the Commission – Duty of the Member States
(Art. EC and EC)
1.        A Member State fails to fulfil its obligations under Article 9(1) of Directive 95/on taxes other than turnover taxes which
         affect the consumption of manufactured tobacco, as amended by Directive 2002/10, where it imposes  minimum retail prices for
         cigarettes, and where that system does not make it possible to ensure, in any event, that the minimum price imposed does not
         impair the competitive advantage which could result for some producers and importers of tobacco products from lower cost prices.
         Such a system, which furthermore fixes the minimum price by reference to the weighted average price on the market for each
         category of cigarettes, is likely to eliminate price differences between competing products and to cause prices to converge
         around the price of the most expensive product. That system therefore undermines the freedom of producers and importers to
         determine their maximum retail selling price, guaranteed by the second paragraph of Article 9(1) of Directive 95/59.
      
The World Health Organisation Framework Convention on Tobacco Control cannot affect the compatibility or otherwise of such
         a system with Article 9(1) of Directive 95/since that convention imposes no actual obligation on the Contracting Parties
         with regard to price policies for tobacco products, and merely describes possible approaches by which to take account of national
         health objectives concerning tobacco control. Article 6(2) of the convention provides only that the Contracting Parties are
         to adopt or maintain measures which ‘may include’ implementing tax policies and, ‘where appropriate’, price policies, concerning
         tobacco products.
      
Member States may not rely on Article EC in order to justify an infringement of Article 9(1) of Directive 95/with reference
         to the objective of protection of health and life of humans. Article EC cannot be understood as authorising measures other
         than the quantitative restrictions on imports and exports and the measures having equivalent effect envisaged by Articles
         EC and EC. 
      
The fact remains that Directive 95/does not prevent Member States from taking measures to combat smoking, which forms part
         of the objective of protecting public health.
      
(see paras 45-46, 50-51, 57, operative part 1)
2.        A Member State fails to fulfil its obligations under Article EC by not providing the information required by the European
         Commission in order to enable it to fulfil its task of monitoring compliance with Directive 95/on taxes other than turnover
         taxes which affect the consumption of manufactured tobacco, as amended by Directive 2002/10/EC.
      
(see para. 62, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
March (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 95/59/EC – Taxes other than turnover taxes which affect the consumption of manufactured tobacco – Article 9(1) – Free determination, by manufacturers and importers, of the maximum retail selling prices of their products – National legislation imposing a minimum retail selling price for cigarettes – Justification – Protection of public health – World Health Organisation Framework Convention on Tobacco Control)
In Case C‑221/08,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on May 2008,
European Commission, represented by R. Lyal and W. Mölls, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Ireland, represented by D. O’Hagan, acting as Agent, assisted by G. Hogan SC, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, President of the Second Chamber, acting for the President of the Third Chamber, P. Lindh,
         A. Rosas, U. Lõhmus and A. Arabadjiev (Rapporteur), Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: R. Şereş, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on June 2009,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on October 2009,
gives the following
Judgment
By its action, the Commission of the European Communities requests the Court to declare:
      
–        that by imposing minimum and maximum retail prices for cigarettes, Ireland has failed to comply with its obligations under
         Article 9(1) of Council Directive 95/59/EC of November on taxes other than turnover taxes which affect the consumption
         of manufactured tobacco (OJ L 291, p. 40), as amended by Council Directive 2002/10/EC of February (OJ L
         46, p. 26) (‘Directive 95/59’); and
      
–        that by failing to provide the information necessary in order to enable the Commission to fulfil its task of monitoring compliance
         with Directive 95/59, Ireland has failed to comply with its obligations under Article EC.
      
 Legal framework
 Community legislation
Recitals 2, and in the preamble to Directive 95/read as follows:
      
‘(2)      Whereas the objective of the [EC] Treaty is to establish an economic union within which there is healthy competition and whose
         characteristics are similar to those of a domestic market; and, as regards manufactured tobacco, achievement of this aim presupposes
         that the application in the Member States of taxes affecting the consumption of products in this sector does not distort conditions
         of competition and does not impede their free movement within the Community;
      
(3)      Whereas, as far as excise duties are concerned, harmonisation of structures must, in particular, result in competition in
         the different categories of manufactured tobacco belonging to the same group not being distorted by the effects of the charging
         of the tax and, consequently, in the opening of the national markets of the Member States;
      
…
(7)      Whereas the imperative needs of competition imply a system of freely formed prices for all groups of manufactured tobacco’.
Under Article 2(1) of that directive:
      
‘The following shall be considered to be manufactured tobacco:
(a)       cigarettes;
(b)       cigars and cigarillos;
(c)       smoking tobacco:
–        fine-cut tobacco for the rolling of cigarettes;
–        other smoking tobacco,
as defined in Articles to 7.’
Article of Directive 95/provides:
      
‘1.      Cigarettes manufactured in the Community and those imported from non‑member countries shall be subject to a proportional excise
         duty calculated on the maximum retail selling  price, including customs duties, and also to a specific excise duty calculated
         per unit of the  product.
      
2.      The rate of the proportional excise duty and the amount of the specific excise duty must be the same for all cigarettes.
…’
Under Article 9(1) of the directive:
      
‘A natural or legal person established in the Community who converts tobacco into manufactured products prepared for retail
         sale shall be deemed to be a manufacturer.
      
Manufacturers, or, where appropriate, their representatives or authorised agents in the Community and importers of tobacco
         from non-member countries shall be free to determine the maximum retail selling price for each of their products for each
         Member State for which the products in question are to be released for consumption.
      
The second paragraph may not, however, hinder implementation of national systems of legislation regarding the control of price
         levels or the observance of imposed prices, provided that they are compatible with Community legislation.’
      
Article of the directive provides:
      
‘1.      The amount of the specific excise duty on cigarettes shall be established by reference to cigarettes in the most popular price
         category according to the information available at January each year, beginning January 1978.
      
2.      The specific component of the excise duty may not be less than 5% or more than 55% of the amount of the total tax burden resulting
         from the aggregation of the proportional excise duty, the specific excise duty and the turnover tax levied on these cigarettes.
      
…
5.      Member States may levy a minimum excise duty on cigarettes sold at a price lower than the retail selling price for cigarettes
         of the price category most in demand, provided that such excise duty does not exceed the amount of the excise duty levied
         on cigarettes of the price category most in demand.’
      
Council Directive 92/79/EEC of October on the approximation of taxes on cigarettes (OJ L 316, p. 8), as amended
         by Council Directive 2003/117/EC of December (OJ L 333, p. 49), lays down the rates and minimum amounts of  the
         overall excise duty on cigarettes.
      
By Council Decision 2004/513/EC of June (OJ L 213, p. 8), the World Health Organisation Framework Convention on
         Tobacco Control, signed at Geneva on May (‘the WHO Convention’), was approved on behalf of the Community. Article
         of that Convention, headed ‘Price and tax measures to reduce the demand for tobacco’, states:
      
‘1. The Parties recognise that price and tax measures are an effective and important means of reducing tobacco consumption
         by various segments of the population, in particular young persons.
      
2. Without prejudice to the sovereign right of the Parties to determine and establish their taxation policies, each Party
         should take account of its national health objectives concerning tobacco control and adopt or maintain, as appropriate, measures
         which may include:
      
a)      implementing tax policies and, where appropriate, price policies, on tobacco products so as to contribute to the health objectives
         aimed at reducing tobacco consumption, …
      
…’
 National legislation
Under section 2(1) of the Tobacco Products (Control of Advertising, Sponsorship and Sales Promotion) Act 1978, No 27/1978,
         the Minister for Health may make regulations for the control and regulation of advertising of tobacco products, sponsorship
         and any other activities which are intended or are likely to promote the sales of tobacco products.
      
Under section 2(2)(i) of that law, those regulations may provide for ‘the prohibition of the sale of tobacco products at prices
         which are so much lower than those at which tobacco products of a similar type or character are at the material time being
         sold that the sale at the lower prices constitutes in the opinion of the Minister [for Health] a sales promotion device’.
      
The legislation in this field was extended by the Tobacco Products (Control of Advertising, Sponsorship and Sales Promotion)
         Regulations 1991, S.I. No 326/(‘the regulations’) which at the same time revoked the Tobacco Products (Control of
         Advertising, Sponsorship and Sales Promotion) (No 2) Regulations 1986, S.I. No 107/(‘the regulations’). Article
         of the regulations, which corresponds to Article of the regulations, provides:
      
‘1.      A person shall not sell by retail a tobacco product of a particular brand at a price lower than that otherwise obtaining for
         that brand.
      
2.      A person shall not offer to sell by retail a tobacco product of a particular brand at a price lower than otherwise obtaining
         for that brand by making available to persons a coupon or similar document. 
      
3.      A person shall not use, in relation to the retail sale or purchase of tobacco products, offers of vouchers, trading stamps,
         coupons, premia, tokens or gifts (including gifts of tobacco products).’
      
Article of the regulations, which corresponds to Article of the regulations, provides:
      
‘1.      A person shall not sell by retail a tobacco product at a price as respects which the Minister [for Health], in the exercise
         of the powers conferred on her by paragraph (i) of sub-section (2) of section of the Act, has formed an opinion that the
         sale of that product at such a price constitutes a sales promotion device.
      
2.      An opinion formed by th[at] Minister under sub-article (1) of this article shall be communicated in writing to the person
         concerned.’
      
In 1986, the Minister for Health issued a Memorandum of Clarification concerning the regulations. The first sentence
         of point of the part of that memorandum concerning Article of the regulations reads as follows:
      
‘The weighted average price of all cigarettes in each category sold by the [Irish Tobacco Manufacturers Advisory Council]
         companies will be calculated by reference to the net ex-warehouse sales volumes for each brand for the previous year to the
         31st December, and the recommended retail price operative at the time the weighted average price for each category is determined.’
      
According to the first sentence of point of that part of the memorandum, ‘a sales promotion device will occur if the recommended
         retail price of a brand of cigarettes falls to a price which is more than 3% below the weighted average price for its category’.
      
 Pre-litigation procedure
Taking the view that the Irish legislation on the sale of tobacco products was incompatible with Article 9(1) of Directive
         95/59, the Commission sent a letter of formal notice to Ireland on October 2001.
      
On July 2002, the Commission also sent to Ireland a request for information on the applicable Irish legislation.
      
Having found that Ireland’s reply of September to the letter of formal notice did not contain the requested information,
         the Commission sent Ireland a further request for information on October 2002. It was not answered.
      
On October and July 2004, respectively, the Commission therefore sent a letter of formal notice and a reasoned opinion
         to Ireland, in which it concluded that, by not providing the requested information, Ireland had failed to fulfil its obligations
         under Article EC. The reasoned opinion called upon Ireland to adopt the measures necessary to comply with its obligations
         within a period of two months from receipt of that opinion.
      
On December 2004, the Irish Ministry for Health and Children sent Mr Medghoul, Director for Taxation and Customs Union
         matters in the Commission, a letter in which it gave brief details of recent Irish legislation concerning public health and
         tobacco products, while pointing out that the legislation was the subject of legal proceedings before the Irish courts and
         therefore had not yet entered into force. That legislation had still not entered into force upon the expiry of the period
         prescribed in the reasoned opinion of December 2006, referred to in paragraph of the present judgment.
      
At the Commission’s request, a meeting took place between it and the Irish authorities on February 2005.
      
On April 2006, the Commission sent Ireland a letter of formal notice, and, on December 2006, another reasoned opinion,
         in which it asserted that, by applying minimum and maximum retail prices for cigarettes, Ireland had failed to fulfil its
         obligations under Article 9(1) of Directive 95/59. The reasoned opinion called upon Ireland to take the measures required
         to comply with it within a period of two months from the date of receipt of the opinion.
      
Ireland replied to that reasoned opinion by letter of January 2007, contending that the national legislation in question
         was necessary in order to protect public health.
      
The Commission then sent, on June 2007, an additional reasoned opinion. Taking the view, in the light of Ireland’s replies
         to those reasoned opinions, that the situation remained unsatisfactory, the Commission brought the present action.
      
 The action
 The complaints alleging infringement of Article 9(1) of Directive 95/Arguments of the parties
On the basis of the information available to it, in particular that contained in the minutes of the meeting of February
         2005, the Commission considers that, under the Irish legislation in question and in the light of the practice of the Irish
         authorities, minimum prices are fixed for the retail sale of cigarettes, in so far as a price of no more than 3% below the
         weighted average price for cigarettes in the relevant category may be imposed and maximum prices are fixed, in so far as that
         weighted average price may not be exceeded by more than 3%. That system restricts the freedom of producers and importers to
         determine the maximum retail selling prices for their products and is therefore contrary to Article 9(1) of Directive 95/59.
         Like the other similar national systems which have been examined by the Court, that system prevents the sale of cigarettes
         at a price lower than that fixed by the Member State concerned. That conclusion is not affected by the third paragraph of
         Article 9(1) of Directive 95/59.
      
Nor can the system of minimum and maximum prices be justified by the objective of protection of public health laid down in
         Article EC. As made clear, inter alia, by the judgment in Case C-470/A.G.M.-COS.MET [2007] ECR I-2749, a matter which has been the subject of harmonisation cannot be examined in the light of provisions of
         primary law which derogate from the fundamental freedoms.
      
In any event, Member States could ensure that the retail selling prices for tobacco products are sufficiently high in order
         to combat smoking by means of a general increase in the tax on those products, or by a specific increase, by giving particular
         weight to the various components of the excise duty or by setting a minimum excise duty. The directives on taxation of cigarettes
         leave the Member States free to adapt that taxation to their own priorities.
      
The Commission also considers that Article 9(1) of Directive 95/is compatible with the WHO Convention. First, that convention
         does not oblige the Contracting Parties to apply minimum prices. Second, it does not confer on Member States a right, enforceable
         against the Community, to choose between the application of tax measures or the application of price measures, since that
         is a matter for the internal functioning of the Community.
      
With regard to Council Recommendation 2003/54/EC of December on the prevention of smoking and on initiatives to improve
         tobacco control (OJ L 22, p. 31), relied on by Ireland in so far as it refers to ‘appropriate price measures on tobacco
         products so as to discourage tobacco consumption’, the Commission considers that the terms of that recommendation are not
         binding and that, in any case, they cannot be interpreted as encouraging an infringement of Article 9(1) of Directive 95/59.
      
In addition, public health considerations are not completely unrelated to the harmonisation of excise duty on tobacco products.
      
Ireland contends that there is no prohibition either in the national legislation in question or the Memorandum of Clarification
         of on  exceeding by more than 3% the weighted average price for each category of cigarettes. Maximum prices are therefore
         not imposed. Ireland concedes that the minutes of the meeting of February do not reflect the real situation in that
         regard.
      
In addition, Ireland argues that Article 9(1) of Directive 95/59, which provides that manufacturers and importers of manufactured
         tobacco are to be free to determine the maximum retail selling price for their products, does not mention minimum prices and,
         consequently, does not prohibit the imposition of such minimum prices. The imposition of a minimum price prevents producers
         and importers from fixing maximum prices only in a technical and wholly artificial sense. Furthermore, in contrast to other
         national systems which have been examined by the Court, the Irish system is designed solely to target the sale of cheap cigarettes.
      
Ireland considers that the case-law referred to by the Commission in support of its argument that Article EC cannot be
         relied upon in the present case, is not capable of being applied here. In Case C-216/Commission v Greece [2000] ECR I-the Court acknowledged that Article EC, and in particular the objective of the protection of the health
         and life of humans, can in principle justify the fixing of minimum prices for the retail sale of tobacco products. The Member
         States enjoy a broad margin of discretion in judging which measures are necessary and proportionate to protect public health.
         In that regard, the Irish legislation in question satisfies the proportionality test. It stems from a legitimate policy choice
         between fixing minimum prices and increasing taxation.
      
Ireland also takes the view that tax measures are not of themselves a sufficient means to achieve the public health goal of
         preventing the sale of cheap cigarettes. The effect of such measures is uncertain, given that manufacturers may decide to
         absorb all or some of the increases in excise tax. Also, Ireland cannot combat the sale of cheap cigarettes by imposing a
         minimum excise duty without introducing a general increase in the tax on all cigarettes, which is already very high in Ireland.
         Also, an increase in the level of excise duty would increase the risk of smuggling.
      
The proportionality, with regard to that objective, of the Irish system of minimum prices is confirmed by paragraph of Recommendation
         2003/and by Article 6(2)(a) of the WHO Convention. In relation to that recommendation, Ireland argues that, while recommendations
         are not binding measures, they can nevertheless be taken into consideration where they are capable of casting light on the
         interpretation of Community law. With regard to the WHO Convention, Ireland contends that, while it does not impose an obligation
         to apply a system of minimum prices, it does require the Contracting Parties to regulate retail selling prices by using tax
         policies or price policies, whichever is more appropriate. Ireland took the view, in its discretion, that price policies were
         an appropriate adjunct to its tax policies. 
      
Ireland submits, finally, that Directive 95/is predicated on competition concerns and that it does not take public health
         considerations into account. In that regard, the Commission has itself recently proposed amendments to that directive (proposal
         for a directive, COM(2008) Final) intended mainly to reduce tobacco consumption. It has also acknowledged that the existing
         Community system has not made it possible to prevent significant price differences between the Member States and that those
         differences have led to smuggling and extensive cross-border trade, causing distortion of competition on the market for tobacco,
         loss of revenue for Member States applying a relatively high level of taxation, and undermining the attainment of public health
         objectives.
      
 Findings of the Court
It must be recalled as a preliminary point that, as recital in the preamble to Directive 95/makes clear, the directive
         is part of a policy of harmonisation of the structures of excise duty on manufactured tobacco, the objective of which is to
         prevent the distortion of competition between different categories of manufactured tobacco belonging to the same group and,
         consequently, to open the national markets of the Member States.
      
To that end, Article 8(1) of the directive provides that cigarettes manufactured in the Community and those imported from
         non-member countries are to be subject in each Member State to a proportional excise duty calculated on the maximum retail
         selling price, including customs duties, and also to a specific excise duty calculated per unit of the product (Commission v Greece, paragraph 19).
      
It is, furthermore, apparent from recital in the preamble to Directive 95/that the imperative needs of competition imply
         a system of freely formed prices for all groups of manufactured tobacco.
      
In that regard, Article 9(1) of Directive 95/provides that manufacturers, or, where appropriate, their representatives
         or authorised agents in the Community and importers of tobacco from non-member countries are to be free to determine the maximum
         retail selling price for each of their products, the aim being to ensure effective competition between them (Commission v Greece, paragraph 20). That provision seeks to ensure that the determination of the tax base of the proportional excise duty on
         tobacco products, that is the maximum retail selling price of those products, is subject to the same rules in all the Member
         States. It also aims, as the Advocate General states in point of her Opinion, to maintain the freedom of the abovementioned
         economic operators, by which they may make effective use of the competitive advantage resulting from any lower cost prices.
      
The imposition of a minimum retail selling price by the public authorities thus means that the maximum retail selling price
         determined by manufacturers and importers cannot, in any event, be lower than that obligatory minimum price. Legislation imposing
         such a minimum price is therefore capable of undermining competition by preventing some of those producers or importers from
         taking advantage of lower cost prices so as to offer more attractive retail selling prices.
      
Consequently, a system of minimum retail selling prices for tobacco products cannot be regarded as compatible with Article
         9(1) of Directive 95/unless it is structured in such a way as to ensure, in any event, that the competitive advantage which
         could result for some producers and importers of those products from lower cost prices is not impaired and, thus, competition
         is not distorted (see Case C‑197/Commission v France [2010] ECR I-0000, paragraph 38, and Case C‑198/Commission v Austria [2010] ECR I-0000, paragraph 30).
      
The national legislation which is the subject of the present action must be examined in the light of those principles.
      
That legislation imposes on producers and importers active on the Irish market a minimum retail selling price for cigarettes
         equal to 97% of the weighted average price on that market for each category of cigarettes.
      
By contrast, the Commission has not established that that system imposes on producers and importers a maximum retail selling
         price for cigarettes.
      
It must however be held that that system does not make it possible to ensure, in any event, that the minimum price imposed
         does not impair the competitive advantage which could result for some producers and importers of tobacco products from lower
         cost prices. On the contrary, as the Commission pointed out at the hearing, without being contradicted by Ireland, such a
         system, which furthermore fixes the minimum price by reference to the weighted average price on the market for each category
         of cigarettes, is likely to eliminate price differences between competing products and to cause prices to converge around
         the price of the most expensive product. That system therefore undermines the freedom of producers and importers to determine
         their maximum retail selling price, guaranteed by the second paragraph of Article 9(1) of Directive 95/59.
      
With regard to the WHO Convention, as the Advocate General stated in points and of her Opinion, that convention imposes
         no actual obligation on the Contracting Parties with regard to price policies for tobacco products, and merely describes possible
         approaches by which to take account of national health objectives concerning tobacco control. Article 6(2) of the convention
         provides only that the Contracting Parties are to adopt or maintain measures which ‘may include’ implementing tax policies
         and, ‘where appropriate’, price policies, concerning tobacco products.
      
Equally, no specific conclusions concerning the recourse to systems of minimum prices can be drawn from Recommendation 2003/54,
         which, furthermore, is not binding. The section to which Ireland refers merely expresses the idea that high prices for tobacco
         products discourage tobacco consumption.
      
In any event, as is clear from paragraph of this judgment, Directive 95/does not preclude a pricing policy provided
         that it does not run counter to the objectives of that directive, in particular that of ensuring that competition between
         different categories of manufactured tobacco belonging to the same group is not distorted.
      
Ireland also contends that the system of minimum prices at issue is justified by the objective of protection of health and
         life of humans under Article EC. According to Ireland, an increase in the level of tax cannot guarantee sufficiently high
         prices of tobacco products, because that increase could be absorbed by producers or importers by sacrificing part of their
         profit margins, or even by selling at a loss.
      
It should be pointed out, in that regard, that Article EC cannot be understood as authorising measures other than the quantitative
         restrictions on imports and exports and the measures having equivalent effect envisaged by Articles EC and EC (see,
         to that effect Case C-302/Commission v France [2002] ECR I‑2055, paragraph 33). In the present case, the Commission has not alleged any infringement of Articles EC
         or EC.
      
The fact remains that Directive 95/does not prevent Ireland from taking measures to combat smoking, which forms part of
         the objective of protecting public health.
      
Equally, it cannot be maintained that that objective is not taken into account by the directive.
      
As noted in recital in the preamble to Directive 2002/10, which was  the last directive to amend Directive 95/but which
         left Article unchanged, the EC Treaty, and in particular the first paragraph of Article 152(1) EC, requires a high level
         of human health protection in the definition and implementation of all Community policies and activities.
      
That recital also explains that the level of taxation is a major factor in the price of tobacco products, which in turn influences
         consumers’ smoking habits. Equally, the Court has already held that fiscal legislation is an important and effective instrument
         for discouraging consumption of tobacco products and, therefore, for the protection of public health (Case C-140/Valeško [2006] ECR I-10025, paragraph 58), and that the objective of ensuring that a high price level is fixed for those products
         may adequately be attained by increased taxation of those products, the excise duty increases sooner or later being reflected
         in an increase in the retail selling price, without undermining the freedom to determine prices  (see, to that effect, Commission v Greece, paragraph 31). 
      
Moreover, if the Member States wish to exclude once and for all any possibility for producers or importers to absorb, even
         temporarily, the impact of taxes on the retail selling price of manufactured tobacco products by selling them at a loss, it
         is inter alia open to them, while allowing those producers and importers to make effective use of the competitive advantage
         resulting from any lower cost prices, to prohibit the sale of manufactured tobacco products at a price below the sum of the
         cost price and all taxes (see Case C-197/Commission v France, paragraph 53, and Commission v Austria, paragraph 43).
      
It follows from all the foregoing considerations that the Commission’s action must be upheld in so far as concerns the complaint
         relating to the imposition, in Ireland, of minimum retail prices for cigarettes, but  rejected in so far as concerns the complaint
         relating to the imposition, in Ireland, of maximum retail prices for cigarettes.
      
It must, therefore, be held that, by imposing minimum retail prices for cigarettes, Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under Article 9(1) of Directive 95/59.
      
 Complaint alleging the infringement of Article EC
 Arguments of the parties
According to the Commission, the Member States have the duty, under Article EC, to facilitate the achievement of its tasks,
         in particular by complying with requests for information made in the course of infringement procedures. Thus, by not providing
         information on the applicable Irish legislation despite the Commission’s requests of July and October 2002, Ireland has
         failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC. Ireland’s reply of September to the letter of formal notice of
         October did not contain the requested information. In addition, Ireland failed to reply either to the letter of formal
         notice of October or to the reasoned opinion of July 2004. Finally, Ireland’s letter of December did not
         comply with its cooperation obligations, since the letter was sent more than two years after the requests for information
         addressed to it.
      
Ireland contends that on May the Minister for Health and Children sent to Mr Medghoul a copy of the documents referred
         to in the Commission’s request for information. On September 2002, Ireland replied both to the letter of formal notice of
         October and to the Commission’s request for information. Finally, by letter of December 2004, the Irish authorities
         described the national legislation which had recently been adopted. The Commission was therefore perfectly aware of the Irish
         legislation. Consequently, Ireland disputes any infringement of its obligations under Article EC.
      
 Findings of the Court
Article EC makes it clear that the Member States are required to cooperate in good faith with the enquiries of the Commission
         pursuant to Article EC, and to provide the Commission with all the information requested for that purpose (see Case C-82/Commission v Italy [2004] ECR I‑6635, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
On expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion of July 2004, which referred to a failure to comply with Article
         EC, Ireland had still not provided the information requested, even though it had been called upon to do so several times.
         It is apparent from the documents before the Court that, only in the letter of December did the Irish authorities
         briefly describe the national legislation concerning public health and tobacco, in its latest version.
      
Consequently, it must be held that, by not providing the information required by the Commission in order to enable it to fulfil
         its task of monitoring compliance with Directive 95/59, Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Under Article 69(3) of those rules, where each party succeeds on some and
         fails on other heads, the Court may order that the costs be shared or that the parties bear their own costs. However, even
         though the action is dismissed in part, it must be held that the Commission’s action is, in essence, well founded. In those
         circumstances, Ireland should be ordered to pay the costs, as applied for in the Commission’s pleadings.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by imposing minimum retail prices for cigarettes, Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article
            9(1) of Council Directive 95/59/EC of November on taxes other than turnover taxes which affect the consumption of
            manufactured tobacco, as amended by Council Directive 2002/10/EC of February 2002;
2.      Declares that, by not providing the information required by the European Commission in order to enable it to fulfil its task
            of monitoring compliance with Directive 95/59, as amended by Directive 2002/10, Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations
            under Article EC;
3.      Dismisses the action as to the remainder;
4.      Orders Ireland to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 