
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-56/IHW Rebmann GmbHvHauptzollamt Weiden(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Bundesfinanzhof)
         
«(Free movement of goods – Trade with third countries – Procedure for returned goods – Article of Regulation (EEC) No 2913/– Reimportation of compensating products originally re-exported subsequent to an inward processing procedure – Determination of the import duty legally owed – Burden of proof in respect of the proportion of the value of the reimported products corresponding to inward processing)»
Opinion of Advocate General Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer delivered on February I - Judgment of the Court (First Chamber), May I - Summary of the Judgment
Common Customs Tariff – Relief from import duties – Procedure for returned goods in the customs territory of the Community – Importation of compensating products qualifying for application of that procedure – Importer unable to provide all the information necessary for calculating the duty legally owed – Customs authorities required to use the administrative cooperation procedure to obtain the relevant information(Council Regulation No 2913/92, Arts and 187; Commission Regulation No 2454/93, Arts 611(2)(b), and 848)The first paragraph of Article of Regulation No 2913/establishing the Community Customs Code allows the reimportation,
         with relief from import duties, of compensating products originally exported or re-exported subsequent to an inward processing
         procedure. The second paragraph of that provision, according to which  
         [t]he amount of import duty legally owed shall be determined on the basis of the rules applicable under the inward processing
         procedure, must be interpreted as meaning that, where an importer has provided proof that the imported goods are compensating products
         qualifying for application of the procedure for returned goods under Article of Regulation No 2454/laying down provisions
         for the implementation of Regulation No 2913/92, but is unable to provide all the information necessary for calculating the
         duty legally owed, the administrative cooperation procedure provided for in Articles 611(2)(b) and of Regulation No 2454/must be used by the customs authorities responsible for accepting the declaration. Those authorities must therefore ask the
         supervising customs office, using the INF sheet, to communicate to them the amount of duty legally owed.Article of the Customs Code, relating to professional secrecy, does not preclude use of that procedure.see paras 35-36, operative part
      
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)May (1)
((Free movement of goods – Trade with third countries – Procedure for returned goods – Article of Regulation (EEC) No 2913/– Reimportation of compensating products originally re-exported subsequent to an inward processing procedure – Determination of the import duty legally owed – Burden of proof in respect of the proportion of the value of the reimported products corresponding to inward processing))
In Case C-56/02, 
            REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Bundesfinanzhof (Germany) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending
            before that court between
            
 IHW Rebmann GmbH
and
 Hauptzollamt Weiden,
on the interpretation of the second paragraph of Article of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/of October establishing
            the Community Customs Code (OJ L 302, p. 1),
THE COURT (First Chamber),,
composed of: M. Wathelet, President of the Chamber, P. Jann and A. Rosas (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer, Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
IHW Rebmann GmbH, by H. Glashoff, Steuerberater, 
               
─
the Commission of the European Communities, by J.C. Schieferer and R. Tricot, acting as Agents, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of IHW Rebmann GmbH and the Commission at the hearing on January 2003,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on February 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
By order of January 2002, received at the Court on February 2002, the Bundesfinanzhof (Federal Finance Court) referred
         for a preliminary ruling under Article EC a question on the interpretation of the second paragraph of Article of Council
         Regulation (EEC) No 2913/of October establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L 302, p. 1; hereinafter 
         
         the Customs Code). 
         
            
That question was  raised in the course of proceedings between IHW Rebmann GmbH (hereinafter  
         Rebmann) and Hauptzollamt Weiden concerning the amount of customs duty owed upon the reimportation into the Community of compensating
         products as returned goods. 
         
Legal background
            
Inward processing within the meaning of Article of the Customs Code occurs where non-Community goods intended for re-export
         from the customs territory of the Community are used in the customs territory of the Community in one or more processing operations.
         The products resulting from processing operations are known as  
         compensating products. 
         
            
A person intending to carry out processing operations must apply for authorisation. The customs authorities set him a time-limit,
         on the expiry of which he must have re-exported the compensating products. The holder of the authorisation may also assign
         to the compensating products a new customs-approved treatment or use, and in particular release them for free circulation
         in the Community by paying the duty on goods which have been imported and placed under the inward processing procedure. 
         
            
Community goods which have been exported and which it is subsequently intended to reimport into the Community are known as
          
         returned goods. Under Articles and of the Customs Code, they may be reimported within a period of three years with relief from import
         duties. 
         
            
Under the first paragraph of Article of the Customs Code, compensating products originally exported or re-exported subsequent
         to an inward processing procedure may also qualify for application of the procedure for returned goods and be reimported with
         relief from import duties.  However, relief applies only to the proportion of the value of the product which corresponds to
         inward processing carried out in the Community, whereas the proportion of the value of the product which corresponds to the
         import goods used in the manufacture of that product will give rise to the payment of import duties.  In that regard, the
         second paragraph of Article of that code is worded as follows: The amount of import duty legally owed shall be determined on the basis of the rules applicable under the inward processing
         procedure, the date of re-export being regarded as the date of release for free circulation.
         
            
Pursuant to Article 62(1) of the Customs Code, a declaration in writing for the purpose of placing goods under a customs procedure
         must contain all the particulars necessary for implementation of the provisions governing that procedure.  Article 62(2) of
         that code provides that the declaration is to be accompanied by all the documents required for implementation of the provisions
         governing the customs procedure for which the goods are declared. 
         
            
However, certain provisions assign a role to the customs authorities in gathering the information necessary to take their
         decision. Thus, in general terms, Article of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2454/of July laying down provisions
         for the implementation of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/(OJ L 253, p. 1; hereinafter  
         the implementing regulation) provides that  
         [w]here a person making a request for a decision is not in a position to provide all the documents and information necessary
         to give a ruling, the customs authorities shall provide the documents and information at their disposal. 
         
            
Article of the implementing regulation, which forms part of the subsection dealing with administrative cooperation, of
         the section concerning provisions applying to the suspension system, of the chapter on inward processing, provides for an
         information sheet referred to as the INF sheet.  Pursuant to Article 611(2)(b), that sheet is to be used for  
         the release for free circulation of compensating products or goods in the unaltered state at a customs office other than an
         office of discharge. 
         
            
Article 613(1), first subparagraph, and (5) of the implementing regulation provide: 
         
1.
 Under Article 611(2)(b), where the release for free circulation of all or part of the compensating products or goods in the
         unaltered state is requested, the customs authorities responsible for accepting the declaration, using the INF sheet endorsed
         by them, shall ask the supervising customs office to indicate:
         
─
 in box 9(a), the amount of import duties to be levied under Article or 128(4) of the Code, 
         
─
 in box 9(b), the amount of compensatory interest to be levied under Article 589, 
         
─
 the quantity, CN code and origin of the import goods used in the manufacture of the compensating products released for free
            circulation. 
         
...
         
5.
 The supervising office to which the INF sheet is sent shall supply the information requested in boxes 8, and of the
         sheet, endorse it, retain the copy and return the original. However, it shall not be obliged to supply such information beyond
         the expiry of the period for which it is required to keep records.
         
            
The form for the INF sheet, the specimen of which is contained in Annex to the implementing regulation, comprises various
         boxes. Of those: 
         
─
box is entitled  
            Particulars necessary for application of specific commercial policy measures; 
         
─
box is subdivided into four spaces marked (a) to (d), the first three for entering amounts of, respectively, customs duties,
            charges having equivalent effect and other charges, and the last for entering the currency in which those amounts are expressed.
            
         
─
box is for indicating whether specific common commercial policy measures are applicable. 
         
            
Article 848(1), first subparagraph, first indent, and (3) of the implementing regulation, relating to returned goods, provide:
         
         
1.
  The following shall be accepted as returned goods:
         
─
 goods for which the following documents are produced in support of the declaration for release for free circulation: 
         
(a)
the copy of the export declaration returned to the exporter by the customs authorities, or a copy of such document certified
         true by the said authorities; or 
         
(b)
 the information sheet provided for in Article 850. Where evidence available to the customs authorities at the customs office of reimportation or ascertainable by them from the
         person concerned indicates that the goods declared for free circulation were originally exported from the customs territory
         of the Community, and at that time satisfied the conditions for acceptance as returned goods, the documents referred to at
         (a) and (b) shall not be required. 
         
...
         
3.
  Where they consider it necessary, the customs authorities at the customs office of reimportation may ask the person concerned
         to submit additional evidence for the purposes of identification of the returned goods.
         
            
Article of the Customs Code, which relates to professional secrecy, provides: All information which is by nature confidential or which is provided on a confidential basis shall be covered by the obligation
         of professional secrecy. It shall not be disclosed by the customs authorities without the express permission of the person
         or authority providing it; the communication of information shall be permitted where the customs authorities may be obliged
         or authorised to do so pursuant to the provisions in force, particularly in respect of data protection, or in connection with
         legal proceedings.
         The main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
            
From December to March 1995, Rebmann declared consignments containing a total of new German-origin cars
         of a particular make and model from the Czech Republic as returned goods for release for free circulation.  On each occasion
         it produced a declaration of returned goods and an invoice bearing the export stamp of the German customs authorities. 
         
            
However, the customs authorities realised that those vehicles did not originate entirely in the Community, but had undergone
         inward processing there. In the absence of any documents from which the proportion of the value of those products corresponding
         to inward processing could be determined, they demanded payment of import duties on their full value. 
         
            
Rebmann protested, pointing to the fact that the duties should not have been calculated on the proportion of the value of
         the vehicles corresponding to inward processing, since they were compensating products qualifying for application of the procedure
         for returned goods. Since Rebmann had not itself carried out the inward processing, it did not have the  
         calculation formula for determining the value of the Community components. It asked the customs authorities to obtain the necessary information
         from the supervising office. 
         
            
However, the customs authorities did not agree to that request, on the grounds, firstly, that under Article of the Customs
         Code it is for the importer to prove that the conditions for implementation of the applicable customs procedure are satisfied
         and, secondly, that pursuant to the second paragraph of Article of that code the import duty legally owed is to be determined
         on the basis of the rules applicable under the inward processing procedure for the non-Community goods contained in the compensating
         products.  They also stated that Article of that code, relating to professional secrecy, prevented them, in the absence
         of the exporter's agreement, from disclosing the amount of duty in respect of the proportion of the value of the reimported
         products corresponding to inward processing. 
         
            
In the appeal on a point of law (
         Revision) which it has brought before the Bundesfinanzhof, Rebmann argues that it is sufficient for it to prove that an imported product
         is a compensating product which has undergone inward processing.  Under Article of the implementing regulation, it is
         then for the customs authorities to determine the amount of duty owed, using the information provided by the exporter of the
         compensating products. 
         
            
In the order for reference, the Bundesfinanzhof indicates its uncertainty as to the interpretation of the Community provisions
         relied on by the customs authorities and as to whether customs duty may be charged on the proportion of the value of the reimported
         products corresponding to inward processing. 
         
            
It submits that the reference in the second paragraph of Article of the Customs Code to the rules applicable under the
         inward processing procedure can be interpreted as not being confined to the rules for the calculation of import duty, but
         as also covering the procedures relating to the method of determining duty.  According to that interpretation, the customs
         office to which a request is made for the release for free circulation of reimported compensating products is obliged, under
         Article 613(1) of the implementing regulation, to ask the supervising customs office, using the INF sheet, to communicate
         to it the information referred to in that provision so as to enable it to determine, on that basis, the import duty legally
         owed under the second paragraph of Article of the Customs Code.  Article of the implementing regulation supports that
         interpretation.  The Bundesfinanzhof points out, however, that such an interpretation of the second paragraph of Article of the Customs Code could conflict with Article of that code, relating to professional secrecy. 
         
            
The Bundesfinanzhof further submits that it is hardly justifiable from the point of view of customs law if compensating products
         that are declared for release for free circulation, either immediately subsequent to the inward processing procedure or after
         the application of an intervening customs procedure, are subject to a different procedure from compensating products that
         are declared for release for free circulation after reimportation as returned goods.  Whilst in the first case cooperation
         between the customs authorities is expressly required by Articles to of the implementing regulation, in the second
         case, on a strict interpretation of Article of the Customs Code, such cooperation would not be permissible.  The Bundesfinanzhof
         notes in that regard that, in either case, the interest of the user of the inward processing procedure in maintaining professional
         secrecy can be similarly affected if it is not he but a third party which declares the compensating products for release for
         free circulation.  Moreover, the administrative burden entailed by the request for the necessary information made, using the
         INF sheet, by the customs authority responsible for accepting the declaration would be the same in both cases. 
         
            
In those circumstances, the Bundesfinanzhof decided to refer the following question to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
         Is Article 187, second paragraph, of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/of October establishing the Community Customs
         Code to be interpreted as meaning that, where compensating products that are declared as returned goods are released for free
         circulation, the factual particulars required to calculate the import duties legally owed on those compensating products must
         also be declared and proved, or is it for the endorsing customs office, so far as possible, to ascertain those factual particulars
         from the supervising office using an INF sheet, pursuant to the procedure established in Article of Commission Regulation
         (EEC) No 2454/of July laying down provisions for the implementation of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/establishing
         the Community Customs Code, in the version in force until June 2001?
         The question referred for a preliminary rulingObservations submitted to the Court
            
Only Rebmann and the Commission submitted observations. However, the German Government replied to various written questions
         put by the Court. 
         
            
Rebmann maintains that, in a situation such as that at issue in the main proceedings, the importer is not required to prove
         the information necessary for calculating the import duty legally owed, but that that duty can be determined by the customs
         authorities under the procedure provided for in Article of the implementing regulation.  It argues that that analysis
         is supported both by the actual wording of the second paragraph of Article of the Customs Code and by the fact that taxing
         products where it is established that a proportion of their value corresponds to inward processing is not justified. 
         
            
According to Rebmann, Article of the Customs Code does not preclude the solution proposed by it.  The supervising customs
         office would merely have to indicate the amount of duty owed in box of the INF sheet.  That indication would obviate the
         need for that of  
         the quantity, CN code and origin of the import goods used in the manufacture of the compensating products released for free
         circulation, provided for in Article 613(1), first subparagraph, third indent, of the implementing regulation, but for which the INF
         sheet provides no space.  In Rebmann's submission, merely indicating the amount of duty owed would not give the reimporter
         any information liable to harm the interests of the holder of the inward processing authorisation. 
         
            
The Commission, on the other hand, submits that the wording of the second paragraph of Article of the Customs Code is
         clear inasmuch as that provision refers only to the rules for the calculation of import duty which are applicable under the
         inward processing procedure, and not to the procedures for collecting the information to be used as the basis for that calculation.  It
         draws attention to the formal and procedural nature of customs law, which is necessary to ensure legal certainty in relations
         between the administrative authorities and taxpayers.  That explains why, in its submission, in the case in the main proceedings,
         under Article of that code it is for Rebmann to prove not only the status of the motor vehicles as returned goods, but
         also the proportion of the value of the vehicles corresponding to inward processing, on which no duty should be charged on
         reimportation. 
         
            
The Commission further points out that the information provided by the exporter is confidential and protected under Article
         of the Customs Code. 
         
            
At the hearing, the Commission qualified its position and explained that customs law must also be interpreted having regard
         to its economic nature.  Since the objective of that law is to protect Community producers from imports from third countries,
         that justifies observance of the confidentiality rule. 
         Reply of the Court
         
            
The first paragraph of Article of the Customs Code, which allows the reimportation, with relief from import duties, of
         compensating products originally exported or re-exported subsequent to an inward processing procedure, does not by any means
         require such reimportation to be effected by the holder of the inward processing authorisation. 
         
            
Likewise, the second paragraph of that article, under which  
         [t]he amount of import duty legally owed shall be determined on the basis of the rules applicable under the inward processing
         procedure, must, as the Advocate General rightly observes in points and of his Opinion, be interpreted as referring to all the
         rules applicable under the inward processing procedure, which include those relating to administrative cooperation.  It follows
         that that provision does not require the reimporter of the compensating products himself to provide, in all circumstances,
         all the information permitting calculation of the duty legally owed. 
         
            
That interpretation is supported by the wording of Article 611(2)(b) of the implementing regulation, which provides for the
         use of the INF sheet for the release for free circulation of compensating products at a customs office other than an office
         of discharge, without making any distinction based on whether the declarant is the holder of the inward processing authorisation.
         
         
            
Article of the Customs Code does not preclude such an interpretation.  It is true that that provision requires a customs
         declaration to contain all the particulars necessary for implementation of the provisions governing the customs procedure
         for which the goods are declared.  It is therefore, in principle, for the declarant to provide the information necessary for
         calculating the customs duty payable when the compensating products are reimported as returned goods.  However, that article
         must necessarily be applied having regard to all the provisions governing inward processing, which include those relating
         to administrative cooperation. 
         
            
Moreover, account must be taken of Article of the implementing regulation, a general provision under which, where a person
         making a request for a decision is not in a position to provide all the documents and information necessary to give a ruling,
         the customs authorities are to provide the documents and information at their disposal. 
         
            
Thus it must be held that, in a situation such as that at issue in the main proceedings, where the importer provides proof
         that the imported goods are compensating products qualifying for application of the procedure for returned goods under Article
         of the implementing regulation, but is unable to provide all the information necessary for calculating the duty legally
         owed, the administrative cooperation procedure provided for in Articles 611(2)(b) and of the implementing regulation must
         be used by the customs authorities. 
         
            
Article of the Customs Code does not preclude use of that procedure.  That provision permits the communication of information
          
         where the customs authorities [are] obliged or authorised to do so pursuant to the provisions in force.  That may indeed be the case with regard to the information referred to in Article of the implementing regulation, which
         must be communicated, using the INF sheet, by the supervising office to the customs authority responsible for accepting
         the declaration, especially where it is necessary to communicate only the amount of duty legally owed. 
         
            
The answer to the question referred for a preliminary ruling must therefore be that the second paragraph of Article of
         the Customs Code is to be interpreted as meaning that, where an importer has provided proof that the imported goods are compensating
         products qualifying for application of the procedure for returned goods under Article of the implementing regulation,
         but is unable to provide all the information necessary for calculating the duty legally owed, the administrative cooperation
         procedure provided for in Articles 611(2)(b) and of the implementing regulation must be used by the customs authorities
         responsible for accepting the declaration.  Those authorities must therefore ask the supervising customs office, using the
         INF sheet, to communicate to them the amount of duty legally owed. 
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the Commission, which has submitted observations to the Court, are not recoverable.  Since these proceedings
         are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings pending before the national court, the decision on
         costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (First Chamber),
in answer to the question referred to it by the Bundesfinanzhof by order of January 2002, hereby rules: 
         
Wathelet
Jann 
Rosas 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on May 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
M. Wathelet  
Registrar
President of the First Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: German.
Top  
 