
Case C-205/Fabien Nemec
v
Caisse régionale d’assurance maladie du Nord-Est
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Tribunal des affaires de sécurité sociale de Longwy)
(Social security for migrant workers – Article EC – Regulation (EEC) No 1408/– Article – Allowance for workers exposed to asbestos – Calculation of cash benefits – Refusal to take account of pay earned in another Member State)
Summary of the Judgment
Social security for migrant workers – Accidents at work and occupational disease – Calculation of benefit 
(Art. EC; Council Regulation No 1408/71, Art. 58(1))
Article 58(1) of Regulation No 1408/71, according to which, where the legislation of a Member State provides that the calculation
         of cash benefits for occupational illness is to be based an average wage or salary, the latter is to be determined exclusively
         by reference to wages or salaries recorded during the periods completed under that legislation, must be interpreted in accordance
         with the objective set out in Article EC, which requires in particular that migrant workers must not lose their right to
         social security benefits or have the amount of those benefits reduced because they have exercised the right to freedom of
         movement conferred on them by the EC Treaty.
      
It follows that, in the case of an occupational sickness benefit whose amount is calculated by reference to average pay earned
         during the final months of working in national territory, calculation of that average pay must, in relation to a migrant worker,
         be made in such a way as to take into account the pay that the person concerned could reasonably have earned, given his subsequent
         employment record, had he continued to work in the Member State in which the competent institution is situated.
      
(see paras 38, 43, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Social security for migrant workers – Article EC – Regulation (EEC) No 1408/– Article – Allowance for workers exposed to asbestos – Calculation of cash benefits – Refusal to take account of pay earned in another Member State)
In Case C-205/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, from the Tribunal des affaires de sécurité sociale de Longwy (France),
         made by decision of April 2005, received at the Court on May 2005, in the proceedings
      
Fabien Nemec
v
Caisse régionale d’assurance maladie du Nord-Est,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, R. Schintgen (Rapporteur), J. Makarczyk, G. Arestis and L. Bay Larsen,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: K. Sztranc-Sławiczek, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on March 2006,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Mr Nemec, by M. Gamelon, avocat,
–        the Caisse régionale d’assurance maladie du Nord-Est, by A. Schaf Codognet and F. Verra, avocats, 
–        the French Government, by G. de Bergues and C. Bergeot-Nunes, acting as Agents,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by J. Stratford, acting as Agent,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by D. Martin, acting as Agent,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/of the Council of June
         on the application of social security schemes to employed persons, to self‑employed persons and to members of their families
         moving within the Community and Article of Regulation (EEC) No 574/of the Council of March laying down the procedure
         for implementing Regulation No 1408/71, both as amended and updated by Council Regulation (EC) No 118/of December (OJ L 28, p. 1), (‘Regulation No 1408/71’ and ‘Regulation No 574/72’), of Regulation (EC) No 883/of the European
         Parliament and of the Council of April on the coordination of social security systems (OJ L 166, p. 1) and of
         Article EC.
      
The reference has been made in the course of proceedings between Mr Nemec and the Caisse régional d’assurance maladie du Nord-Est
         (Regional Health Insurance Fund of the North East) (‘CRAM’), on account of the latter’s refusal to take account of pay earned
         by Mr Nemec during his employment in Belgium for the purpose of calculating the amount of the allowance provided for in the
         case of early cessation of occupational activity for workers exposed to asbestos (‘the ACAATA’).
      
 Legal background
 Community legislation
Regulation No 1408/Article of Regulation No 1408/provides:
      
‘For the purpose of this Regulation:
…
(t)      “benefits” and “pensions” mean all benefits and pensions, including all elements thereof payable out of public funds, revalorisation
         increases and supplementary allowances, subject to the provisions of Title III, as also lump-sum benefits which may be paid
         in lieu of pensions, and payments made by way of reimbursement of contributions;
      
…’.
Article 3(1) of Regulation No 1408/71, entitled ‘Equality of treatment’, provides:
      
‘Subject to the special provisions of this Regulation, persons resident in the territory of one of the Member States to whom
         this Regulation applies shall be subject to the same obligations and enjoy the same benefits under the legislation of any
         Member State as the nationals of the State.’
      
Article 4(1) of Regulation No 1408/defines the scope of the regulation as follows:
      
‘This Regulation shall apply to all legislation concerning the following branches of social security:
(a)      sickness and maternity benefits;
(b)      invalidity benefits, including those intended for the maintenance or improvement of earning capacity;
(c)      old-age benefits;
(d)      survivors’ benefits;
(e)      benefits in respect of accidents at work and occupational diseases;
(f)      death grants;
(g)      unemployment benefits;
(h)      family benefits.’
Article 4(2) of Regulation No 1408/provides that the regulation ‘shall apply to all general and special social security
         schemes, whether contributory or non-contributory …’.
      
Under Title III of Regulation No 1408/71, Chapter 4, dealing with accidents at work and occupational diseases, contains Article
         58, entitled, ‘Calculation of cash benefits’, which provides in Article 58(1):
      
‘The competent institution of a Member State whose legislation provides that the calculation of cash benefits shall be based
         on an average wage or salary shall determine such average wage or salary exclusively by reference to wages or salaries recorded
         during the periods completed under the said legislation.’
      
Regulation No 574/Article of Regulation No 574/lays down the ‘[g]eneral rules for the aggregation of insurance periods’.
      
Regulation No 883/Under Article 87(1) of Regulation No 883/‘[n]o rights shall be acquired pursuant to this Regulation for the period before
         its date of application’.
      
Article 90(1) of Regulation No 883/provides that ‘… Regulation … No 1408/shall be repealed from the date of application
         of this Regulation’.
      
Article of Regulation No 883/provides:
      
‘This Regulation shall enter into force on the 20th day after its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union.
      
It shall apply from the date of entry into force of the Implementing Regulation.’
 National legislation
Law No 98-of December on the financing of social security for (JORF of December 1998, p. 19646), as amended
         by Law No 99-of December on the financing of social security for (JORF of December 1999, p. 19706), (‘Law
         No 98-1194’) made specific provisions for early cessation of occupational activity for employees and former employees who
         were exposed to asbestos during their employment. Article of Law 98-provides:
      
‘I. – An allowance for early cessation of activity shall be paid to employees and former employees of establishments manufacturing
         materials containing asbestos, or establishments engaged in fireproofing and heat insulation lagging with asbestos, or naval
         construction and repair, provided those persons have ceased all occupational activity, where they fulfil the following conditions:
      
1.      They must work or have worked in one of the establishments referred to above which are included on a list drawn up by decree
         by the Ministers for Employment, Social Security and the Budget, at a time when asbestos or materials containing asbestos
         were manufactured or treated there;
      
2.      They must have reached a specified age, which may vary according to the period of employment in the establishments referred
         to in paragraph 1, but must be at least years old;
      
…
Employees or former employees who are recognised, by virtue of the general scheme, to be suffering from an occupational disease
         caused by asbestos and included on a list drawn up by decree by the Ministers for Employment and Social Security shall also
         be entitled to the allowance for early cessation of activity from the age of 50.
      
The allowance for early cessation of activity may not overlap either with any income or allowance referred to in Article L.
         131-of the Social Security Code, or with a personal old-age advantage, invalidity advantage or early retirement/early cessation
         of activity allowance, subject to the provisions of the following paragraph.
      
A differential allowance shall be paid as a supplement to an invalidity pension, reversionary advantage or personal old‑age
         advantage covered by a special scheme referred to in Chapter I, Title I, Book VII of the Social Security Code, within the
         limits of the allowance calculated under the conditions laid down by this Article.
      
II. – The amount of the allowance shall be calculated according to the updated average gross monthly earnings in the last
         months of the recipient’s employment in respect of which, under the conditions laid down by the decree, certain periods
         of employment giving rise to reduced earnings shall not be taken into account. It shall be revalorised in the same way as
         the advantages granted in accordance with the second paragraph of Article L. 322-of the Employment Code.
      
…
The allowance shall cease to be paid when the recipient fulfils the conditions required for receipt of the full old-age pension,
         as defined in Articles L. 351-and L. 351-of the Social Security Code.
      
…’
Under Article of Decree No 99-of March on the allowance for early cessation of occupational activity provided
         for in Article of the Law on the financing of social security for (JORF, of March 1999, p. 4471):
      
‘The reference pay used as a basis for determining the allowance shall be fixed in accordance with the remuneration referred
         to in Article L. 242-of the Social Security Code, earned by the person concerned in the last months of his employment.
         That remuneration, revalorised where appropriate in accordance with the rules set out in Article R. 351-29-of the Social
         Security Code, shall be taken into account up to a limit of twice the ceiling laid down in Article L. 241-of the Social
         Security Code in force at the date on which the person concerned becomes entitled to the allowance. The reference pay shall
         be equal to the average monthly earnings thus determined.
      
The monthly amount of the allowance shall be equal to 65% of the reference pay defined in the previous paragraph, up to the
         ceiling provided for in Article L. 241-of the Social Security Code, to which shall be added 50% of the proportion of the
         reference pay which falls between the amount of the ceiling and twice that amount.
      
The minimum amount of the allowance may not be less than the minimum amount of the insurance allowance provided for in Article
         L. 351-of the Employment Code. However, the amount of the allowance thus guaranteed shall not exceed 85% of the reference
         pay.’
      
Article L. 242-of the Social Security Code provides: 
      
‘For the purpose of calculating contributions to social insurance, accidents at work and family allowances, all sums paid
         to workers as consideration for work or arising from employment, in particular salaries or wages, holiday pay, the amount
         deducted for workers’ contributions, allowances, bonuses and all other financial benefits, benefits in kind and sums received
         directly or by way of a third party as gratuities, shall be regarded as remuneration.
      
…’
Circular No DSS/4B/99/of June on implementation of the provision made for early cessation of occupational activity
         for workers exposed to asbestos sets out in detail the rules for the grant, calculation and payment of the allowance introduced
         for workers exposed to asbestos by the regional health insurance funds. That circular states, in particular, that, as far
         as concerns the method of calculating that allowance, and as regards periods of employment abroad, ‘various types of case
         may arise. Where social security contributions have been deducted from pay under Article L. 242-of the Social Security Code,
         that pay shall be taken into account with the periods relating to it. In other cases, account shall be taken of pay earned
         during the last year of paid employment in France.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
Mr Nemec, a French national, born in and resident in France, worked for several years for an undertaking established
         there. It is common ground that during that employment he was exposed to asbestos.
      
After being dismissed in 1994, when his employer in France closed down activities in France altogether, he found a job in
         Belgium that same year with an undertaking established approximately kilometres from his place of residence. Throughout
         his employment in Belgium Mr Nemec continued to reside and pay his taxes in France.
      
In 1995, the competent authority in France recognised that Mr Nemec had contracted an occupational disease because of his
         exposure to asbestos.
      
Following the claim submitted by Mr Nemec in March 2004, the CRAM notified him, in May of that year, of a decision to grant
         him the ACAATA. In accordance with the national rules in force, the amount of that allowance was calculated on the basis of
         the average pay earned by Mr Nemec in the last months of his employment in France.
      
Mr Nemec then challenged that decision before the CRAM Conciliation Committee, claiming that the CRAM had failed to take account
         of the pay he had most recently earned in Belgium, which was higher than that used to calculate the ACAATA.
      
That appeal was dismissed by the Conciliation Committee, which based the decision refusing the claim on Circular No DSS/4B/99/332.
      
It was in those circumstances that Mr Nemec brought an action before the Tribunal des affaires de sécurité sociale de Longwy
         which decided to stay proceedings and refer the following question to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘In refusing to take the pay earned by Mr Nemec in Belgium into account when calculating the amount of the allowance for asbestos
         workers granted to him pursuant to Article of Law No 98-of December 1998, on the basis of Article of the Decree
         implementing Law No 99-of March and Circular DSS/4B/No of June 1999, because that pay did not give rise
         to the payment of social security contributions in accordance with Article L. 242-of the French Social Security Code, did
         the CRAM take, in his regard, a wrongful decision constituting an impediment to freedom of movement as laid down in Article
         [EC], an infringement of Regulation … No 883/… or an infringement of Article of Regulation … No 574/72?’
      
 Admissibility of the reference for a preliminary ruling
The French Government submits that the reference for a preliminary ruling is inadmissible on the ground that the national
         court has not set out sufficiently clearly the factual and legal background to the question referred. 
      
The national court’s decision does not make it possible to establish whether Mr Nemec was exposed to asbestos in the course
         of employment in Member States other than the French Republic, and it makes only an incomplete and indirect reference to the
         applicable national provisions. The French Government also maintains that the national court failed to set out either the
         reasons for its uncertainty regarding the interpretation of the various provisions of Community law referred to in that decision,
         or the link it established between those provisions and the national legislation applicable to the dispute in the main proceedings.
      
In that connection, it must be recalled that, according to settled case-law, the need to provide an interpretation of Community
         law which will be of use to the national court makes it necessary that the national court should define the factual and legislative
         context of the questions it is asking or, at the very least, explain the factual circumstances on which those questions are
         based (see, inter alia, Joined Cases C-320/to C‑322/Telemarsicabruzzo and Others [1993] ECR I-393, paragraph 6; Case C-9/Agostini [1998] ECR I-4261, paragraph 4; Case C-72/Carbonati Apuani [2004] ECR I-8027, paragraph 10; and Case C‑237/Enirisorse [2006] ECR I-2843, paragraph 17).
      
The Court has likewise held that it is essential that the national court should give at the very least some explanation of
         the reasons for the choice of the Community provisions which it requires to be interpreted and on the link it establishes
         between those provisions and the national legislation applicable to the dispute (order in Case C-116/Laguillaumie [2000] ECR I-4979, paragraph 16, and the judgments in Carbonati Apuani, paragraph 11, and Enirisorse, paragraph 21).
      
In this case the Court has sufficient information to enable it to give an answer that will be of use to the national court.
      
First, the decision making the reference sets out briefly, but precisely, the facts giving rise to the dispute in the main
         proceedings and the relevant national legal context. It is clear that the dispute arose in the context of an application for
         an allowance, under the French legislation, to which the person concerned is entitled, since he undeniably fulfils the conditions
         governing its grant. Second, the reference sets out the reasons for the choice of the Community provisions which the national
         court requires to be interpreted and the link between those provisions and the national legislation applicable to the dispute.
      
In those circumstances, the arguments of the French Government cannot be accepted, so that the reference for a preliminary
         ruling is admissible.
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
The national court asks, essentially, whether the decision refusing to take account of the pay earned by Mr Nemec in Belgium
         for the calculation of the ACAATA constitutes an infringement of Regulation No 883/2004.
      
Under Article of Regulation No 883/2004, the latter is to enter into force on the 20th day after its publication in the
         Official Journal of the European Union, but it is to apply only from the date of entry into force of the Implementing Regulation.
      
Since no regulation implementing Regulation No 883/has yet been adopted, it necessarily follows that the provisions of
         Regulation No 1408/remain applicable. 
      
It follows that it is appropriate to examine the question referred by the national court in the light of the latter regulation.
         
      
As the parties to the main proceedings, the French Government and the Commission of the European Communities have pointed
         out, a benefit such as the ACAATA, granted to former workers exposed to asbestos who fulfil the conditions set out in the
         national legislation, without any individual assessment of their personal needs, must be regarded as a social security benefit
         falling under Article 4(1)(e) of Regulation No 1408/71, a provision which covers benefits in respect of accidents at work
         and occupational diseases.
      
As regards the subject-matter of the dispute in the main proceedings, that is to say, the detailed rules for calculating the
         amount of the ACAATA, which is determined on the basis of the recipient’s remuneration, the CRAM, the French Government and
         the United Kingdom Government take the view that the refusal to take account of pay earned abroad and which has not given
         rise to the payment of social security contributions under the legislation of the Member State in which the institution responsible
         for granting that allowance is situated is in accordance with Article of Regulation No 1408/71.
      
The Court has already held, as regards a provision drafted in terms essentially identical to those in Article 58, that such
         a provision does not merely determine the legislation applicable for fixing the reference period for average pay, but that
         its purpose is also to determine the remuneration which the competent institution must take into account in order to determine
         the average pay over a given period, which, according to the applicable national legislation, serves as a basis for the calculation
         of cash benefits (see, to that effect, Case 268/Pennartz [1979] ECR 2411, paragraphs and 9).
      
However, Article of Regulation No 1408/71, as indeed all the provisions of that regulation, must be interpreted in the
         light of Article EC (see, to that effect, Case C-406/Reichling [1994] ECR I-4061, paragraph 21, and Case C‑251/Lafuente Nieto [1996] ECR I-4187, paragraphs and 38).
      
The objective pursued by that provision, which aims to facilitate freedom of movement for workers, entails in particular that
         migrant workers must not lose their right to social security benefits or have the amount of those benefits reduced because
         they have exercised the right to freedom of movement conferred on them by the EC Treaty (see Reichling, paragraph 24; Lafuente Nieto, paragraphs and 38; Joined Cases C-31/to C-33/Naranjo Arjona and Others [1997] ECR I‑5501, paragraph 20; and Case C-153/Grajera Rodríguez [1998] ECR I-8645, paragraph 17).
      
It is common ground that national legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings is likely to put migrant workers
         at a disadvantage as compared with workers who have worked in only one Member State.
      
Under such legislation, a migrant worker like Mr Nemec finds that the method of calculating the ACAATA in his case is based
         on pay which he earned more than years ago, accordingly bearing no relation to his current situation, whereas for his colleagues,
         who continued to work in France, it is their last effective pay which is taken into account. Such a worker therefore suffers
         a reduction in the amount of benefit that he would have received had he not exercised his right to free movement.
      
The obligation not to put migrant workers who have availed themselves of their right to free movement at a disadvantage does
         not mean, however, that Article 58(1) of Regulation No 1408/71, by not allowing the pay earned in another Member State to
         be taken into account for the calculation of cash benefits, must be regarded as contrary to the objective set down in Article
         EC. That obligation merely implies that those benefits must be the same for the migrant worker as they would have been
         if he had not availed himself of his right to free movement (see, to that effect, Lafuente Nieto, paragraph 39; Naranjo Arjona and Others, paragraph 21; and Grajera Rodriguez, paragraph 18).
      
Therefore, in circumstances such as those at issue in the main proceedings, although account is to be taken, under Article
         58(1) of Regulation No 1408/71, only of the pay earned in the Member State in which the competent institution is situated,
         the amount of that pay must be updated and revalorised so as to correspond to the pay the person concerned might reasonably
         have been able to earn had he continued to work in the Member State in question (see, to that effect, Lafuente Nieto, paragraph 40; Naranjo Arjona and Others, paragraph 22; and Grajera Rodríguez, paragraph 19).
      
Therefore, the answer to the question referred must be that Article 58(1) of Regulation No 1408/71, interpreted in accordance
         with the objective set out in Article EC, requires that, in a situation such as that in the main proceedings, calculation
         of the ‘average wage or salary’, within the meaning of the first of those two provisions, takes into account the pay that
         the person concerned could reasonably have earned, given his subsequent employment record, had he continued to work in the
         Member State in which the competent institution is situated.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
Article 58(1) of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/of the Council of June on the application of social security schemes
            to employed persons, to self‑employed persons and to members of their families moving within the Community, as amended and
            updated by Council Regulation (EC) No 118/of December 1996, interpreted in accordance with the objective set out in Article
            EC, requires that, in a situation such as that in the main proceedings, calculation of the ‘average wage or salary’, within
            the meaning of the first of those two provisions, takes into account the pay that the person concerned could reasonably have
            earned, given his subsequent employment record, had he continued to work in the Member State in which the competent institution
            is situated.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 