
Case C-222/Unión de Televisiones Comerciales Asociadas (UTECA)
v
Administración General del Estado
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Tribunal Supremo)
(Reference for a preliminary ruling – Article EC – Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of nationality – Articles EC, EC, EC and EC – Fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the EC Treaty – Article EC – State aid – Directive 89/552/EEC – Pursuit of television broadcasting activities – Obligation for television operators to earmark a percentage of their operating revenue for the pre-funding of European cinematographic
         films and films made for television, 60% of that funding being reserved to the production of works of which the original language
         is one of the official languages of the Kingdom of Spain and of which the majority is produced by the Spanish film industry)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Community law – Principles – Equal treatment – Discrimination on grounds of nationality – Freedom to provide services – Television
            broadcasting activities – Directive 89/(Arts EC, 39(2) EC, EC, EC and EC; Council Directive 89/552, Art. 3)
2.        State aid – Meaning 
(Art. 87(1) EC)
1.        Directive 89/on the coordination of certain provisions laid down by law, regulation or administrative action in Member
         States concerning the pursuit of television broadcasting activities, as amended by Directive 97/36, and, more particularly,
         Article thereof and Article EC must be interpreted as meaning that they do not preclude a measure adopted by a Member
         State which requires television operators to earmark 5% of their operating revenue for the pre-funding of European cinematographic
         films and films made for television and, more specifically, to reserve 60% of that 5% for the production of works of which
         the original language is one of the official languages of that Member State. 
      
Irrespective of whether such a measure is in an area covered by the directive, the Member States retain, in principle, jurisdiction
         to adopt it, provided that they respect the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty. 
      
It is true that, such a measure, in so far as it relates to the obligation to reserve for the production of films of which
         the original language is one of the official languages of the Member State in question 60% of the 5% of operating revenue
         reserved for the pre-funding of European cinematographic films and films made for television, constitutes a restriction on
         several fundamental freedoms, that is to say on the freedom to provide services, freedom of establishment, the free movement
         of capital and freedom of movement for workers. 
      
However, that measure may be justified by the objective of defending and promoting one or several of the official languages
         of a Member State concerned.  In that regard, such a measure, in so far as it introduces an obligation to invest in cinematographic
         films and films made for television the original language of which is one of the official languages of that Member State,
         appears appropriate to ensure that such an objective is achieved. 
      
In addition, it does not appear that such a measure goes beyond what is necessary to achieve that objective. Since that measure
         affects, first of all, only 3% of the operating revenue of the operators, such a percentage cannot be considered disproportionate
         in relation to the objective pursued. Furthermore, such a measure does not go beyond what is necessary to achieve the objective
         pursued by reason of the mere fact that it does not lay down criteria which would allow the works concerned to be classified
         as ‘cultural productions’. Since language and culture are intrinsically linked, the view cannot be taken that the objective
         pursued by a Member State of defending and promoting one or several of its official languages must of necessity be accompanied
         by other cultural criteria in order for it to justify a restriction on one of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty.
         Nor does such a measure go beyond what is necessary to achieve the objective pursued by reason of the mere fact that the beneficiaries
         of the financing concerned are mostly cinema production undertakings in that Member State. The fact that the criterion on
         which that measure is based may constitute an advantage for cinema production undertakings which work in the language covered
         by that criterion and which, accordingly, may in practice mostly comprise undertakings established in the Member State of
         which the language constitutes an official language appears inherent to the objective pursued. Such a situation cannot, of
         itself, constitute proof of the disproportionate nature of that measure without rendering nugatory the recognition, as an
         overriding reason in the public interest, of the objective pursued by a Member State of defending and promoting one or several
         of its official languages. 
      
With regard to Article EC, that provision applies independently only to situations governed by Community law for which
         the Treaty lays down no specific rules of non-discrimination. However, in relation to the freedom of movement for workers,
         the right of establishment, the freedom to provide services and the free movement of capital, the principle of non-discrimination
         was implemented by Articles 39(2) EC, EC, EC and EC respectively. Since it follows from the foregoing that the measure
         at issue does not appear contrary to those provisions of the Treaty, it cannot be considered contrary to Article EC either.
      
(see paras 20, 24, 27, 29-34, 36-40, operative part 1)
2.        Article EC must be interpreted as meaning that a measure adopted by a Member State requiring television operators to earmark
         5% of their operating revenue for the pre-funding of European cinematographic films and films made for television and, more
         specifically, to reserve 60% of that 5% for the production of works of which the original language is one of the official
         languages of that Member State does not constitute State aid in favour of the cinematographic industry of that Member State.
         
      
Only advantages granted directly or indirectly through State resources are to be considered aid within the meaning of Article
         87(1) EC. In that regard, the distinction made in that provision between aid granted by a Member State and aid granted through
         State resources does not signify that all advantages granted by a State, whether financed through State resources or not,
         constitute aid, but is intended merely to bring within that definition both advantages which are granted directly by the State
         and those granted by a public or private body designated or established by the State.
      
It is not apparent that the advantage given by way of that measure to the cinematographic industry of the Member State concerned
         constitutes an advantage granted directly by the State or by a public or private body designated or established by the State.
         Such an advantage is the result of general legislation requiring television operators, whether public or private, to earmark
         a percentage of their operating revenue for the pre-funding of European cinematographic films and films made for television.
         
      
Furthermore, since that measure applies to public television operators, it does not appear that the advantage in question
         is dependent on the control exercised by the public authorities over such operators.
      
(see paras 43-47, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
March (*)
      
(Reference for a preliminary ruling – Article EC – Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of nationality – Articles EC, EC, EC and EC – Fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the EC Treaty – Article EC – State aid – Directive 89/552/EEC – Pursuit of television broadcasting activities – Obligation for television operators to earmark a percentage of their operating revenue for the pre-funding of European cinematographic
         films and films made for television, 60% of that funding being reserved to the production of works of which the original language
         is one of the official languages of the Kingdom of Spain and of which the majority is produced by the Spanish film industry)
      
In Case C‑222/07,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Tribunal Supremo (Spain), made by decision of April 2007,
         received at the Court on May 2007, in the proceedings
      
Unión de Televisiones Comerciales Asociadas (UTECA)
v
Administración General del Estado,
intervening parties:
Federación de Asociaciones de Productores Audiovisuales
Radiotelevisión Española (RTVE),
Entidad de Gestión de Derechos de los Productores Audiovisuales (Egeda),
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, J.‑C. Bonichot, J. Makarczyk, P. Kūris and L. Bay Larsen,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on July 2008,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Unión de Televisiones Comerciales Asociadas (UTECA), by S. Muñoz Machado, abogado, and M. Cornejo Barranco, procuradora,
–        Federación de Asociaciones de Productores Audiovisuales, by A. Albaladejo and E. Klimt, abogados, and by A. Blanco Fernández,
         procurador,
      
–        Entidad de Gestión de Derechos de los Productores Audiovisuales (Egeda), by J. Suárez Lozano and M. Benzal Medina, abogados,
–        the Spanish Government, by N. Díaz Abad, acting as Agent,
–        the Belgian Government, by C. Pochet, acting as Agent, and by A. Berenboom and A. Joachimowicz, avocats,
–        the Greek Government, by E.-M. Mamouna and O. Patsopoulou, acting as Agents,
–        the French Government, by G. de Bergues and A.-L. During, acting as Agents,
–        the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by F. Arena, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Austrian Government, by C. Pesendorfer, acting as Agent,
–        the Polish Government, by P.T. Kozek, acting as Agent,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by E. Montaguti, and by R. Vidal Puig and T. Scharf, acting as Agents,
–        the EFTA Surveillance Authority, by B. Alterskjær and L. Young, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2008,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles EC and EC, and Article of Council
         Directive 89/552/EEC of October on the coordination of certain provisions laid down by law, regulation or administrative
         action in Member States concerning the pursuit of television broadcasting activities (OJ L 298, p. 23), as amended by
         Directive 97/36/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of June (OJ L 202, p. 60; ‘the Directive’).
      
The reference has been made in an action brought by the Unión de Televisiones Comerciales Asociadas (‘UTECA’) against a Royal
         Decree requiring television operators to allocate, first, 5% of their operating revenue for the previous year to the funding
         of full-length and short cinematographic films and European films made for television and, secondly, 60% of that funding to
         the production of films of which the original language is one of the official languages of the Kingdom of Spain.
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
The 26th recital in the preamble to Directive 89/states:
      
‘… in order to allow for an active policy in favour of a specific language, Member States remain free to lay down more detailed
         or stricter rules in particular on the basis of language criteria, as long as these rules are in conformity with Community
         law, and in particular are not applicable to the retransmission of broadcasts originating in other Member States’. 
      
Recital in the preamble to Directive 97/provides:
      
‘… any legislative framework concerning new audiovisual services must be compatible with the primary objective of this Directive
         which is to create the legal framework for the free movement of services’. 
      
Recital in the preamble to Directive 97/states:
      
‘… Member States remain free to apply to broadcasters under their jurisdiction more detailed or stricter rules in the fields
         coordinated by this Directive, including, inter alia, rules concerning the achievement of language policy goals …’.
      
Recital in the preamble to Directive 97/states:
      
‘… the objective of supporting audiovisual production in Europe can be pursued within the Member States in the framework of
         the organisation of their broadcasting services, inter alia, through the definition of a public interest mission for certain
         broadcasting organisations, including the obligation to contribute substantially to investment in European production’.
      
Article 3(1) of the Directive provides:
      
‘Member States shall remain free to require television broadcasters under their jurisdiction to lay down more detailed or
         stricter rules in the areas covered by this Directive.’ 
      
Article 4(1) of the Directive provides:
      
‘Member States shall ensure where practicable and by appropriate means, that broadcasters reserve for European works, within
         the meaning of Article 6, a majority proportion of their transmission time, excluding the time appointed to news, sports events,
         games, advertising, teletext services and teleshopping. This proportion, having regard to the broadcaster’s informational,
         educational, cultural and entertainment responsibilities to its viewing public, should be achieved progressively, on the basis
         of suitable criteria.’ 
      
Article of the Directive states:
      
‘Member States shall ensure, where practicable and by appropriate means, that broadcasters reserve at least 10% of their transmission
         time, excluding the time appointed to news, sports events, games, advertising, teletext services and teleshopping, or alternately,
         at the discretion of the Member State, at least 10% of their programming budget, for European works created by producers who
         are independent of broadcasters. This proportion, having regard to broadcasters’ informational, educational, cultural and
         entertainment responsibilities to its viewing public, should be achieved progressively, on the basis of suitable criteria;
         it must be achieved by earmarking an adequate proportion for recent works, that is to say works transmitted within five years
         of their production.’
      
 National legislation
Royal Decree 1652/approving the Regulation governing compulsory investment for the pre-funding of European and Spanish
         cinematographic feature‑length and short films and films made for television (Real decreto 1652/por el que se aprueba
         el Reglamento que regula la inversión obligatoria para la financiación anticipada de largometrajes y cortometrajes cinematográficos
         y películas para televisión, europeos y españoles) of July (BOE No of July 2004, p. 26264), implements in part
         the Spanish legislation with regard to television and cinematography. That legislation comprises Law 25/incorporating
         Directive 89/522/EEC on the coordination of certain provisions laid down by law, regulation or administrative action in Member
         States concerning the pursuit of television broadcasting activities in the Spanish legal order (Ley 25/por la que se
         incorpora al ordenamiento jurídico español la Directiva 89/552/CEE del Consejo, sobre la coordinación de disposiciones legales,
         reglamentarias y administrativas de los Estados miembros relativas al ejercicio de la actividad de radiodifusión televisiva)
         of July (BOE No of July 1994, p. 22342), as amended by Law 22/of June (BOE No of June 1999),
         then by the Second Additional Provision of Law 15/on the development and promotion of cinematography and the audiovisual
         sector (Ley 15/de fomento y promoción de la cinematografía y el sector audiovisual) of July (BOE No of July 2001, p. 24904). 
      
Article 5(1) of Law 25/1994, as amended by Law 22/1999, provides:
      
‘Television operators must reserve 51% of their annual transmission time for broadcasting European audiovisual works. 
With a view to fulfilling that obligation, each year they must earmark at least 5% of the total amount of revenue which, according
         to their operating account, accrued in the previous financial year for the funding of European cinematographic feature films
         and films made for television.’ 
      
Subsequent to the amendment made by the Second Additional Provision of Law 15/2001, the second subparagraph of Article 5(1)
         of that law was replaced by the following provisions:
      
‘Television operators with editorial responsibility for television channels whose programming schedules include recently-produced
         cinematographic feature films, in other words, films which are less than seven years old by reference to their date of production,
         must earmark each year at least 5% of the total amount of revenue which, according to their operating account, accrued in
         the previous financial year for the pre-funding of the production of European cinematographic feature films and short films
         and films made for television, including the cases provided for in Article 5(1) of the Law on the development and promotion
         of cinematography and the audiovisual sector. Sixty per cent of that funding must be used for productions whose original language
         is any of the official languages of Spain.
      
In that connection, films made for television shall mean audiovisual works which have characteristics similar to cinematographic
         feature films, in other words, unitary works with a duration of more than minutes and a final outcome, but which are distinguished
         by the fact that their commercial exploitation does not entail cinema exhibition; and operating revenue shall mean revenue
         derived from the programming and running of the television channel or channels which give rise to the obligation concerned,
         as reflected in their audited operating accounts.
      
After consulting all interested sectors, the Government may enact regulations stipulating the duration which an audiovisual
         work is required to have in order to be regarded as a film made for television.’ 
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
UTECA has brought an action to challenge Royal Decree 1652/before the Tribunal Supremo (Supreme Court). In its application,
         it seeks to have both that Royal Decree and the legislative provisions on which it is based declared inapplicable, submitting
         that the investment obligations imposed thereby infringe not only a number of provisions of the Spanish Constitution but also
         certain provisions of Community law. 
      
UTECA’s claims are opposed by the Administración General del Estado (General State Administration) and by the Federación de
         Asociaciones de Productores Audiovisuales Españoles (Federation of Spanish Audiovisual Producers’ Associations) and the Entidad
         de Gestión de Derechos de los Productores Audiovisuales (Management body for the rights of audiovisual producers), the latter
         having intervened to seek to uphold the validity of the contested provisions.
      
Since the Tribunal Supremo had concerns, first, as to the extent of Member States’ discretion in imposing stricter standards
         in fields coordinated by the Directive, having regard in particular to Article 3(1) thereof, and, secondly, as to the compatibility
         of Articles EC and EC with the requirement to reserve 60% of the obligatory funding for the production of films of which
         the original language is one of the official languages of the Kingdom of Spain, decided to stay the proceedings and to refer
         the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Does Article of [the] Directive … permit Member States to impose on television operators the obligation to earmark a percentage
         of their operating revenue for the pre-funding of European cinematographic films and films made for television?
      
(2)      If the reply to the previous question is in the affirmative, is a national measure which, in addition to laying down the pre-funding
         obligation referred to above, reserves 60% of that compulsory funding for works having an original language which is one of
         the languages of Spain compatible with that directive and with Article EC, taken in conjunction with the other special
         provisions to which that article refers?
      
(3)      Does an obligation imposed by a national measure on television operators to the effect that the latter must earmark a percentage
         of their operating revenue for the pre-funding of cinematographic films, where 60% of that amount must be earmarked specifically
         for films having an original language which is one of the languages of Spain the majority of which are produced by the Spanish
         film industry, amount to State aid in favour of that industry within the meaning of Article EC?’
      
 The first and second questions
By its first and second questions, which may conveniently be considered together, the referring court asks essentially whether
         the Directive and, more particularly, Article thereof and Article EC are to be interpreted as meaning that they preclude
         a measure adopted by a Member State, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, requiring television operators to earmark
         5% of their operating revenue for the pre-funding of European cinematographic films and films made for television and, more
         specifically, to reserve 60% of that 5% for the production of works of which the original language is one of the official
         languages of that Member State.
      
At the outset, it must be noted that the Directive does not contain any provision governing the extent to which a Member State
         may require television operators to earmark part of their operating revenue for the funding of European cinematographic films
         and films made for television or whose original language is one of the official languages of that Member State. In particular,
         Articles and of the Directive do not address such a situation.
      
Pursuant to Article 3(1) of the Directive, the Member States remain free to lay down more detailed or stricter rules with
         regard to television broadcasting bodies under their jurisdiction. Nevertheless, when exercising that right, they must respect
         the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the EC Treaty (see, to that effect, Case C‑6/ARD [1999] ECR I‑7599, paragraph 49, and Case C‑500/Corporación Dermoestética [2008] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 31). 
      
Finally, it should be recalled that the Directive does not completely harmonise the rules relating to the areas which it covers,
         but that it lays down minimum rules for broadcasts which emanate from the European Community and which are intended to be
         received within it (see, to that effect, Case C‑412/Leclerc-Siplec [1995] ECR I‑179, paragraphs and 44, and Joined Cases C‑34/to C‑36/De Agostini and TV-Shop [1997] ECR I‑3843, paragraph 3). 
      
It follows that, irrespective of whether the measure adopted by a Member State such as the measure at issue in the main proceedings
         is in an area covered by the Directive, the Member States retain, in principle, jurisdiction to adopt such a measure, provided
         that they respect the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty.
      
In those circumstances, it is appropriate to examine whether that measure respects those fundamental freedoms.
      
With regard to a measure adopted by a Member State such as the measure at issue in the main proceedings requiring television
         operators to earmark 5% of their operating revenue for the pre-funding of European cinematographic films and films made for
         television, the documents before the Court do not contain any indication that such a measure constitutes, in practice, a restriction
         on one of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty.
      
Moreover, it should be noted that it is clear from a reading of recital in conjunction with recital in the preamble to
         Directive 97/that the main objective of that directive is to create a legal framework for the free movement of services,
         mention being made at the same time, inter alia, of ‘supporting audiovisual production in Europe’, which can be achieved through,
         inter alia, ‘the obligation to contribute substantially to investment in European production’.
      
By contrast, with regard to a measure such as that at issue in the main proceedings, in so far as it relates to the obligation
         to reserve for the production of films of which the original language is one of the official languages of the Member State
         in question 60% of the 5% of operating revenue reserved for the pre-funding of European cinematographic films and films made
         for television, such a measure constitutes, as the Advocate General points out in points to of her Opinion, a restriction
         on several fundamental freedoms, that is to say on the freedom to provide services, freedom of establishment, the free movement
         of capital and freedom of movement for workers. 
      
However, such a restriction on the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty may be justified only where it serves overriding
         reasons relating to the general interest, is suitable for securing the attainment of the objective which it pursues and does
         not go beyond what is necessary in order to attain it (Case C‑250/United Pan-Europe Communications Belgium and Others [2007] ECR I‑11135, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
According to the Spanish Government, the measure at issue in the main proceedings has a cultural basis, namely the defence
         of Spanish multilingualism. 
      
In that regard, the Court has already accepted that the objective, pursued by a Member State, of defending and promoting one
         or several of its official languages constitutes an overriding reason in the public interest (see, to that effect, Case C‑379/Groener [1989] ECR 3967, paragraph 19, and United Pan-Europe Communications Belgium and Others, paragraph 43).
      
As the Advocate General points out in point of her Opinion, such an aim has also been recognised as being legitimate by
         the Community legislature, as shown by the 26th recital in the preamble to Directive 89/and recital in the preamble
         to Directive 97/36.
      
A measure taken by a Member State such as the measure at issue in the main proceedings, in so far as it introduces an obligation
         to invest in cinematographic films and films made for television the original language of which is one of the official languages
         of that Member State, appears appropriate to ensure that such an objective is achieved. 
      
In addition, it does not appear, in the circumstances of the action in the main proceedings, that such a measure goes beyond
         what is necessary to achieve that objective.
      
By requiring television operators to reserve for works whose original language is one of the official languages of the Member
         State concerned 60% of the 5% of operating revenue reserved for the pre-funding of European cinematographic films and films
         made for television, a measure taken by a Member State such as the member at issue in the main proceedings affects, in the
         final analysis, 3% of the operating revenue of those operators. The documents submitted to the Court do not contain any material
         which might lead to the conclusion that such a percentage is disproportionate in relation to the objective pursued.
      
Furthermore, contrary to the submissions of the Commission of the European Communities, a measure taken by a Member State
         such as the measure at issue in the main proceedings does not go beyond what is necessary to achieve the objective pursued
         by reason of the mere fact that it does not lay down criteria which would allow the works concerned to be classified as ‘cultural
         productions’. 
      
Since language and culture are intrinsically linked, as pointed out by, inter alia, the Convention on the Protection and Promotion
         of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, adopted at the General Conference of UNESCO in Paris on October and approved
         on behalf of the Community by Council Decision 2006/515/EC of May (OJ L 201, p. 15), which states in paragraph
         of its preamble that ‘linguistic diversity is a fundamental element of cultural diversity’, the view cannot be taken that
         the objective pursued by a Member State of defending and promoting one or several of its official languages must of necessity
         be accompanied by other cultural criteria in order for it to justify a restriction on one of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed
         by the Treaty. Indeed, in the present proceedings, the Commission has been unable to state precisely what those criteria should
         actually be.
      
Nor does a measure taken by a Member State such as the measure at issue in the main proceedings go beyond what is necessary
         to achieve the objective pursued by reason of the mere fact that the beneficiaries of the financing concerned are mostly cinema
         production undertakings in that Member State. 
      
As the Advocate General pointed out in point of her Opinion, the criterion used in respect of such a measure is linguistic.
         
      
The fact that such a criterion may constitute an advantage for cinema production undertakings which work in the language covered
         by that criterion and which, accordingly, may in practice mostly comprise undertakings established in the Member State of
         which the language constitutes an official language appears inherent to the objective pursued. Such a situation cannot, of
         itself, constitute proof of the disproportionate nature of the measure at issue in the main proceedings without rendering
         nugatory the recognition, as an overriding reason in the public interest, of the objective pursued by a Member State of defending
         and promoting one or several of its official languages.
      
With regard to Article EC, of which an interpretation is also requested by the referring court and which enshrines the
         general principle of non-discrimination on grounds of nationality, it must be recalled that that provision applies independently
         only to situations governed by Community law for which the Treaty lays down no specific rules of non-discrimination (see Case
         C‑40/Lyyski [2007] ECR I‑99, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
However, in relation to the freedom of movement for workers, the right of establishment, the freedom to provide services and
         the free movement of capital, the principle of non-discrimination was implemented by Articles 39(2) EC, EC, EC and EC respectively (see, with regard to Article 39(2) EC, Lyyski, paragraph 34; with regard to Article EC, Case C‑289/AMOK [2003] ECR I‑15059, paragraph 26; and, with regard to Articles EC and EC, Case C‑222/Cassa di Risparmio di Firenze and Others [2006] ECR I‑289, paragraph 99). 
      
Since it follows from the foregoing that a measure taken by a Member State such as that at issue in the main proceedings does
         not appear contrary to those provisions of the Treaty, it cannot be considered contrary to Article EC either.
      
Consequently, the answer to the first and second questions is that the Directive and, more particularly, Article thereof
         and Article EC must be interpreted as meaning that they do not preclude a measure adopted by a Member State such as the
         measure at issue in the main proceedings which requires television operators to earmark 5% of their operating revenue for
         the pre-funding of European cinematographic films and films made for television and, more specifically, to reserve 60% of
         that 5% for the production of works of which the original language is one of the official languages of that Member State.
         
      
 The third question
By its third question, the referring court asks essentially whether Article EC is to be interpreted as meaning that a measure
         adopted by a Member State, such as the measure at issue in the main proceedings, requiring television operators to earmark
         5% of their operating revenue for the pre-funding of European cinematographic films and films made for television and, more
         specifically, to reserve 60% of that 5% for the production of works of which the original language is one of the official
         languages of that Member State constitutes State aid in favour of the cinematographic industry of that Member State.
      
It should be recalled that, in accordance with settled case-law, classification as aid requires all the conditions set out
         in Article EC to be fulfilled, that is to say, first, there must be intervention by the State or through State resources,
         second, the intervention must be liable to affect trade between Member States, third, it must confer an advantage on the recipient
         and, fourth, it must distort or threaten to distort competition (Case C‑280/Altmark Trans and Regierungspräsidium Magdeburg [2003] ECR I‑7747, paragraphs and and the case-law cited).
      
More particularly, it is clear from the case-law of the Court that only advantages granted directly or indirectly through
         State resources are to be considered aid within the meaning of Article 87(1) EC. The distinction made in that provision between
         aid granted by a Member State and aid granted through State resources does not signify that all advantages granted by a State,
         whether financed through State resources or not, constitute aid, but is intended merely to bring within that definition both
         advantages which are granted directly by the State and those granted by a public or private body designated or established
         by the State (Case C‑379/PreussenElektra [2001] ECR I‑2099, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
It is not apparent that the advantage given by way of a measure adopted by a Member State, such as that at issue in the main
         proceedings, to the cinematographic industry of a Member State constitutes an advantage granted directly by the State or by
         a public or private body designated or established by the State.
      
Such an advantage is the result of general legislation requiring television operators, whether public or private, to earmark
         a percentage of their operating revenue for the pre-funding of European cinematographic films and films made for television.
      
Furthermore, since a measure adopted by a Member State, such as the measure at issue in the main proceedings, applies to public
         television operators, it does not appear that the advantage in question is dependent on the control exercised by the public
         authorities over such operators (see, by analogy, Joined Cases 67/85, 68/and 70/Kwekerij van der Kooy and Others v Commission [1988] ECR 219, paragraph 37). 
      
Consequently, the answer to the third question is that Article EC must be interpreted as meaning that a measure adopted
         by a Member State, such as the measure at issue in the main proceedings, requiring television operators to earmark 5% of their
         operating revenue for the pre-funding of European cinematographic films and films made for television and, more specifically,
         to reserve 60% of that 5% for the production of works of which the original language is one of the official languages of that
         Member State does not constitute State aid in favour of the cinematographic industry of that Member State.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Council Directive 89/552/EEC of October on the coordination of certain provisions laid down by law, regulation or administrative
            action in Member States concerning the pursuit of television broadcasting activities, as amended by Directive 97/36/EC of
            the European Parliament and of the Council of June 1997, and, more particularly, Article thereof and Article EC must
            be interpreted as meaning that they do not preclude a measure adopted by a Member State such as the measure at issue in the
            main proceedings which requires television operators to earmark 5% of their operating revenue for the pre-funding of European
            cinematographic films and films made for television and, more specifically, to reserve 60% of that 5% for the production of
            works of which the original language is one of the official languages of that Member State. 
2.      Article EC must be interpreted as meaning that a measure adopted by a Member State, such as the measure at issue in the
            main proceedings, requiring television operators to earmark 5% of their operating revenue for the pre-funding of European
            cinematographic films and films made for television and, more specifically, to reserve 60% of that 5% for the production of
            works of which the original language is one of the official languages of that Member State does not constitute State aid in
            favour of the cinematographic industry of that Member State. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Spanish.
      
Top  
 