
Case C-61/Landkreis Bad Dürkheim
v
Aufsichts- und Dienstleistungsdirektion
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Oberverwaltungsgericht Rheinland-Pfalz)
(Common agricultural policy – Integrated administration and control system for certain aid schemes – Regulation (EC) No 1782/– Single payment scheme – Common rules for direct support schemes – Concept of ‘eligible hectare’ – Non-agricultural activities – Conditions for allocation of an agricultural area to a holding)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Agriculture – Common agricultural policy – Integrated administration and control system for certain aid schemes – Single payment
            scheme – Concept of area eligible for aid
(Council Regulation No 1782/2003, as amended by Regulation No 2013/2006, Arts 2(c), and 44(2); Commission Regulation No 796/2004,
            Art. 2, paras and 2)
2.        Agriculture – Common agricultural policy – Integrated administration and control system for certain aid schemes – Single payment
            scheme – Concept of area forming part of farmer’s holding
(Council Regulation No 1782/2003, as amended by Regulation No 2013/2006, Art. 44(2))
1.        Article 44(2) of Regulation 1782/establishing common rules for direct support schemes under the common agricultural policy
         and establishing certain support schemes for farmers, as amended by Regulation No 2013/2006, must be interpreted as not precluding
         an area from being eligible for aid where, while it is admittedly also used for agricultural purposes, the overriding objective
         is landscape management and nature conservation. In addition, according to that provision, the fact that the farmer is subject
         to the instructions of the nature conservation authority does not deprive an activity which meets the definition referred
         to in Article 2(c) of that regulation of its agricultural character. 
      
Classification as ‘arable land’ or ‘permanent pasture’ and, consequently, as ‘agricultural area’, depends on the actual use
         of the land in question. It follows that the fact that parcels of land which are actually used as arable land or as permanent
         pasture have the overriding purpose of nature and landscape conservation cannot preclude those parcels from being classified
         as agricultural land within the meaning of Article points (1) and (2) of Regulation No 796/laying down detailed rules
         for the implementation of cross-compliance, modulation and the integrated administration and control system provided for in
         Regulation 1782/2003, particularly because  environmental protection is an objective which forms part of the common agricultural
         policy. It follows, first, that the fact that an area has an overriding nature and landscape conservation objective does not
         deprive it of its agricultural character for the purposes of Article 44(2) of Regulation No 1782/where the land is actually
         being used as arable land or pasture. Second, provided that an agricultural area is used for an agricultural activity within
         the meaning of Article 2(c) of that regulation, it is irrelevant, for the purposes of Article 44(2), whether the activity
         has an essentially agricultural or nature conservation objective.
      
(see paras 37-39, 41, 47, 49, operative part 1)
2.        Article 44(2) of Regulation No 1782/establishing common rules for direct support schemes under the common agricultural
         policy and establishing certain support schemes for farmers, as amended by Regulation No 2013/as amended, must be interpreted
         as meaning that:
      
- it is not necessary, for an agricultural area to be considered as allocated to the farmer’s holding, that it be at his disposal
         against payment on the basis of a lease or another similar type of contract to let;
      
- the allocation of an agricultural area to a holding is not precluded by the fact that the area is placed at the farmer’s
         disposal free of charge, the farmer being obliged only to take over the contributions to a trade association, for a specific
         use and for a limited period of time in accordance with the objectives of nature conservation, on condition that the farmer
         is able to use that area with a degree of autonomy sufficient for his agricultural activities for a period of at least months; 
      
- it is without prejudice to the allocation of the area in question to the farmer’s holding that the farmer is obliged to
         carry out certain tasks for a third party in return for payment, provided that the area is also used by the farmer for his
         own agricultural activities in his name and on his own behalf.
      
(see para. 71, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Common agricultural policy – Integrated administration and control system for certain aid schemes – Regulation (EC) No 1782/– Single payment scheme – Common rules for direct support schemes – Concept of ‘eligible hectare’ – Non-agricultural activities – Conditions for allocation of an agricultural area to a holding)
In Case C‑61/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Oberverwaltungsgericht Rheinland-Pfalz (Germany), made by
         decision of January 2009, received at the Court on February 2009, in the proceedings
      
Landkreis Bad Dürkheim,
v
Aufsichts- und Dienstleistungsdirektion
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of A. Tizzano, President of the Chamber, J.-J.Kasel, A. Borg Barthet (Rapporteur), E. Levits and M. Safjan, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: K. Malacek, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on February 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        the Landkreis Bad Dürkheim, by A. Martin, acting as Agent,
–        the Aufsichts- und Dienstleistungsdirektion, by M. Arnoldi, acting as Agent,
–        Mrs Niedermair-Schiemann, by M. Winkelmüller and M. Rietdorf, Rechtsanwälte,
–        the German Government, by M. Lumma and J. Möller, acting as Agents,
–        the Polish Government, by B. Majczyna and M. Drwiecki, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by F. Clotuche-Duvieusart and G. von Rintelen, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 1782/of September establishing common rules for direct support schemes under the common agricultural policy and establishing
         certain support schemes for farmers and amending Regulations (EEC) No 2019/93, (EC) No 1452/2001, (EC) No 1453/2001, (EC)
         No 1454/2001, (EC) No 1868/94, (EC) No 1251/1999, (EC) No 1254/1999, (EC) No 1673/2000, (EEC) No 2358/and (EC) No 2529/(OJ L 270, p. and corrigendum OJ L 94, p. 70), as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 2013/of December
         (OJ L 384, p. 13) (‘Regulation No 1782/2003’).
      
The reference was made in proceedings between the Landkreis Bad Dürkheim (rural district authority of Bad Dürkheim) and the
         Aufsichts- und Dienstleistungsdirektion (administrative body with supervisory and advisory powers) (‘the ADD’) concerning
         the taking into account of certain areas (‘the disputed areas’) for the allocation of payment entitlements to Mrs Niedermair-Schiemann
         in the context of the single payment scheme.
      
 Legal framework
 European Union legislation
 Regulation No 1782/Regulation No 1782/establishes, inter alia, an income support scheme for farmers. That scheme is described, under the
         second indent of Article of the regulation, as the ‘single payment scheme’.
      
Recital in the preamble to that regulation states:
      
‘In order to avoid the abandonment of agricultural land and ensure that it is maintained in good agricultural and environmental
         condition, standards should be established which may or may not have a basis in provisions of the Member States. It is therefore
         appropriate to establish a Community framework within which Member States may adopt standards taking account of the specific
         characteristics of the areas concerned, including soil and climatic conditions and existing farming systems (land use, crop
         rotation, farming practices) and farm structures.’
      
Recital in the preamble to that regulation states:
      
‘The support schemes under the common agricultural policy provide for direct income support in particular with a view to ensuring
         a fair standard of living for the agricultural community. This objective is closely related to the maintenance of rural areas.
         …’
      
Recital in the preamble to that regulation states inter alia:
      
‘… It is, therefore, appropriate to make the single farm payment conditional upon cross-compliance with environmental, food
         safety, animal health and welfare, as well as the maintenance of the farm in good agricultural and environmental condition.’
      
Under Article 2(b) and (c) of Regulation No 1782/2003:
      
‘For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions shall apply:
(b)      “holding” means all the production units managed by a farmer situated within the territory of the same Member State; 
(c)      “agricultural activity” means the production, rearing or growing of agricultural products including harvesting, milking, breeding
         animals and keeping animals for farming purposes, or maintaining the land in good agricultural and environmental condition
         as established under Article 5.’
      
Article of Regulation No 1782/2003, entitled ‘Main requirements’, provides:
      
‘1.      A farmer receiving direct payments shall respect the statutory management requirements referred to in Annex III, according
         to the timetable fixed in that Annex, and the good agricultural and environmental condition established under Article 5.
      
2.      The competent national authority shall provide the farmer with the list of statutory management requirements and good agricultural
         and environmental condition to be respected.’
      
Under Article 5(1) of that regulation:
      
‘Member States shall ensure that all agricultural land, especially land which is no longer used for production purposes, is
         maintained in good agricultural and environmental condition. Member States shall define, at national or regional level, minimum
         requirements for good agricultural and environmental condition on the basis of the framework set up in Annex IV, taking into
         account the specific characteristics of the areas concerned, including soil and climatic condition, existing farming systems,
         land use, crop rotation, farming practices, and farm structures. This is without prejudice to the standards governing good
         agricultural practices as applied in the context of Council Regulation (EC) No 1257/and to agri-environment measures
         applied above the reference level of good agricultural practices.’
      
Article 36(1) of Regulation No 1782/is worded as follows:
      
‘Aid under the single payment scheme shall be paid in respect of payment entitlements as defined in Chapter 3, accompanied
         by an equal number of eligible hectares as defined in Article 44(2).’
      
Article 43(1) of Regulation No 1782/2003, entitled ‘Determination of the payment entitlements’, provides in its first and
         second subparagraphs as follows:
      
‘Without prejudice to Article 48, a farmer shall receive a payment entitlement per hectare which is calculated by dividing
         the reference amount by the three-year average number of all hectares which in the reference period gave right to direct payments
         listed in Annex VI. 
      
The total number of payment entitlements shall be equal to the abovementioned average number of hectares.’
Article 44(1) to (3) of Regulation No 1782/2003, entitled ‘Use of payment entitlements’, state:
      
‘1.      Any payment entitlement accompanied by an eligible hectare shall give right to the payment of the amount fixed by the payment
         entitlement.
      
2.      “Eligible hectare” shall mean any agricultural area of the holding taken up by arable land and permanent pasture except areas
         under permanent crops, forests or used for non-agricultural activities.
      
“Eligible hectare” shall also mean areas planted with hops or being under a temporary resting obligation or planted with bananas,
         or areas under olive trees.
      
3.      The farmer shall declare the parcels corresponding to the eligible hectare accompanying any payment entitlement. Except in
         case of force majeure or exceptional circumstances, these parcels shall be at the farmer’s disposal for a period of at least
         months, starting from a date to be fixed by the Member State, but not earlier than September of the calendar year preceding
         the year of lodging the application for participation in the single payment scheme.’
      
Section of Chapter of Regulation No 1782/2003, entitled ‘Regional implementation’, allows Member States to apply the single
         payment scheme at regional level.
      
Article 59(4) of that regulation, which is applicable in the context of the regional implementation of the single payment
         scheme, provides that the number of payment entitlements per farmer is to be equal to the number of hectares he declares in
         accordance with Article 44(2) for the first year of application of the single payment.
      
 Regulation (EC) No 795/Commission Regulation (EC) No 795/of April laying down detailed rules for the implementation of the single payment
         scheme provided for in Regulation No 1782/(OJ L 141, p. 1), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 394/of March (OJ L 63, p. 17) (‘Regulation No 795/2004’), provides in Article 2(a) to (h):
      
‘For the purposes of Title III of Regulation (EC) No 1782/and of this Regulation, the following definitions shall apply:
(a)      “agricultural area” shall mean the total area taken up by arable land, permanent pasture and permanent crops;
(b)      “arable land” shall mean “arable land” within the meaning of Article point (1) of Commission Regulation (EC) No [796/2004];
(c)      “permanent crops” shall mean non-rotational crops other than permanent pasture that occupy the land for five years or longer
         and yield repeated harvests including nurseries as defined in Annex I point (G/05) of Commission Decision 2000/115/EC …, with
         the exception of multiannual crops and the nurseries of such multiannual crops.
      
…
(e)      “permanent pasture” shall mean “permanent pasture” within the meaning of Article point (2) of Commission Regulation (EC)
         No [796/2004];
      
…
(h)      “lease” shall mean lease or similar types of temporary transactions.’
 Regulation (EC) No 796/Commission Regulation (EC) No 796/of April laying down detailed rules for the implementation of cross-compliance,
         modulation and the integrated administration and control system provided for in Council Regulation (EC) No 1782/(OJ L 141, p. 18), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 239/of February (OJ L 42, p. 3) (‘Regulation
         No 796/2004’), provides in Article points (1) and (2) as follows:
      
‘For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions shall apply:
(1)      “Arable land”: shall mean land cultivated for crop production and land under set-aside, or maintained in good agricultural
         and environmental condition in accordance with Article of Regulation (EC) No 1782/2003, irrespective of whether or not that
         land is under greenhouses or under fixed or mobile cover;
      
(2)      “Permanent pasture”: shall mean land used to grow grasses or other herbaceous forage naturally (self-seeded) or through cultivation
         (sown) and that has not been included in the crop rotation of the holding for five years or longer, excluding land under set-aside
         schemes pursuant to Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 1251/…, land under set-aside schemes pursuant to Article
         54(2) and Article of Regulation (EC) No 1782/2003, areas set aside in accordance with Council Regulation (EEC) No 2078/… and areas set aside in accordance with Articles 22, and of Council Regulation (EC) No 1257/…’. 
      
 National legislation
Under Paragraph 2(1) of the Law on the application of the single payment scheme (Betriebsprämiendurchführungsgesetz, BGBl.
         I, p. 1298), the single payment is granted at regional level from January under the detailed provisions laid down
         by that law and by the implementing rules of the single payment scheme.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
The dispute in the main proceedings concerns the taking into account of the disputed areas for the allocation of payment entitlements
         to Mrs Niedermair-Schiemann in the context of the single payment scheme. 
      
Mrs Niedermair-Schiemann has an agricultural holding comprising sheep farming. She farms the disputed areas on the basis of
         two contracts. 
      
Under the first of those contracts, concluded on November with the Land of Rhineland-Palatinate, Mrs Niedermair-Schiemann
         is permitted to use certain areas as hay pasture and meadow. Certain restrictions are imposed on her in that regard. In particular,
         no cutting is permitted on those areas during the period from November to June each year and the cutting may not be carried
         out with suction or rotary mowers. Instead of a second cut, the grazing of sheep and goats, in the form of rotational grazing
         or grazing in open areas, is possible, in which case the grazing period is to be agreed with the Land authority, which is
         in charge of the maintenance of those areas. The land is made available free of charge, subject to the party concerned taking
         over the contributions to the trade association. The parcels in question were let to the Land by their owners.
      
Under the second contract, concluded on May with the Landkreis Bad Dürkheim, Mrs Niedermair-Schiemann, whom the contract
         describes as ‘the party performing the contract’, is obliged to maintain and manage certain areas while complying with nature
         conservation rules. To that end, she receives a fixed amount of annual remuneration. She is also subject to specific contractual
         obligations and has to follow further instructions from the nature conservation authority, governing such matters as intensity
         of grazing. That authority also provides her with material support in the form of maintenance measures, such as preliminary
         cutting of sections of land and regular removal of bushes and grubbing carried out by third parties. Part of the disputed
         areas is owned by the Land of Rhineland-Palatinate. As to the remainder, the owners have permitted grazing for the purpose
         of nature conservation and have, in certain cases, been obliged by general orders to accept maintenance measures implemented
         by Mrs Niedermair-Schiemann.
      
In the context of the single payment scheme, Mrs Niedermair-Schiemann registered the disputed areas as permanent pasture belonging
         to her holding. By decision of February 2006, she was allocated payment entitlements for arable land and for land under
         pasture, including the disputed areas. 
      
On ministerial instructions, that decision was amended by a decision of May (‘the amending decision’) on the ground
         that the disputed areas were not eligible for aid.
      
Mrs Niedermair-Schiemann lodged an objection to the amending decision.
      
Considering that the initial decision of February had been adopted in compliance with the legislation in force, the
         legal affairs committee of the Landkreis Bad Dürkheim allowed Mrs Niedermair-Schiemann’s objection and, by decision of October 2007, annulled the amending decision.
      
Upon appeal by the ADD, the Verwaltungsgericht Neustadt an der Weinstraße (Administrative Court, Neustadt an der Weinstraße)
         by judgment of July 2008, set aside the decision of October and reinstated the amending decision.
      
That Verwaltungsgericht considered first that, since the holding is used both for nature conservation purposes and extensive
         agricultural activity, reference must be made to the underlying right of use. It then observed that the purpose of the single
         payment scheme is not to provide income support for nature conservation tasks allocated to the farmer by the State authorities.
         The Verwaltungsgericht also held that there could be no agricultural use unless a right to farm the land had been given to
         the farmer under a lease or similar transaction. It also considered that, in the context of the case in the main proceedings,
         the areas concerned were not placed at Mrs Niedermair-Schiemann’s disposal for agricultural reasons but for nature conservation
         purposes. Lastly, it held that, in order to be eligible for aid, the areas concerned must form part of the holding which receives
         that aid and the farmer must have the right to use the land for agricultural purposes, which was not so in the present case.
      
The Landkreis Bad Dürkheim and Mrs Niedermair-Schiemann appealed against that judgment to the referring court.
      
According to that court, the outcome of the action in the main proceedings depends on whether the disputed areas falls within
         the concept of ‘eligible hectare’ within the meaning of Article 44(2) of Regulation No 1782/2003. 
      
In those circumstances, the Oberverwaltungsgericht Rheinland-Pfalz (Higher Administrative Court, Rhineland-Palatinate) decided
         to stay the proceedings and refer the following questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘1.      Is there also an “agricultural area” in the sense of Article 44(2) of Regulation (EC) No 1782/if that area is admittedly
         also used for agricultural purposes (grazing for sheep farming purposes) but the overriding objective is to achieve the aims
         of landscape management and nature conservation?
      
2.      If Question is to be answered in the affirmative:
Is an area used for non-agricultural activities in the sense of Article 44(2) of Regulation No 1782/if the overriding
         purpose of the activity is nature conservation or in any case if the farmer is subject to the instructions of the nature conservation
         authority when fulfilling nature conservation objectives?
      
3.      If there is an agricultural area (Question 1), which is also used for an agricultural activity (Question 2):
Does the allocation of an agricultural area to a holding (agricultural area of the holding in the sense of Article 44(2) of
         Regulation (EC) No 1782/2003) require:
      
(a)      that it be at the disposal of the holding against payment on the basis of a lease or another similar temporary transaction?
(b)      If (a) is to be answered in the negative: is it without prejudice to the allocation to the holding if occupation of the areas
         is allowed, without charge or in return only for taking over the contributions to the trade association, for use of a specific
         nature and for a limited period of time in accordance with the objectives of nature conservation?
      
(c)      If (a) is to be answered in the affirmative: is it without prejudice to the allocation to the holding if the holding is obliged
         to carry out certain tasks on the land in return for payment?’
      
 Questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 The first and second questions
By its first two questions, which should be examined together, the referring court asks essentially whether Article 44(2)
         of Regulation No 1782/must be interpreted as precluding an area from being eligible where, while it is admittedly also
         used for agricultural purposes, the overriding objective is landscape management and nature conservation, in particular where
         the farmer is subject to the instructions of the nature conservation authority when fulfilling nature conservation objectives.
      
Under Article 44(2) of Regulation No 1782/2003, an ‘eligible hectare’ is any agricultural area of the holding taken up by
         arable land and permanent pasture, except areas under permanent crops or forests or used for non-agricultural activities.
      
In that context, the referring court asks, first, whether an area can be regarded as agricultural where, although used for
         agricultural purposes, the overriding objective is landscape management and nature conservation.
      
The expression agricultural area is defined in Article 2(a) of Regulation No 795/as the total area taken up by arable
         land, permanent pasture and permanent crops.
      
Under Article 2(b) of that same regulation, read in conjunction with Article point (1) of Regulation No 796/2004, arable
         land is land cultivated for crop production and land under set-aside, or maintained in good agricultural and environmental
         condition in accordance with Article of Regulation No 1782/2003.
      
According to Article 2(e) of Regulation No 795/2004, read in conjunction with Article point (2) of Regulation No 796/2004,
         permanent pasture is land used to grow grasses or other herbaceous forage that has not been included in the crop rotation
         of the holding for five years or longer.
      
It follows from the provisions referred to in paragraphs to of the present judgment that classification as ‘arable land’
         or ‘permanent pasture’ and, consequently, as ‘agricultural area’, depends on the actual use of the land in question. Thus,
         an area must be classified as agricultural where is it used as arable land or permanent pasture within the meaning of Article
         points (1) and (2) of Regulation No 796/2004. 
      
It follows that the fact that parcels of land which are actually used as arable land or as permanent pasture have the overriding
         purpose of nature and landscape conservation cannot preclude those parcels from being classified as agricultural land within
         the meaning of Article points (1) and (2) of Regulation No 796/2004. 
      
For the sake of completeness, it must be noted that, as recitals 3, and in the preamble to Regulation No 1782/make
         clear, environmental protection forms part of the objectives of the single payment scheme. The Court has also held that environmental
         protection, one of the essential objectives of the European Union, must be regarded as forming part of the common agricultural
         policy (Case C-428/Horvath [2009] ECR I-6355, paragraph 29). Moreover, Article point (1) of Regulation No 796/expressly provides that arable
         land, and consequently agricultural areas pursuant to Article 2(a) of Regulation No 795/2004, is land maintained in good agricultural
         and environmental condition within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 1782/2003.
      
Seen in that light, it would be illogical if an agricultural area ceased to be eligible for support where it is used for nature
         and landscape conservation.
      
It follows from the preceding considerations that the fact that an area has an overriding nature and landscape conservation
         objective does not deprive it of its agricultural character for the purposes of Article 44(2) of Regulation No 1782/where,
         as in the present case, the land is actually being used as arable land or pasture.
      
Second, the referring court asks whether an agricultural area may be eligible for aid if an activity is carried out on it
         which has the overriding purpose of landscape management and nature conservation.
      
In that regard, it should be recalled that, under the first subparagraph of Article 44(2) of Regulation No 1782/2003, areas
         used for non-agricultural activities are not eligible for aid.
      
Article 2(c) of that regulation defines agriculture as the production, rearing or growing of agricultural products including
         harvesting, milking, breeding animals and keeping animals for farming purposes, or maintaining the land in good agricultural
         and environmental condition, as established under Article of that regulation.
      
In that context, the referring court raises the question whether an agricultural area which is used both for agricultural
         and non-agricultural activities within the meaning of the first subparagraph of Article 44(2) is eligible for aid.
      
In the present case it must however be held that, as is clear from the order for reference, the disputed areas were used for
         an agricultural activity.
      
Provided that an agricultural area is used for an agricultural activity within the meaning of Article 2(c) of Regulation No
         1782/2003, it is irrelevant, for the purposes of Article 44(2), whether the activity has an essentially agricultural or nature
         conservation objective.
      
Equally, the fact that instructions were given to the farmer by the competent national authority is irrelevant, in the light
         of the definition of agricultural activity in that provision. That is all the more true since, under Article of Regulation
         No 1782/itself, not only is a farmer receiving direct payments bound to comply with the statutory management requirements
         referred to in Annex III to that regulation, and the good agricultural and environmental condition established under Article
         of that regulation, but also the national competent authority must provide the farmer with the list of statutory management
         requirements and good agricultural and environmental condition to be observed.
      
It follows from the above considerations that Article 44(2) of Regulation No 1782/must be interpreted as not precluding
         an area from being eligible for aid where, while it is admittedly also used for agricultural purposes, the overriding objective
         is landscape management and nature conservation. In addition, the fact that the farmer is subject to the instructions of the
         nature conservation authority does not deprive an activity which meets the definition referred to in Article 2(c) of that
         regulation of its agricultural character.
      
 Third question
The third question seeks to establish the conditions under which an agricultural area may be considered as allocated to a
         holding for the purposes of Article 44(2) of Regulation No 1782/2003.
      
In particular, the referring court inquires first whether it is necessary, in order for an agricultural area to be considered
         as allocated to the farmer’s holding, that the farmer have the area at his disposal under a lease or another similar type
         of contract to let concluded against payment. That court then asks whether an area is allocated to a holding where it is put
         at the disposal of the farmer for a specific use for a limited period of time in accordance with the objectives of nature
         conservation. Lastly, the referring court asks whether an agricultural area may be considered as allocated to the holding
         where the farmer is obliged to carry out certain tasks on the land in return for payment.
      
First, it should be recalled that under Article 44(2) of Regulation No 1782/any agricultural area of the holding is eligible
         for aid. Holding is defined in Article 2(b) of the regulation as all the production units managed by a farmer situated within
         the territory of the same Member State. 
      
Article 44(3) of that regulation provides that the parcels corresponding to the eligible hectare accompanying any payment
         entitlement are to be at the farmer’s disposal for a period of at least months.
      
Thus, it must be concluded that neither Article 44(2) nor Article 44(3) of Regulation No 1782/specify the nature of the
         legal relationship on the basis of which the area concerned is used by the farmer. Therefore, it cannot be inferred from those
         provisions that the parcels in question must be at the farmer’s disposal pursuant to a lease or other similar transaction.
      
Under the principle of freedom of contract, the parties are therefore free to arrange the legal relationship on which use
         of the area in question is based. In the absence of a provision to the contrary, they are also free to provide that those
         parcels are made available without monetary consideration. 
      
Equally, they may legitimately provide that, in return for making the land available, the farmer is obliged to take over the
         contributions due to the trade association.
      
Second, the national court wishes to know whether an area may be considered as allocated to the holding where, as is the case
         under the contract concluded by Mrs Niedermair-Schiemann on November with the Land Rhineland-Palatinate, certain restrictions
         are imposed on the farmer concerning the duration and nature of the activities permitted on that area.
      
In that regard, it should be borne in mind that, as indicated in paragraph of this judgment, an area is allocated to a
         farmer’s holding where he has the power to manage that holding for the purposes of an agricultural activity.
      
There is nothing in Regulation No 1782/or Regulations Nos 795/and 796/which would clarify the precise meaning
         of the phrase ‘production units managed by a farmer’ which appears in Article 2(b) of Regulation No 1782/2003. 
      
According to the Court’s settled case-law, the meaning and scope of terms for which European Union law provides no definition
         must be determined by considering their usual meaning in everyday language, while also taking into account the context in
         which they occur and the purposes of the rules of which they are part (Case C-336/easyCar [2005] ECR I-1947, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
With regard to the single payment scheme, the concept of management does not imply, contrary to what is maintained by the
         ADD in its written observations, that the farmer has unlimited power over the area in question when using it for agricultural
         purposes.
      
However, the farmer must enjoy a degree of autonomy with regard to that area sufficient for the carrying-out of his agricultural
         activity, that being a matter for the referring court to assess, taking into account all the circumstances of the case.
      
In circumstances such as those at issue in the main proceedings, it is important in particular that the farmer is not fully
         subject to the instructions of the national competent authority. Notwithstanding that authority’s instructions, the farmer
         must therefore be able to exercise a certain degree of decision-making power when using the area concerned.
      
Under Article 44(3) of Regulation 1782/2003, the areas eligible for aid must also be at the farmer’s disposal for a period
         of at least months.
      
During that period, the farmer must be able to use the area in question with a degree of autonomy sufficient for his agricultural
         activities, including the maintenance of the land in good agricultural and environmental condition within the meaning of Article
         of Regulation No 1782/2003.
      
In addition, it is essential that no third party carry out any agricultural activity on the disputed areas during that period.
         In order to avoid the situation where a number of farmers claim allocation of the parcels concerned to their holding, those
         areas may not, during that period, be considered as allocated to other farmers’ holdings for the purposes of the single payment
         scheme.
      
Third, the referring court asks whether an agricultural area can be considered as allocated to a holding where the farmer
         is bound to carry out certain tasks in return for payment.
      
In that regard, it should be borne in mind that, under Article 44(2) of Regulation No 1782/2003, an agricultural holding is
         taken up by arable land and permanent pasture which are used for an agricultural activity which is carried out by the farmer
         with a certain degree of autonomy.
      
It must also be pointed out that the agricultural activity must be carried out on the land concerned in the farmer’s name
         and on his behalf, that being a matter for the referring court to determine.
      
The fact that the farmer is also bound to carry out certain tasks for a third party in return for payment is irrelevant in
         that regard.
      
Consequently, the answer to the third question is that Article 44(2) of Regulation No 1782/must be interpreted as meaning
         that:
      
–        it is not necessary, for an agricultural area to be considered as allocated to the farmer’s holding, that it be at his disposal
         against payment on the basis of a lease or another similar type of contract to let;
      
–        the allocation of an agricultural area to a holding is not precluded by the fact that the area is placed at the farmer’s disposal
         free of charge, the farmer being obliged only to take over the contributions to a trade association, for a specific use and
         for a limited period of time in accordance with the objectives of nature conservation, on condition that the farmer is able
         to use that area with a degree of autonomy sufficient for his agricultural activities for a period of at least months;
         and that 
      
–        it is without prejudice to the allocation of the area in question to the farmer’s holding that the farmer is obliged to carry
         out certain tasks for a third party in return for payment, provided that the area is also used by the farmer for his own agricultural
         activities in his name and on his own behalf.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article 44(2) of Council Regulation (EC) 1782/of September establishing common rules for direct support schemes
            under the common agricultural policy and establishing certain support schemes for farmers and amending Regulations (EEC) No
            2019/93, (EC) No 1452/2001, (EC) No 1453/2001, (EC) No 1454/2001, (EC) No 1868/94, (EC) No 1251/1999, (EC) No 1254/1999, (EC)
            No 1673/2000, (EEC) No 2358/and (EC) No 2529/2001, as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 2013/of December 2006,
            must be interpreted as not precluding an area from being eligible for aid where, while it is admittedly also used for agricultural
            purposes, the overriding objective is landscape management and nature conservation. In addition, the fact that the farmer
            is subject to the instructions of the nature conservation authority does not deprive an activity which meets the definition
            referred to in Article 2(c) of that regulation of its agricultural character.
2.      Article 44(2) of Regulation No 1782/2003, as amended, must be interpreted as meaning that:
–        it is not necessary, for an agricultural area to be considered as allocated to the farmer’s holding, that it be at his disposal
            against payment on the basis of a lease or another similar type of contract to let;
–        the allocation of an agricultural area to a holding is not precluded by the fact that the area is placed at the farmer’s disposal
            free of charge, the farmer being obliged only to take over the contributions to a trade association, for a specific use and
            for a limited period of time in accordance with the objectives of nature conservation, on condition that the farmer is able
            to use that area with a degree of autonomy sufficient for his agricultural activities for a period of at least months;
            and that
–        it is without prejudice to the allocation of the area in question to the farmer’s holding that the farmer is obliged to carry
            out certain tasks for a third party in return for payment, provided that the area is also used by the farmer for his own agricultural
            activities in his name and on his own behalf.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 