
Case C-301/P
Commission of the European Communities
v
SGL Carbon AG
(Appeals – Competition – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Graphite electrodes – Article 81(1) EC – Fines – Guidelines on the method of setting fines – Leniency Notice – Production of documents in a Commission investigation)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Competition – Administrative procedure – Request for information – Powers of the Commission 
(Council Regulation No 17, Art. 11)
2.        Competition – Fines – Amount – Determination – Criteria – Reduction of the amount of the fine in exchange for the cooperation
            of the undertaking involved with the Commission
(Council Regulation No 17, Art. 15(2); Commission Notice 96/C 207/04, Section D, para. 2)
1.        Regulation No does not give an undertaking which is being investigated under that regulation any right to evade the investigation.
         The undertaking in question is, on the contrary, subject to an obligation to cooperate actively, which implies that it must
         make available to the Commission all information relating to the subject‑matter of the investigation.
      
So far as concerns the question whether that obligation also applies to requests for information which could be used to establish,
         against the undertaking which provides the information, an infringement of the competition rules, it is established that in
         order to ensure the effectiveness of Article 11(2) and (5) of Regulation No 17, the Commission is entitled to compel an undertaking
         to provide all necessary information concerning such facts as may be known to it and to disclose to it, if necessary, such
         documents relating thereto as are in that undertaking’s possession, even if the latter may be used to establish, against it
         or another undertaking, the existence of anti-competitive conduct.
      
That obligation to cooperate means that the undertaking may not evade requests for production of documents on the ground that
         by complying with them it would be required to give evidence against itself.
      
Finally, while it is evident that the rights of the defence should be respected, the undertaking concerned is still able,
         either during the administrative procedure or in the proceedings before the Community Courts, to contend that the documents
         produced have a different meaning from that ascribed to them by the Commission.
      
(see paras 40-41, 48-49)
2.        A reduction under the Notice on the non-imposition or reduction of fines in cartel cases can be justified only where the information
         provided and, more generally, the conduct of the undertaking concerned might be considered to demonstrate a genuine spirit
         of cooperation on its part.
      
The conduct of an undertaking which, although it was not obliged to answer a question asked by the Commission, did answer
         it, but in an incomplete and misleading way, cannot be considered to reflect such a spirit of cooperation.
      
(see paras 68-69)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
June (*)
      
(Appeals – Competition –Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Graphite electrodes – Article 81(1) EC – Fines – Guidelines on the method of setting fines – Leniency Notice – Production of documents in a Commission investigation)
In Case C-301/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice lodged on July 2004,
      
Commission of the European Communities, represented by W. Mölls, W. Wils and H. Gading, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
appellant,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
SGL Carbon AG, established in Wiesbaden (Germany), represented by M. Klusmann, Rechtsanwalt,
      
applicant at first instance,
Tokai Carbon Co. Ltd, established in Tokyo (Japan),
      
Nippon Carbon Co. Ltd, established in Tokyo,
      
Showa Denko KK, established in Tokyo,
      
GrafTech International Ltd, formerly UCAR International Inc., established in Wilmington (United States),
      
SEC Corp., established in Amagasaki (Japan),
      
The Carbide/Graphite Group Inc., established in Pittsburgh (United States),
      
applicants at first instance,
THE COURT (Second Chamber)
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, R. Silva de Lapuerta (Rapporteur), P. Kūris, G. Arestis and J. Klučka,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed,
Registrar: K. Sztranc, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2005, 
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2006,
gives the following 
Judgment
By its appeal, the Commission of the European Communities applies for paragraph of the operative part of the judgment of
         the Court of First Instance of the European Communities of April in Joined Cases T‑236/01, T‑239/01, T‑244/to T‑246/01,
         T‑251/and T‑252/Tokai Carbon and Others v Commission [2004] ECR II‑(‘the judgment under appeal’) to be set aside in so far as it reduced to the sum of EUR the
         amount of the fine imposed on SGL Carbon AG (‘SGL Carbon’) by Commission Decision 2002/271/EC of July relating to
         a proceeding under Article of the EC Treaty and Article of the EEA Agreement – Case COMP/E-1/36.– Graphite electrodes
         (OJ L 100, p. 1) (‘the contested decision’).
      
 Legal context
 Regulation No Article of Council Regulation No of February 1962: First Regulation implementing Articles [81] and [82] of the Treaty
         (OJ, English Special Edition 1959-1962, p. 87) provides:
      
‘1.      In carrying out the duties assigned to it by Article [85] and by provisions adopted under Article [83] of the Treaty, the
         Commission may obtain all necessary information from the governments and competent authorities of the Member States and from
         undertakings and associations of undertakings.
      
2.      When sending a request for information to an undertaking or association of undertakings, the Commission shall at the same
         time forward a copy of the request to the competent authority of the Member State in whose territory the seat of the undertaking
         or association of undertakings is situated. 
      
3.      In its request the Commission shall state the legal basis and the purpose of the request and also the penalties provided for
         in Article 15(1)(b) for supplying incorrect information.
      
4.      The owners of the undertakings or their representatives and, in the case of legal persons, companies or firms, or of associations
         having no legal personality, the persons authorised to represent them by law or by their constitution shall supply the information
         requested.
      
5.      Where an undertaking or association of undertakings does not supply the information requested within the time‑limit fixed
         by the Commission, or supplies incomplete information, the Commission shall by decision require the information to be supplied.
         The decision shall specify what information is required, fix an appropriate time‑limit within which it is to be supplied and
         indicate the penalties provided for in Article 15(1)(b) and Article 16(1)(c) and the right to have the decision reviewed by
         the Court of Justice. 
      
6.      The Commission shall at the same time forward a copy of its decision to the competent authority of the Member State in whose
         territory the seat of the undertaking or association of undertakings is situated.’
      
Article of Regulation No provides:
      
‘1.      The Commission may by decision impose on undertakings or associations of undertakings fines of from to units of
         account where, intentionally or negligently:
      
…
(b)      they supply incorrect information in response to a request made pursuant to Article 11(3) or (5) …
…
2.      The Commission may by decision impose on undertakings or associations of undertakings fines of from to units
         of account, or a sum in excess thereof but not exceeding 10% of the turnover in the preceding business year of each of the
         undertakings participating in the infringement where, either intentionally or negligently:
      
(a)      they infringe Article [81](1) or Article [82] of the Treaty, … 
…
In fixing the amount of the fine, regard shall be had both to the gravity and to the duration of the infringement.
…’
 The Guidelines
The Commission Notice entitled ‘Guidelines on the method of setting fines imposed pursuant to Article 15(2) of Regulation
         No and Article 65(5) of the ECSC Treaty’ (OJ C 9, p. 3) (‘the Guidelines’) states in its preamble:
      
‘The principles outlined … should ensure the transparency and impartiality of the Commission’s decisions, in the eyes of the
         undertakings and of the Court of Justice alike, while upholding the discretion which the Commission is granted under the relevant
         legislation to set fines within the limit of 10% of overall turnover. This discretion must, however, follow a coherent and
         non-discriminatory policy which is consistent with the objectives pursued in penalising infringements of the competition rules.
      
The new method of determining the amount of a fine will adhere to the following rules, which start from a basic amount that
         will be increased to take account of aggravating circumstances or reduced to take account of attenuating circumstances.’
      
 The Leniency Notice
In its Notice on the non-imposition or reduction of fines in cartel cases (OJ C 207, p. 4) (‘the Leniency Notice’), the
         Commission set out the conditions under which undertakings cooperating with the Commission during its investigation into a
         cartel may be exempted from fines, or may be granted reductions in the fine which would otherwise have been imposed upon them.
      
Section A, paragraph 5, of the Leniency Notice provides:
      
‘Cooperation by an [undertaking] is only one of several factors which the Commission takes into account when fixing the amount
         of a fine. ...’ 
      
 Facts and background to the adoption of the contested decision
In the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance summarised the facts of the action before it as follows:
      
‘By Decision 2002/271/EC … the Commission found that various undertakings had participated in a series of agreements and concerted
         practices within the meaning of Article 81(1) EC and Article 53(1) of the Agreement on the European Economic Area [of May
         (OJ L 1, p. 3) (“the EEA Agreement”)] in the graphite electrodes sector. 
      
Graphite electrodes are used primarily in the production of steel in electric arc furnaces. Electric arc furnace steelmaking
         is essentially a recycling process whereby scrap steel is converted into new steel, as opposed to the “traditional” blast
         furnace/oxygen process of production from iron ore. Nine electrodes, joined in columns of three, are used in the electric
         arc furnace to melt scrap steel. Because of the intensity of the melting process, one electrode is consumed approximately
         every eight hours. The processing time for an electrode is approximately two months. There are no product substitutes for
         graphite electrodes in this production process.
      
The demand for graphite electrodes is directly linked to the production of steel in electric arc furnaces. The customers are
         principally steel producers, which account for approximately 85% of demand. In 1998, world crude steel production was million tonnes, of which million tonnes was produced in electric arc furnaces … .
      
…
During the 1980s, technological improvements led to a substantial decline in the specific consumption of electrodes per tonne
         of steel produced. The steel industry was also undergoing major restructuring in that period. The fall in demand for electrodes
         led to the restructuring of the world electrodes industry, with a number of factories being closed. 
      
In 2001, nine Western producers supplied the European market with graphite electrodes: …
On June 1997, acting under Article 14(3) of Council Regulation No …, Commission officials carried out simultaneous and
         unannounced investigations at the premises of [certain graphite electrode producers]. 
      
On the same date, Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) agents executed judicial search warrants at the premises of a number
         of producers. These investigations led to criminal proceedings for conspiracy being brought against SGL … . All the accused
         pleaded guilty to the charges and agreed to pay fines, which were set at United States dollars (USD) million for SGL …
         
      
…
Civil proceedings were filed in the United States on behalf of a class of purchasers claiming triple damages against …, SGL
         … . 
      
In Canada … in July 2000, SGL pleaded guilty and agreed to pay a fine of CAD 12.million for [an] offence [against the Canadian
         Competition Act]. Civil proceedings were instituted by purchasers of steel in Canada in June against … SGL … for conspiracy.
      
On January 2000, the Commission sent a statement of objections to the undertakings concerned. The administrative procedure
         culminated in the adoption, on July 2001, of the [contested] [d]ecision, in which the applicant undertakings … are found
         to have been involved, on a worldwide scale, in price fixing and also in sharing the national and regional markets in the
         product in question according to the “home producer” principle: … SGL [was responsible for a part] of Europe; … 
      
Still according to the [contested] [d]ecision, the basic principles of the cartel were as follows: 
–        prices for graphite electrodes should be set on a global basis; 
–        decisions on each company’s pricing had to be taken by the Chairman/General Manager only; 
–        the “home producer” was to establish the market price in its “home area” and the other producers would “follow” it; 
–        for “non-home” markets, i.e. markets where there was no “home” producer, prices would be decided by consensus; 
–        non-home producers should not compete aggressively and would withdraw from the other producers’ home markets; 
–        there was to be no expansion of capacity (the Japanese were supposed to reduce their capacity); 
–        there should be no transfer of technology outside the circle of producers participating in the cartel.
The [contested] [d]ecision goes on to state that those basic principles were implemented by meetings of the cartel, held at
         a number of levels: “Top Guy” meetings, “Working Level” meetings, “European group” meetings (without the Japanese undertakings),
         national or regional meetings dedicated to specific markets and bilateral contacts between undertakings. 
      
…
On the basis of the findings of fact and the legal assessments made in the [contested] [d]ecision, the Commission imposed
         on the undertakings concerned fines set according to the methodology described in the Guidelines on the method of setting
         fines imposed pursuant to Article 15(2) of Regulation No and Article 65(5) of the ECSC Treaty … and the Notice on the non-imposition
         or reduction of fines in cartel cases …
      
Article of the operative part of the [contested] [d]ecision imposes the following fines:
SGL: EUR 80.million;
…
In Article of the operative part, the undertakings concerned are ordered to pay the fines within three months of the date
         of notification of the [contested] [d]ecision, failing which interest of 8.04% will be payable.’
      
 Proceedings before the Court of First Instance and the judgment under appeal
SGL Carbon and other undertakings to which the contested decision was addressed brought actions for annulment of that decision
         before the Court of First Instance.
      
In the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance, in particular:
      
‘…
2.      In Case T-239/SGL Carbon v Commission:
      
–        sets the amount of the fine imposed on the applicant by Article of Decision 2002/at EUR 000;
–        dismisses the remainder of the action;
…’
As regards the method of setting the fines imposed, the Court of First Instance, in paragraphs to of the judgment
         under appeal, held as follows:
      
‘Next, the essential reason why the Commission granted SGL a reduction of only 30% is set out in recital of the [contested
         decision]: according to the Commission, an undertaking deserves a reduction in its fine only if its cooperation is “voluntary”
         and is outside the exercise of “any investigatory power”: the Commission considered that “a substantial part of the information
         provided [by SGL] in fact constitute[d] SGL’s reply to the Commission’s formal request for information [and that] SGL’s statement
         [would] be regarded as a voluntary contribution within the meaning of the Leniency Notice only where the information provided
         went beyond that requested under Article 11”. Furthermore, SGL sent its statement of June only after it had received
         a reminder in which the Commission reserved the right to adopt a formal decision under Article 11(5) (recital of the [contested]
         [d]ecision). Relying on the judgment of the Court of Justice in Case 374/Orkem v Commission [1989] ECR 3283, paragraphs 27, and to 35, the Commission therefore did not make recompense for the information which
         it considered that SGL was required to provide in any event in reply to a request for information or to a decision ordering,
         under threat of penalties, communication of the information requested. 
      
In that context, it is appropriate to observe that the absolute right to silence on which SGL relies in support of its contention
         that it was not required to respond to any request for information cannot be recognised. To acknowledge the existence of such
         a right would be to go beyond what is necessary in order to preserve the rights of defence of undertakings, and would constitute
         an unjustified hindrance to the Commission’s performance of its duty to ensure that the rules on competition within the common
         market are observed. A right to silence can be recognised only to the extent that the undertaking concerned would be compelled
         to provide answers which might involve an admission on its part of the existence of an infringement which it is incumbent
         upon the Commission to prove (Case T‑112/Mannesmannröhren-Werke v Commission [2001] ECR II-729, paragraphs and 67). 
      
In order to ensure the effectiveness of Article of Regulation No 17, the Commission is therefore entitled to compel the
         undertakings to provide all necessary information concerning such facts as may be known to them and to disclose to the Commission,
         if necessary, such documents relating thereto as are in their possession, even if the latter may be used to establish the
         existence of anti-competitive conduct (see Mannesmannröhren-Werke v Commission, cited at paragraph above, paragraph 65, and the case-law cited there). 
      
This power of the Commission to obtain information, enshrined in Orkem v Commission and Mannesmannröhren-Werke v Commission, cited at paragraphs and above respectively, does not fall foul of either Article 6(1) and (2) of the ECHR [European
         Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, signed at Rome on November 1950] (Mannesmannröhren-Werke v Commission, cited above, paragraph 75) or the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights. 
      
Although the Court of Justice has held ([Joined Cases C‑238/P, C-244/P, C-245/P, C-247/P, C-250/P to C-252/P and C-254/P Limburgse Vinyl Maatschappij and Others v Commission [2002] ECR I‑8735; “LVM”], paragraph 274) that after the judgment in Orkem v Commission, cited at paragraph above, the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights, of which the Community Courts must take
         account, has gone through new developments with the Funke judgment … the Saunders v United Kingdom judgment of December (Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1996-VI, p. 2044, §§ 69, and 76), and the J.B. v Switzerland judgment of May (Reports of Judgments and Decisions 2001-III, §§ to 71), the Court of Justice did not reverse its previous case-law in LVM. 
      
In any event, the mere fact of being obliged to answer purely factual questions put by the Commission and to comply with its
         requests for the production of documents already in existence cannot constitute a breach of the principle of respect for the
         rights of defence or impair the right to fair legal process, which offer, in the specific field of competition law, protection
         equivalent to that guaranteed by Article of the Convention. There is nothing to prevent the addressee of a request for information
         from showing, whether later during the administrative procedure or in proceedings before the Community Courts, when exercising
         his rights of defence, that the facts set out in his replies or the documents produced by him have a different meaning from
         that ascribed to them by the Commission (Mannesmannröhren-Werke v Commission, cited at paragraph above, paragraphs and 78). 
      
As regards, next, the extent to which SGL was required to reply, in accordance with the case-law referred to above, to the
         request for information of March 1999, it must be observed that, in addition to the purely factual questions and the requests
         to produce documents already in existence, the Commission requested SGL to describe the object of and what occurred at a number
         of meetings in which SGL participated and also the results/conclusions of those meetings, when it was clear that the Commission
         suspected that the object of the meetings was to restrict competition. It follows that a request of that nature was of such
         a kind as to require SGL to admit its participation in an infringement of the Community competition rules.
      
The same applies to the requests for the protocols of those meetings, the working documents and the preparatory documents
         concerning them, the handwritten notes relating to them, the notes and the conclusions pertaining to the meetings, the planning
         and discussion documents and also the implementing projects concerning the price increases put into effect between and
         1998.
      
As SGL was not required to answer questions of that type in the request for information of March 1999, the fact that it
         none the less provided information on those points must be regarded as voluntary collaboration on the part of the undertaking
         apt to justify a reduction in the fine under the Leniency Notice. 
      
That conclusion cannot be affected by the Commission’s argument that the information in question was not provided voluntarily
         but in reply to a request for information. Section D, paragraph 2, first indent, of the Leniency Notice does not require a
         voluntary act taken solely on the initiative of the undertaking concerned, but merely requires information which contributes
         to establishing the existence of the infringement. Even Section C, moreover, which relates to a more substantial reduction
         in the fine than that referred to in Section D, makes it possible to reward cooperation provided “after the Commission has
         undertaken an investigation ordered by decision on the premises of the parties to the cartel”. Accordingly, the fact that
         a request for information was sent to SGL under Article 11(1) of Regulation No cannot minimise the cooperation provided
         by that undertaking under Section D, paragraph 2, first indent, of the Leniency Notice, especially not as a request for information
         is a less coercive measure than an investigation ordered by decision. 
      
It follows that the Commission failed to appreciate the importance of SGL’s cooperation in that context. 
In so far as the Commission criticises SGL for having given an incomplete answer to the question as to which undertakings
         SGL had informed of the forthcoming investigations by the Commission in June 1997, it is true that, by letter of July 1997,
         SGL admitted only to having informed VAW and another undertaking and failed to state that it had also informed UCAR. However,
         the Commission itself stated that SGL’s warning increased the gravity of the infringement, gave rise to a fine whose deterrent
         effect was greater than normal and justified being regarded as an aggravating circumstance, as SGL’s conduct had created the
         conditions necessary to keep the cartel active and to prolong its injurious effects. Consequently, SGL was not required to
         inform the Commission that it had warned other undertakings. That information was likely to increase the penalty which the
         Commission would impose on SGL. On this point too, therefore, the Commission failed to appreciate SGL’s conduct by criticising
         it for having provided an incomplete reply.’
      
 Forms of order sought before the Court
The Commission claims that the Court should:
      
–        set aside the judgment under appeal as regards paragraph of its operative part;
–        order SGL Carbon to pay the costs.
SGL Carbon contends that the Court should:
      
–        dismiss the appeal;
–        order the Commission to pay the costs.
 The application for the reopening of the oral procedure
By letter received at the Court of Justice on February 2006, SGL Carbon requested the reopening of the oral procedure,
         pursuant to Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice. 
      
In support of that request, SGL Carbon asserts that the Advocate General’s Opinion in the present appeal does not always correctly
         reproduce the parties’ statements of facts and the Court of First Instance’s findings. It also contains arguments and suppositions
         which have not hitherto been put forward by the parties in their pleadings or discussed at the hearing. That Opinion cannot
         therefore constitute sufficient groundwork for the judgment, but calls, exceptionally, for additional observations before
         the Court decides the case definitively.
      
On that point, it is appropriate to recall, first, that the Statute of the Court of Justice and its Rules of Procedure make
         no provision for the parties to submit observations in response to the Advocate General’s Opinion (see, in particular, the
         order in Case C-17/Emesa Sugar [2000] ECR I-665, paragraph 2).
      
As regards SGL Carbon’s argument, it is noteworthy that the Court may, of its own motion, on a proposal from the Advocate
         General or at the request of the parties, order the reopening of the oral procedure under Article of its Rules of Procedure,
         if it considers that it lacks sufficient information or that the case must be dealt with on the basis of an argument which
         has not been debated between the parties (see, in particular, Case C-209/Schilling and Fleck-Schilling [2003] ECR I‑13389, paragraph 19, and Case C‑30/Recheio – Cash & Carry [2004] ECR I-6051, paragraph 12).
      
In the present case, the Court finds that it has all the information necessary to give judgment on this appeal. 
      
Consequently, there is no need to order the reopening of the oral procedure.
      
 The appeal
The Commission maintains that paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal involve infringements of Community law, in
         particular of Article 15, in conjunction with Article 11, of Regulation No and of the Leniency Notice. It submits that
         the Court of First Instance made errors of law in its evaluation of the replies given by SGL Carbon to the Commission’s requests
         for information as regards a possible reduction in the amount of the fine. In addition, the judgment under appeal, on those
         points, is vitiated by defects in its reasoning. The Commission divides this single ground of appeal into two parts.
      
SGL Carbon submits that, as the Court of First Instance found, the Commission’s request for information of June 1997, as
         well as questions to and the second subparagraph of question in that of March 1999, exceeded its investigatory powers.
         Those requests were contrary to the right not to incriminate oneself (nemo tenetur se ipsum accusare). Consequently, on the basis of the Leniency Notice, the fine should have been further reduced by at least 8%. In any event,
         the judgment under appeal is not, on that point, vitiated by any error of assessment.
      
 First part: the request for information of March Arguments of the parties
The Commission submits that the judgment under appeal is vitiated by several errors of law, in paragraphs and 409, concerning
         the interpretation of Article 15, in conjunction with Article 11, of Regulation No and of the Leniency Notice. It is always
         entitled to request the production of documents and such a request does not infringe the rights of the defence.
      
The Commission states that the points raised in the request for information of March covered the ‘production’ of documents
         in SGL Carbon’s possession and that there were no questions seeking to obtain a ‘reply’ from that party. In those circumstances,
         the Court of First Instance’s conclusion that certain aspects of that request were of such a kind as to require SGL Carbon
         to admit its participation in an infringement cannot apply to requests for existing documents.
      
The Commission asserts that a request for existing documents can always be reconciled with the rights of the defence, even
         if they may be used to establish the existence of anti-competitive conduct, as the Court of First Instance expressly noted
         in paragraphs 403, and of the judgment under appeal. The Court of First Instance therefore failed to apply the Court
         of Justice’s case‑law and contradicted its own findings.
      
The Commission submits that the Court of First Instance should have established the extent to which SGL Carbon, by producing
         the documents requested, effectively complied with the various points of the request for information which the Court of First
         Instance specifically challenged. It is clear from SGL Carbon’s reply of June that that was not the case. On the contrary,
         it stated in that reply that it had no documents of the type requested.
      
The Commission concludes therefrom that the matters in question in the request for information of March cannot give
         rise to a greater reduction in the fine than that already accorded. It took into account the fact that SGL Carbon, in spite
         of lacking the documents sought, made every effort to contribute to clarifying the facts. The only matters which it did not
         take into account in determining the reduction were those which constituted SGL Carbon’s reply to the formal request for information.
         By contrast, it took into account the information which went beyond that requested under Article of Regulation No in
         reducing the amount of the fine imposed by 30%.
      
According to the Commission, the Court of First Instance none the less wrongly held, in paragraph of the judgment under
         appeal, that SGL Carbon complied with the request for information covering those matters as such and that the Commission took
         no account of that contribution.
      
The Commission adds that the judgment under appeal is also affected by defects in its reasoning. Paragraphs and of
         that judgment are in clear contradiction to paragraphs 403, and 407, in which the Court of First Instance reproduces the
         criteria set forth in the case‑law of the Court of Justice. In addition, the Court of First Instance did not explain how,
         in view, first, of the wording of SGL Carbon’s reply of June 1999, and, second, of the contested decision, it could reach
         the conclusion that that undertaking had provided the Commission’s investigation with a contribution of which the Commission
         took no account.
      
SGL Carbon states that the entirety of the matters in its memorandum of June as well as its replies to the request
         for information of June should have been regarded as contributions equivalent to cooperation, since no distinction
         can be drawn between express confession of an infringement or of facts and the production of documents proving the infringement.
      
SGL Carbon contends that questions to and the second subparagraph of question in the request for information of March
         were not only intended to extract a confession of an infringement, but also to induce it to disclose materials proving
         its own infringement. It could not, under the case‑law of the Court of Justice and the European Court of Human Rights, be
         required to reply to those questions. In those circumstances, the fact that it voluntarily disclosed the information and materials
         requested should have been regarded as a contribution justifying a reduction in the fine.
      
In the alternative, that is to say, should the Court of Justice not recognise the existence of an unlimited right to silence,
         SGL Carbon submits that the judgment under appeal is not contrary to the case‑law of the Court of Justice on the subject.
         An undertaking cannot be required to give replies consisting in a confession of infringement the proof of which must be adduced
         by the Commission. For the purposes of that case‑law, the judgment under appeal is well founded, since the Court of First
         Instance regarded as a matter leading to a reduction in the fine – following the examination required under the substantive
         rules – the fact that SGL Carbon replied to the request for information of March in terms exceeding what was required
         of it.
      
SGL Carbon submits that, if an undertaking being questioned produces, without being obliged to do so, probatory documents
         in the field concerned, that is, for the purposes of the Leniency Notice, an initiative which should be regarded as cooperation,
         as the Court of First Instance correctly held in paragraph of the judgment under appeal. The Court of First Instance correctly
         pointed out that the evaluation of the cooperation consists in identifying whether any substantive ‘added value’ has been
         provided voluntarily.
      
SGL Carbon submits also that it matters little, in that context, whether there was a prior request for information. It is
         necessary to ask whether or not, and to what extent, the relevant material provided had to be revealed. To the extent that
         it did not, even a reply to a request for information could be voluntary and therefore relevant from the point of view of
         the undertaking’s cooperation.
      
 Findings of the Court
The first part of the ground of appeal raises, in essence, the question whether SGL Carbon was bound to provide all the documents
         sought by the Commission in its request for information of March and, therefore, whether the Court of First Instance’s
         findings on that question, in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, are correct in law.
      
Accordingly, it must be determined whether the reply given by SGL Carbon to the Commission’s request constituted voluntary
         cooperation or the performance of an obligation.
      
As regards the content of the abovementioned request, it must be noted that the Commission had sought, among others, documents
         relating to the object of and events at meetings in which SGL Carbon had participated as well as written evidence concerning
         the results or conclusions of those meetings. Those documents were described by the Commission as copies of the convening
         notices, agendas, lists of participants, handwritten notes, working documents, preparatory documents and documents concerning
         the implementation of price increases. 
      
The Court of First Instance held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that, as regards an undertaking’s right to
         refuse to produce documents which might contain an admission of infringement, ‘[t]he same applies to the requests for the
         protocols of those meetings, the working documents and the preparatory documents concerning them, the notes and the conclusions
         pertaining to the meetings, the planning and discussion documents and also the implementing projects concerning the price
         increases put into effect between and 1998’. 
      
The Court of First Instance, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, held in that regard that SGL Carbon was ‘not required
         to answer questions of that type …’. It therefore found that to the extent that the Commission could not require SGL Carbon
         to provide the documents sought, the reply which it gave had to be regarded as ‘voluntary collaboration’. 
      
Those findings of the Court of First Instance are vitiated by errors of law.
      
It must be recalled first that, under Article 11(1) of Regulation No 17, in carrying out the duties assigned to it in the
         matter, the Commission may obtain all necessary information from the governments and competent authorities of the Member States
         and from undertakings and associations of undertakings. As set out in Article 11(4) thereof, the owners of the undertakings
         or their representatives and, in the case of legal persons, companies or firms, or of associations having no legal personality,
         the persons authorised to represent them by law or by their constitution are to supply the information requested.
      
As regards the Commission’s powers to make such requests, it is important to note that, in paragraph of the judgment in
         Orkem v Commission, the Court pointed out that Regulation No does not give an undertaking which is being investigated under that regulation
         any right to evade the investigation and that, on the contrary, the undertaking in question is subject to an obligation to
         cooperate actively, which implies that it must make available to the Commission all information relating to the subject‑matter
         of the investigation.
      
So far as concerns the question whether that obligation also applies to requests for information which could be used to establish,
         against the undertaking which provides the information, an infringement of the competition rules, the Court held, in paragraph
         of that judgment that in order to ensure the effectiveness of Article 11(2) and (5) of Regulation No the Commission
         is entitled to compel an undertaking, if necessary by adopting a decision, to provide all necessary information concerning
         such facts as may be known to it and to disclose to it, if necessary, such documents relating thereto as are in that undertaking’s
         possession, even if the latter may be used to establish, against it or another undertaking, the existence of anti-competitive
         conduct.
      
By contrast, the situation is completely different where the Commission seeks to obtain answers from an undertaking which
         is being investigated by which that undertaking would be led to admit an infringement which it is incumbent upon the Commission
         to prove (see Orkem v Commission, paragraph 35).
      
It must be added that the Court of Justice, in paragraphs to of the judgment in Limburgse Vinyl Maatschappij and Others v Commission, observed that since the judgment in Orkem v Commission there have been further developments in the case‑law of the European Court of Human Rights which the Community judicature
         must take into account when interpreting the fundamental rights. The Court of Justice stated however in that regard that those
         developments were not such as to put in question the statements of principle in Orkem v Commission.
      
It does not follow from that case‑law that the Commission’s powers of investigation have been limited as regards the production
         of documents in the possession of an undertaking which is subject to investigation. The undertaking concerned must therefore,
         if the Commission requests it, provide the Commission with documents which relate to the subject‑matter of the investigation,
         even if those documents could be used by the Commission in order to establish the existence of an infringement.
      
It is important to point out also that the Court of First Instance itself, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal,
         expressly referred to the principles stated in Orkem v Commission and to the fact that the Court of Justice has not reversed its previous case‑law on the point. 
      
The Court of First Instance found, however, in the course of its reasoning, that the Commission’s request for information
         of March was such as to require SGL Carbon to admit its participation in infringements of the Community competition
         rules.
      
That finding of the Court of First Instance misconstrues the scope of Article of Regulation No 17, as interpreted by the
         Court of Justice, and therefore weakens the principle that undertakings subject to a Commission investigation must cooperate.
      
That obligation to cooperate means that the undertaking may not evade requests for production of documents on the ground that
         by complying with them it would be required to give evidence against itself.
      
In addition, as the Advocate General correctly observed in point of his Opinion, while it is evident that the rights of
         the defence should be respected, the undertaking concerned is still able, either during the administrative procedure or in
         the proceedings before the Community Courts, to contend that the documents produced have a different meaning from that ascribed
         to them by the Commission.
      
Thus, the Court of First Instance made an error of law in holding that the conditions for a reduction in the fine by virtue
         of the Leniency Notice were fulfilled. 
      
The first part of the ground of appeal is therefore well founded.
      
 Second part: the request for information of June Arguments of the parties
The Commission submits that paragraph of the judgment under appeal is vitiated by several errors of law. The Court of
         First Instance attributed to the Commission a point of view which it did not hold and the Court did not examine the arguments
         which the Commission had developed in its observations, which constitutes a defect in its reasoning.
      
The Commission points out that it never claimed to have limited the reduction accorded to SGL Carbon under the Leniency Notice
         on the ground that it did not name all the undertakings which it had warned of the forthcoming investigations. The Commission,
         on the contrary, gave no greater reduction in the fine because it considered that the reply actually given by SGL Carbon did
         not go beyond its obligation to cooperate, in accordance with Article of Regulation No 17.
      
The Commission maintains that the question which it asked did not exceed its powers of investigation and therefore that the
         reply given went no further than what was requested pursuant to Article of Regulation No 17. There was, as a result, no
         reason to reduce the fine under the Leniency Notice. In addition, the fact that SGL Carbon’s reply was incomplete and misleading
         was an additional reason not to give a reduction under the Leniency Notice.
      
Nor, in the Commission’s view, did the Court of First Instance respond to the alternative argument that SGL Carbon had omitted,
         in its reply to the request for information of June 1997, to deal with the most important elements that had led to an increase
         in the fine because of an aggravating circumstance. As the Court of First Instance itself recognised, only effective contributions
         to the Commission investigation could give rise to a reduction in the fine.
      
The Commission also points out that a reduction for an ‘excusable failure to contribute’, would, if the Court of First Instance
         had envisaged it, be, on any basis, incompatible with Article of Regulation No and the Leniency Notice. According to
         the principles governing the application of those provisions, a reduction is justified only if an undertaking’s conduct enabled
         the Commission to establish an infringement with less difficulty and, where appropriate, to put an end to it. 
      
The Commission maintains that, if the Court of First Instance took the view that the reply actually given by SGL Carbon, namely
         that it warned another undertaking of forthcoming investigations, should have led to a reduction in the fine, it thereby infringed
         Article 15, in conjunction with Article 11, of Regulation No and the Leniency Notice. The Commission is not bound to accord
         a reduction in the fine solely because an undertaking has complied with a request for information, if that request is within
         the limits established by the case‑law of the Court of Justice. That is the case here, since the request of June was
         intended to obtain factual information and did not lead SGL Carbon to admit an infringement.
      
The Commission acknowledges that warning another undertaking does not constitute an infringement of Article EC and states
         that the Court of First Instance itself found that those warnings did not infringe that provision. The Court of First Instance
         held, however, that the information in question could aggravate the penalty which the Commission was going to impose on SGL
         Carbon. It concluded therefrom, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that SGL Carbon was not required to inform
         the Commission that it had warned other undertakings of a forthcoming investigation. In so doing, the Court of First Instance
         misconstrued the case‑law on the point.
      
For the Commission, the decisive question is whether the reply requested, as such, anticipates the conclusion that there is
         an infringement, so that the undertaking would expose itself to a penalty by that reply alone. Warning another economic operator
         of a forthcoming investigation would not, by itself, expose the undertaking to an accusation of infringement or to sanctions.
         The fact, noted by the Court of First Instance, that the Commission considered that warning to be an aggravating factor changes
         nothing. To reach that conclusion, the Commission had first to establish proof of the infringement and the information relating
         to the warning is not such as to replace that proof. 
      
The Commission maintains, in addition, that the fact that it found that there was an aggravating circumstance does not form
         part of its establishment of the facts constituting the infringement, but of the exercise of its discretionary power to determine
         the amount of the fine. In addition, the fact that the information provided could have contributed to the establishment of
         proof of the infringement as a matter of fact is irrelevant.
      
The Commission concludes that the Court of First Instance made an error of law in finding that the reply given by SGL Carbon
         that it had warned another undertaking of the forthcoming investigations should have led to a reduction in the fine. That
         interpretation is contrary to Article 15, in conjunction with Article 11, of Regulation No and the Leniency Notice. Furthermore,
         the judgment under appeal is contradictory on that point, as it is concerning the production of documents already in existence.
         Basing itself on the case‑law of the Court of Justice, the Court of First Instance recalled the relevant criteria in paragraphs
         to of the judgment under appeal, but did not apply them.
      
SGL Carbon submits that the Court of First Instance correctly held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the
         Commission’s request for information of June was unlawful. SGL Carbon voluntarily admitted, in fact, that it had warned
         certain undertakings of forthcoming investigations and the Commission should have taken that admission into consideration
         in evaluating cooperation.
      
SGL Carbon contends that the Commission’s argument should be rejected as inadmissible since neither the Commission nor the
         Court of First Instance found there to be any agreement to destroy documents. The Commission cannot, on an appeal, put forward
         new matters of fact.
      
SGL Carbon maintains that the request for information had no legal basis since the giving of warnings to other undertakings
         is not anti‑competitive conduct prohibited by Article EC. The rights which Article of Regulation No confers on the
         Commission do not empower it to ask questions on matters of fact not covered by that provision. However, supposing that those
         warnings could constitute aggravating circumstances, the fact that they were admitted should have been regarded as an ‘element
         of cooperation’.
      
SGL Carbon submits that, on any basis, the Court of First Instance correctly found that it was not bound to reveal to the
         Commission that it had warned other undertakings of forthcoming investigations. 
      
 Findings of the Court
It should be recalled at the outset, that, in its request for information of June 1997, the Commission had requested SGL
         Carbon to inform it, among other things, of the names of the undertakings in the graphite electrodes industry which it had
         warned of the possibility of being made subject to Commission investigations.
      
It must be noted that the Court of First Instance observed, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that SGL Carbon
         was not required to inform the Commission, as a consequence of that request, that it had warned other undertakings and that
         the Commission could not force SGL Carbon to reply to it. The Court of First Instance concluded, in the same paragraph of
         the judgment under appeal, that the Commission had failed to appreciate SGL Carbon’s conduct by criticising it for having
         provided an incomplete reply.
      
In order to assess the soundness of that reasoning of the Court of First Instance, it must be pointed out that it is clear
         from the Court of Justice’s recent case‑law that a reduction under the Leniency Notice can be justified only where the information
         provided and, more generally, the conduct of the undertaking concerned might be considered to demonstrate a genuine spirit
         of cooperation on its part (see Joined Cases C-189/P, C-202/P, C-205/P to C-208/P and C‑213/P Dansk Rørindustri and Others v Commission [2005] ECR I‑5425, paragraphs to 403, particularly paragraph 395).
      
As the Advocate General pointed out in point of his Opinion, although SGL Carbon was not obliged to answer the question
         asked by the Commission, it did answer it, but in an incomplete and misleading way. Therefore, that conduct of SGL Carbon
         cannot be considered to reflect a spirit of cooperation within the meaning of the judgment in Dansk Rørindustri and Others v Commission.
      
The Court of First Instance therefore made an error of law in holding that SGL Carbon fulfilled, on account of its conduct,
         the requirements for a reduction in the fine pursuant to the Leniency Notice. Paragraph of the judgment under appeal is
         therefore also vitiated by an error of law. It follows that the second part of the ground of appeal is well founded. 
      
 Consequences of the setting‑aside of the judgment under appeal
Under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, if the appeal is well founded, the Court is to set aside the decision
         of the Court of First Instance. It may itself give final judgment in the matter, where the state of the proceedings so permits,
         or refer the case back to the Court of First Instance for judgment.
      
The Court of Justice considers that, in this case, the conditions are fulfilled for it to be able to give final judgment.
      
It should be recalled that the Court of First Instance awarded SGL Carbon an extra reduction of 10% under Section D, paragraph
         2, of the Leniency Notice, but subsequently reduced it to 8% because of its conduct. That reduction of 8% was intended to
         reward SGL Carbon for its answers to the question put by the Commission – which was held to have exceeded the Commission’s
         powers – and which were classified by the Court of First Instance as conduct falling within the scope of the Leniency Notice.
      
As the Advocate General pointed out in points and of his Opinion, only a minor element of the questions put by the Commission,
         namely that relating to the purpose and result of SGL Carbon’s meetings with other undertakings, went beyond what the Commission
         could have compelled SGL Carbon to answer.
      
The Court observes that that element is equivalent to a fifth of the information sought by the Commission.
      
In those circumstances, the Court considers that a total additional reduction of 4% in addition to the 30% accorded by the
         Commission is justified.
      
The fine must therefore be set at EUR 75.million.
      
 Costs
Under the first paragraph of Article of the Rules of Procedure, where an appeal is well founded and the Court itself gives
         final judgment in the case, the Court is to make a decision as to costs. Under the first subparagraph of Article 69(2) of
         the same rules, which is applicable to appeal proceedings pursuant to Article thereof, the unsuccessful party is to be
         ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. As the Commission has asked for
         costs to be awarded against SGL Carbon and the latter has been for the most part unsuccessful in its pleas in law on the appeal,
         it must be ordered to pay the costs of the present proceedings.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Sets aside the first indent of paragraph of the operative part of the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European
            Communities of April in Joined Cases T-236/01, T-239/01, T-244/to T‑246/01, T-251/and T-252/Tokai Carbon and Others v Commission;
2.      Sets at EUR 75.million the amount of the fine imposed on SGL Carbon AG by Article of Commission Decision 2002/271/EC of
            July relating to a proceeding under Article of the EC Treaty and Article of the EEA Agreement – Case COMP/E-1/36.– Graphite electrodes;
3.      Orders SGL Carbon AG to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 