
         				Ordonnance de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-180/P Benito LatinovCommission of the European Communities
«(Appeal – Officials – Occupational disease – Recognition of the occupational origin of arthrosis-related damage – Validity of the opinion of the Medical Committee – Exhaustion of the latter's competence and requirement that it act impartially – Article of the Rules of Procedure)»
Order of the Court (Fifth Chamber), February Summary of the Order
1..
Officials – Social security – Insurance against accidents and occupational diseases – Establishment of the occupational origin of the disease – Disease not included in the European List of Occupational Diseases – Onus of proof resting on the official – General principle of law semper in dubiis benigniora praeferenda sunt – Inapplicable  (Staff Regulations, Art. 73; Rules on insurance against the risk of accident and of occupational disease, Art. 3) 
2..
Appeals – Grounds – Plea put forward for the first time in the appeal – Inadmissible  (Rules of Procedure of the Court, Art. 42(1), second subpara., and  Art. 118) 
1.
 Where a disease is not included in the European List of Occupational Diseases annexed to Commission Recommendation 90/326,
         proof of a causal link between the performance of duties and that disease is necessary in order for the occupational origin
         of the disease to be recognised.  The competent administrative authority cannot be required to accept the occupational character
         of such a disease solely on the ground that there is doubt as to its origin.  The onus is on the official concerned to prove
         the existence of a causal link between the performance of his duties and the disease, and he cannot rely on the general principle
         of law semper in dubiis benigniora praeferenda sunt. see paras 38-2.
 A plea submitted for the first time in an appeal before the Court of Justice is inadmissible. In an appeal, the Court's jurisdiction
         is confined to review of the findings of law on the pleas argued before the Court of First Instance. see paras 42, ORDER OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)February (1)
((Appeal – Officials – Occupational disease – Recognition of the occupational origin of arthrosis-related damage – Validity of the opinion of the Medical Committee – Exhaustion of the latter's competence and requirement that it act impartially – Article of the Rules of Procedure))
 In Case C-180/P, 
         
Benito Latino,   a former official of the Commission of the European Communities, residing at Sérignac-Peboudou (France), represented by J.R.
         Iturriagagoitia Bassas and K. Delvolvé, avocats,
         
appellant, 
 APPEAL against the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities (First Chamber) of February in Case T-145/Latino v  
         Commission [2003] ECR II-337, seeking to have that judgment set aside,
         
 the other party to the proceedings being: 
         Commission of the European Communities,   represented by J. Currall, acting as Agent, assisted by J.-L. Fagnart, avocat
         
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
 composed of: C. Gulmann, President of the Chamber, S. von Bahr and R. Silva de Lapuerta (Rapporteur), Judges, 
         
 Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro, Registrar: R. Grass, 
         
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion makes the following 
Order
            
 By application lodged at the Court Registry on April 2003, Mr Latino brought an appeal under Article of the Statute
         of the Court of Justice against the judgment of the Court of First Instance of February in Case T-145/Latino   v  
         Commission  [2003] ECR II-(hereinafter the  
         contested judgment) in which that Court, first, annulled the decision of the Commission of the European Communities of August rejecting
         his application seeking acknowledgment of the occupational origin of his arthrosis-related damage (hereinafter the  
         contested decision), but only in so far as the decision charged to him the fees and incidental expenses of the doctor appointed by him to the
         Medical Committee and half of the fees and incidental expenses of the third doctor appointed to that Committee, and, secondly,
         dismissed the remainder of his application. 
         
Legal background
            
 The first subparagraph of Article 73(1) of the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Communities (hereinafter the
          
         Staff Regulations) provides that an official is insured, from the date of his entering the service, against the risk of occupational disease
         and of accident, subject to rules drawn up by common agreement of the institutions of the Communities.  
         
            
 Article 73(2)(b) and (c) of the Staff Regulations states that the benefits payable are, in the event of total permanent invalidity,
         payment to the official of a lump sum equal to eight times his annual basic salary calculated on the basis of the monthly
         amounts of salary received during the months before the accident, and, in the event of partial permanent invalidity, payment
         of a proportion of that sum, calculated by reference to the scale laid down in the rules referred to in Article 73(1). 
         
            
 The Rules on the insurance of officials of the European Communities against the risk of accident and occupational disease
         (hereinafter the  
         Rules on Insurance) specify, as required by Article of the Staff Regulations, the conditions under which the official is insured against
         the risks of accident and occupational disease. 
         
            
 Article of those rules states that: 1. The diseases contained in the  
         European List of Occupational Diseases annexed to the Commission Recommendation of May and to any supplements thereto shall be considered occupational diseases
         to the extent to which the official has been exposed to the risk of contracting them in the performance of his duties with
         the European Communities.2. Any disease or aggravation of a pre-existing disease not included in the List referred to in paragraph shall also be
         considered an occupational disease if it is sufficiently established that such disease or aggravation arose in the course
         of or in connection with the performance by the official of his duties with the Communities.
         
            
 The first subparagraph of Article 17(1) of the Rules on Insurance states that an official who requests application of those
         rules on grounds of an occupational disease must submit a statement to the administration of the institution to which he belongs
         within a reasonable period following the onset of the disease or the date on which it was diagnosed for the first time.  
         
            
 The first subparagraph of Article 17(2) of those rules provides that the administration is to hold an inquiry in order to
         obtain all the particulars necessary to determine the nature of the disease, whether it has resulted from the official's occupation,
         and also the circumstances in which it arose. The third subparagraph states that after seeing the report drawn up following
         the inquiry, the doctor(s) appointed by the institutions are to state his or their findings as provided for in Article of those rules.  
         
            
 Article of the Rules on Insurance permits the administration to obtain any expert medical opinion necessary for the implementation
         of the rules. 
         
            
 Article of the Rules on Insurance states that decisions recognising the occupational nature of a disease and assessing
         the degree of permanent invalidity are to be taken by the appointing authority in accordance with the procedure laid down
         in Article of the rules, on the basis of the findings of the doctor(s) appointed by the institutions, and, where the official
         so requests, after consulting the Medical Committee referred to in Article of the rules. 
         
            
 The first subparagraph of Article of the Rules on Insurance states that, before taking a decision pursuant to Article 19,
         the appointing authority is to notify the official or those entitled under him of the draft decision and of the findings of
         the doctor(s) appointed by the institution. The second subparagraph of Article provides that within a period of days
         the official may request that the Medical Committee provided for in Article deliver its opinion. 
         
            
 Under the first subparagraph of Article 23(1) of the Rules on Insurance, the Medical Committee is to consist of three doctors,
         of whom one is to be appointed by the appointing authority, one is to be appointed by the official concerned, and one is to
         be appointed by agreement between the first two doctors. The third subparagraph of Article 23(1) provides that on completing
         its proceedings, the Medical Committee is to set out its opinion in a report to be communicated to the appointing authority
         and to the official. 
         The facts
            
 The facts of the case, as set out in the contested judgment, may be summarised as follows.  
         
            
 The applicant took up his duties in the service of the European Communities in 1964.  
         
            
 From to 1994, as the result of an initial medical opinion relating to arthrosis-related, cervical, and lumbar problems
         suffered by the applicant, the latter carried out his duties in a sitting position and was relieved of the obligation to carry
         heavy weights.  
         
            
 By Commission decision of June 1994, the applicant was granted an invalidity pension under Article of the Staff Regulations
         with effect from July 1994. 
         
            
 Following a request by the applicant for the recognition of the occupational nature of a respiratory disease from which he
         suffered, the Commission held an inquiry, the result of which was that Dr Dalem, the doctor appointed by that institution,
         stated in relation to the arthrosis-related damage that it did not appear to him that that damage was the result of an occupational
         disease. On the basis of those findings, and of the opinion of Professor Bartsch, the Commission, in a draft decision of February 1996, refused to recognise the arthrosis-related damage as having an occupational origin.  
         
            
 On May 1996, the applicant submitted a fresh request for the recognition of the occupational nature of his arthrosis-related
         damage. Although the Commission took the view that this had already been considered by the previous inquiry, it accepted that
         request, which sought in particular a finding that the Medical Committee should treat the pulmonary symptoms and the arthrosis-related
         damage as arising from separate diseases.  
         
            
 The new Medical Committee appointed for that purpose held that the applicant was suffering from  
         degenerative arthrosis-related damage, but that  
         there was a lack of sufficient evidence to show that this originated in the course of or in connection with the performance
         of duties with the Communities. In the light of those findings, the Commission, by letter of November 1998, confirmed its draft decision of February
         1996, refusing to accept that the arthrosis-related damage from which the applicant suffered had an occupational origin. 
         
         
            
 On January 1999, the applicant submitted a complaint against that decision. On March 1999, following a meeting of the
          
         interservices group of the Commission, he lodged a summary of his complaint.  
         
            
 The Commission allowed the complaint, and referred the matter once again to the Medical Committee, requesting it to draw up
         an additional, more detailed, report, particularly in relation to the question of whether the performance of the applicant's
         duties had contributed to the emergence, the development, the aggravation or the acceleration of his arthrosis-related damage.
          
         
            
 In its opinion issued on April 2000, the Medical Committee concluded that: In the current state of medical knowledge, it cannot be held to be proved that this polyarthrosis originated in the course
         of or in connection with the performance of his duties with the Communities. Nor is it proved that the performance of those
         duties contributed to the emergence, the development, the aggravation or the acceleration of the degenerative symptoms with
         which Mr Benito Latino presented. Objectivity requires the Committee to say that while the influence of occupational activities
         on the degenerative symptoms is not proved, it cannot be entirely ruled out. But the Committee points out that the question
         referred to it was not whether an influence of this kind is possible, but whether it is proved.
         
            
 By letter of August 2000, the Commission notified the applicant of the opinion of the Medical Committee and confirmed its
         draft decision of February 1996, which has now become the contested decision. On November 2000, the applicant submitted
         a complaint against that decision. That complaint has not been expressly rejected.  
         
            
 By application lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on June 2001, the applicant brought an action for
         annulment of the contested decision. 
         The contested judgment  
            
 In support of his application to the Court of First Instance, the applicant alleged, first, infringement of Article of
         the Staff Regulations citing the purportedly incomprehensible and incoherent nature of the Medical Committee's opinion. Secondly,
         he alleged infringement of that article of the Staff Regulations, of Article 3(2) of the Rules on Insurance, and failure to
         observe the duty to have regard to the welfare of officials and the principle of proportionality, in connection with the purported
         impossibility of establishing scientific proof of the occupational origin of the arthrosis-related damage. Thirdly, he alleged
         that the Commission had infringed Article of the Rules on Insurance. 
         
            
 By the contested judgment, the Court of First Instance annulled the contested decision, in so far as it charged to the applicant
         the fees and incidental expenses of the doctor appointed by him to the Medical Committee and half of the fees and incidental
         expenses of the third doctor appointed to that committee, and dismissed the remainder of the application. 
         
            
 In essence, as regards the applicant's first plea, alleging infringement of Article of the Staff Regulations and citing
         the purportedly incomprehensible and incoherent nature of the Medical Committee's opinion, the Court of First Instance, at
         paragraphs to of the contested judgment, dismissed that plea, holding that the successive opinions of the Medical Committee
         were entirely valid, having regard in particular to the weight of expert opinion and to the medical reports relating to the
         applicant on which those opinions were based and to the difficulty of assessing the causes of the illness, which involved
         a  
         multifactorial disease.  
         
            
 As regards the second plea, alleging infringement of Article of the Staff Regulations, of Article 3(2) of the Rules on
         Insurance and failure to observe the duty to have regard to the welfare of officials and the principle of proportionality,
         in conncection with the alleged impossibility of proving the occupational origin of the arthrosis-related damage in question,
         the Court of First Instance held, at paragraphs to of the contested judgment, that, having regard to the principle that
         the onus lay on the applicant to prove to the requisite legal standard that the disease from which he was suffering had an
         occupational origin, he had failed to satisfy those evidential requirements.  
         
            
 The applicant's third plea, alleging infringement of Article of the Rules on Insurance, was also dismissed as unfounded
         by the Court of First Instance, which held that the proceedings before the Commission made reference, from the time of the
         adoption of the draft decision of February 1996, to arthrosis-related damage, and, accordingly, that the Commission was
         entitled, without being in breach of that provision, to refuse to adopt a second draft decision following the applicant's
         new request of May 1996. 
         The appeal
            
 In his appeal, the applicant claims that the Court should: 
         
─
 principally, declare that the appeal is admissible and well founded, and set aside the second point of the operative part
            of the contested judgment; 
          principally, declare that the appeal is admissible and well founded, and set aside the second point of the operative part
         of the contested judgment; 
         
─
 in the alternative, annul the contested decision; 
          in the alternative, annul the contested decision; 
         
─
 in any event, make an order as to costs in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Rules of Procedure.  
          in any event, make an order as to costs in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Rules of Procedure.  
         
            
 The Commission contends that the Court should: 
         
─
 declare that the appeal is inadmissible, or, failing that, unfounded; 
          declare that the appeal is inadmissible, or, failing that, unfounded; 
         
─
 decide, in accordance with Article of the Rules of Procedure, that the applicant should bear the whole of the costs of
            the appeal. 
          decide, in accordance with Article of the Rules of Procedure, that the applicant should bear the whole of the costs of
         the appeal. 
         
 The pleas in law on which the appeal is based
         
            
 In support of his appeal, Mr Latino relies on two pleas in law, claiming, first, that the Court of First Instance failed to
         apply the general principle of law  
         semper in dubiis benigniora praeferanda sunt, and, second, that the Court of First Instance failed to take account of the limits of the competence of the Medical Committees.
         
         
            
 By his first plea, Mr Latino claims that the Court of First Instance failed to consider the application to the present case
         of the general principle of law  
         semper in dubiis benigniora praeferanda sunt. He translates this principle, taken from the Code of the Emperor Justinian, as meaning that in case of doubt, the most favourable
         solution is to be preferred and provides several examples, taken in particular from criminal law, in which this principle
         may fall to be taken into account. He argues that the principle must be regarded as part of the modern legal culture. The
         application of that general legal principle would require a broad interpretation of certain provisions of secondary Community
         law, including in particular Article 3(2) of the Rules on Insurance.  
         
            
 By his second plea, Mr Latino claims that in the contested judgment the Court of First Instance also failed to consider an
         alleged failure to take into account the limits of the competence of the Medical Committees. 
         
            
 The second plea is in two parts. In the first, the applicant argues that the Medical Committee, following its first opinion
         issued on March 1998, had exhausted its competence. In the second, the applicant calls into question the impartiality of
         some of the members of that Medical Committee. 
          Assessment
         
            
 It should be noted at the outset that, under Article of its Rules of Procedure, where an appeal is clearly inadmissible
         or clearly unfounded, the Court may at any time by reasoned order dismiss the appeal in whole or in part.  
          The first plea 
         
            
 As regards the first plea, the applicant considers that the contested judgment failed to apply the general principle of law
          
         semper in dubiis benigniora praeferanda sunt, which, according to him, would have the result that in case of doubt as to the occupational origin of the disease from which
         he suffers, his claim should be accepted as being well founded. 
         
            
 Such a broad interpretation of that principle cannot in any event be accepted.  
         
            
 First, such an interpretation is incompatible with the wording of Article 3(2) of the Rules on Insurance. That provision,
         which takes the form of a rule of positive law and which, as such, prevails over the principle on which the applicant relies,
         clearly sets a precise limit on recognition of diseases as occupational in origin, by requiring that, in the case of diseases
         other than those included in the list annexed to Commission Recommendation 90/326/EEC of May to the Member States
         concerning the adoption of a European schedule of occupational diseases (OJ L , p. 39), such recognition is to be
         subject to the requirement that it be  
         sufficiently established that such disease or aggravation arose in the course of or in connection with the performance by
         the official of his duties with the Communities. That provision precludes the adoption of the broad interpretation put forward by the applicant, as it is the Community legislature
         itself which has restricted the scope of the presumption in favour of the official concerned. According to those rules, the
         onus is on the latter to prove the existence of a causal link between the performance of his duties and the disease. The broad
         interpretation suggested by the applicant would have the effect of reversing the onus of proof, which rests in principle on
         the person seeking to be covered by those rules.  
         
            
 Secondly, it should be noted that the purpose of Article 3(2) of the Rules on Insurance is to supplement Article 3(1), which
         contains a presumption in favour of the official as regards certain diseases contained in the European list of occupational
         diseases annexed to Recommendation 90/326. That list therefore sets an initial limit on the application of the principle relied
         on by the applicant and any claim that the definition of occupational disease should be broadly construed. Where a disease
         is not included in that list, proof of a causal link between the performance of duties and that disease is necessary in order
         for the occupational origin of the disease to be recognised, and the competent administrative authority cannot be required
         to accept the occupational character of such a disease solely on the ground that there is doubt as to its origin.  
         
            
 In those circumstances, the first plea in law should be dismissed as being plainly unfounded. 
          The second plea in law
         
            
 As regards the second plea in law, it should be pointed out that Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court, read
         in conjunction with the first subparagraph of Article 42(2) of those Rules, prohibits in principle the introduction of new
         pleas in law in the course of proceedings, unless those pleas are based on legal and factual material that has arisen in the
         course of those proceedings (order in Case C-352/P  
         Eridania and Others   v  
         Council  [2001] ECR I-5037, paragraph 52).  
         
            
 It is clear from the Court's case-law that in an appeal the Court's jurisdiction is confined to review of the findings of
         law on the pleas argued before the Court of First Instance (see the order, cited above, in  
         Eridania and Others   v  
         Council, paragraph 53; judgment in Case C-121/P  
         O'Hannrachain   v  
         Parliament  [2003] ECR I-5539, paragraph 39).  
         
            
 The two parts of the second plea relied on by the applicant in support of his appeal must be regarded as being new pleas,
         submitted for the first time for consideration by the Court of Justice. It is not in dispute that before the Court of First
         Instance it formed no part of the applicant's case that following its first opinion issued on November 1998, the Medical
         Committee had exhausted its competence, nor that the latter was a  
         court which failed to observe the necessary requirement of impartiality which applies to all courts and tribunals.  
         
            
 It follows that this plea, which did not form part of the application before the Court of First Instance, is a new plea, submitted
         for the first time before the Court of Justice, and is accordingly inadmissible.  
         
            
 In accordance with Article of the Rules of Procedure, the appeal should therefore be dismissed as being clearly unfounded,
         as regards the first plea in law, and clearly inadmissible, as regards the second plea. 
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, which applies to the procedure on appeal by virtue of Article thereof,
         the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party's pleadings.
         Since the Commission has applied for the applicant to be ordered to pay the costs and the latter has been unsuccessful, he
         must be ordered to pay the costs.  
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
 hereby orders:
         
1.
 The appeal is dismissed.
2.
 Mr Latino shall bear the costs.
 Luxembourg, February 2004. 
         
R. Grass 
G. Gulmann  
Registrar
President of the Fifth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: French.
Top  
 