
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-78/Bundesverband Güterkraftverkehr und Logistik eV (BGL)vFederal Republic of Germany, represented by Hauptzollamt Friedrichshafen(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Bundesgerichtshof)
         
«(Free movement of goods – External transit operation – Transport under cover of a TIR carnet – Offences or irregularities – Possibility for a guaranteeing association to prove the place where the offence or irregularity was committed – Time-limit for furnishing proof – Existence of an obligation for the Member State which detects an offence or irregularity to investigate the place where it
               was committed)»
            
Opinion of Advocate General Léger delivered on January Judgment of the Court, September Summary of the Judgment
1..
Free movement of goods – Community external transit – Transportation under cover of a TIR carnet – Offences and irregularities – Place where the offence or irregularity was committed – Furnishing of proof by a guaranteeing association within the limitation period – Whether permissible  (Commission Regulation No 2454/93, Arts 454(3), first subpara., and 455) 
2..
Free movement of goods – Community external transit – Transportation under cover of a TIR carnet – Offences and irregularities – Place where the offence or irregularity was committed – Furnishing of proof by a guaranteeing association – Point at which time starts to run and length of period – Principle of legal certainty  
3..
Free movement of goods – Community external transit – Transportation under cover of a TIR carnet – Offences and irregularities – Obligations of the Member State detecting an offence – Obligation to investigate the actual place where the offence was committed and the identity of the customs debtors – Not included   (Commission Regulation No 2454/93, Arts and 455) 
1.
 The first subparagraph of Article 454(3) of Regulation No 2454/laying down provisions for the implementation of Regulation
         No 2913/establishing the Community Customs Code does not preclude a guaranteeing association against which proceedings
         are brought by a Member State for payment of customs duties on the basis of the guarantee contract it has concluded with that
         State in accordance with the TIR Convention from being able to furnish proof of the place where the offence or irregularity
         was committed, provided that that proof is furnished within the period laid down in that provision, that time-limit being
         peremptory. see para. 58, operative part 2.
 The first subparagraph of Article 454(3) and Article of Regulation No 2454/laying down provisions for the implementation
         of Regulation No 2913/establishing the Community Customs Code must be interpreted as meaning that the period within which
         a guaranteeing association against which proceedings are brought by a Member State for payment of customs duties on the basis
         of the guarantee contract it has concluded with that State in accordance with the TIR Convention may furnish proof of the
         place where the offence or irregularity was committed is two years running from the date of the claim for payment made to
         it. As those provisions are manifestly erroneous and provide for several periods which could be taken into consideration, and
         having regard to the principle of legal certainty which constitutes a general principle of Community law and requires in particular
         that rules imposing charges on a taxpayer are clear and precise so that he can ascertain unequivocally what his rights and
         obligations are and take steps accordingly, the period applicable to the guaranteeing association is the one which is most
         favourable to it out of those which may be identified by the various references made in Articles and of the implementing
         regulation. see paras 71-73, operative part 3.
 Articles and of Regulation No 2454/laying down provisions for the implementation of Regulation No 2913/establishing
         the Community Customs Code do not require the Member State which detects an offence or irregularity in connection with a transport
         operation under cover of a TIR carnet, in addition to making the notifications prescribed in Article 455(1) of that regulation
         and an enquiry to the office of destination, to investigate the actual place where the offence or irregularity was committed
         and the identity of the customs debtors, by seeking the administrative assistance of another Member State for elucidation
         of the facts. see para. 84, operative part JUDGMENT OF THE COURTSeptember (1)
((Free movement of goods – External transit operation – Transport under cover of a TIR carnet – Offences or irregularities – Possibility for a guaranteeing association to prove the place where the offence or irregularity was committed – Time-limit for furnishing proof – Existence of an obligation for the Member State which detects an offence or irregularity to investigate the place where it
                  was committed))
               
 In Case C-78/01, 
             REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Bundesgerichtshof (Germany) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings
            pending before that court between
            
Bundesverband Güterkraftverkehr und Logistik eV (BGL)
and
Bundesrepublik Deutschland, represented by the  
            Hauptzollamt Friedrichshafen, third party:Préservatrice Foncière Tiard SA,
 on the interpretation of Articles and of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2454/of July laying down provisions
            for the implementation of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L 253, p. 1),
THE COURT,,
 composed of: G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias, President, M. Wathelet, R. Schintgen and C.W.A. Timmermans (Presidents of Chambers), C. Gulmann, A. La Pergola, V. Skouris, F. Macken, N. Colneric, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues and A. Rosas (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: P. Léger, Registrar: H. von Holstein, Deputy Registrar, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
 Bundesverband Güterkraftverkehr und Logistik eV (BGL), by M. Gräfin von Westerholt and M. Lausterer, Rechtsanwälte, 
               
─
 the Hauptzollamt Friedrichshafen, by H.E. Brandner and J. Kummer, Rechtsanwälte, 
               
─
 Préservatrice Foncière Tiard SA, by H.-J. Prieß, Rechtsanwalt, 
               
─
 the German Government, by W.-D. Plessing and B. Muttelsee-Schön, acting as Agents, 
               
─
 the Commission of the European Communities, by J.C. Schieferer, acting as Agent, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of Bundesverband Güterkraftverkehr und Logistik eV (BGL), represented by M. Gräfin von
               Westerholt and M. Lausterer; the Hauptzollamt Friedrichshafen, represented by J. Kummer; Préservatrice Foncière Tiard SA,
               represented by H.-J. Prieß; and the Commission, represented by U. Wölker, acting as Agent, at the hearing on July 2002,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By order of January 2001, received at the Court Registry on February 2001, the Bundesgerichtshof (Federal Court of Justice)
         referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC two questions on the interpretation of Articles and
         of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2454/of July laying down provisions for the implementation of Council Regulation
         (EEC) No 2913/establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L 253, p. 1,  
         the implementing regulation). 
         
            
 Those questions were raised in proceedings between Bundesverband Güterkraftverkehr und Logistik eV (
         BGL), a guaranteeing association, and the Bundesrepublik Deutschland (Federal Republic of Germany), represented by the Hauptzollamt
         (Principal Customs Office) Friedrichshafen (
         the Hauptzollamt), concerning the payment of a sum representing the customs duties due as a result of irregularities committed in the course
         of international transport operations under cover of TIR carnets. 
         
Legal background
 Provisions applicable to TIR transit
          The TIR Convention
         
            
 The Customs Convention on the International Transport of Goods under cover of TIR Carnets (
         the TIR Convention) was signed in Geneva (Switzerland) on November 1975. The Federal Republic of Germany is a party to the Convention, as
         is the European Community, which approved it by Council Regulation (EEC) No 2112/of July (OJ L 252, p. 1).
         
         
            
 The TIR Convention provides, in particular, that goods carried under the TIR procedure it establishes are not to be subject
         to the payment or deposit of import or export duties and taxes at customs offices en route. 
         
            
 For those facilities to be applied, the TIR Convention requires that the goods be accompanied throughout the transport operation
         by a standard document, the TIR carnet, which serves to check the regularity of the operation. It also requires that the transport
         operations be guaranteed by associations approved by the contracting parties, in accordance with the provisions of Article
         of the Convention. 
         
            
 Article 6(1) of the TIR Convention provides as follows: Subject to such conditions and guarantees as it shall determine, each Contracting Party may authorise associations to issue
         TIR carnets, either directly or through corresponding associations, and to act as guarantors.
         
            
 A TIR carnet consists of a set of sheets each comprising vouchers No and No with the corresponding counterfoils, on which
         appears all the necessary information, one pair of vouchers being used for each territory crossed. At the start of the transport
         operation, counterfoil No is left with the customs office of departure; discharge takes place once counterfoil No is returned
         from the customs office of exit in the same customs territory. The procedure is repeated for each territory crossed, using
         the pairs of vouchers in the one carnet. 
         
            
 TIR carnets are printed and distributed by the International Road Transport Union (
         IRU), established in Geneva, for issue to users by the national guaranteeing associations authorised to do so by the administrations
         of the contracting parties. The TIR carnet is issued by the guaranteeing association of the country of departure, the guarantee
         provided being covered by the IRU and a pool of insurers established in Switzerland. 
         
            
 Under Article of the TIR Convention: 
         
1.
 The guaranteeing association shall undertake to pay the import or export duties and taxes, together with any default interest,
         due under the customs laws and regulations of the country in which an irregularity has been noted in connection with a TIR
         operation. It shall be liable, jointly and severally with the persons from whom the sums mentioned above are due, for payment
         of such sums.
         
2.
 In cases where the laws and regulations of a Contracting Party do not provide for payment of import or export duties and taxes
         as provided for in paragraph above, the guaranteeing association shall undertake to pay, under the same conditions, a sum
         equal to the amount of the import or export duties and taxes and any default interest.
         
3.
 Each Contracting Party shall determine the maximum sum per TIR carnet, which may be claimed from the guaranteeing association
         on the basis of the provisions of paragraphs and above.
         
4.
 The liability of the guaranteeing association to the authorities of the country where the customs office of departure is situated
         shall commence at the time when the TIR carnet is accepted by the customs office. In the succeeding countries through which
         goods are transported under the TIR procedure, this liability shall commence at the time when the goods are imported ...
         ...
         
7.
 When payment of sums mentioned in paragraphs and of this Article becomes due, the competent authorities shall so far as
         possible require payment from the person or persons directly liable before making a claim against the guaranteeing association.
         
            
 Article 10(2) of the TIR Convention provides: When the customs authorities of a country have discharged a TIR carnet unconditionally they can no longer claim from the guaranteeing
         association payment of the sums mentioned in Article 8(1) and (2) unless the certificate of discharge was obtained in an improper
         or fraudulent manner.
         
            
 Article of the TIR Convention reads as follows: 
         
1.
 Where a TIR carnet has not been discharged or has been discharged conditionally, the competent authorities shall not have
         the right to claim payment of the sums mentioned in Article 8(1) and (2) from the guaranteeing association unless, within
         a period of one year from the date of acceptance of the TIR carnet by those authorities, they have notified the association
         in writing of the non-discharge or conditional discharge. The same provision shall apply where the certificate of discharge
         was obtained in an improper or fraudulent manner, save that the period shall be two years.
         
2.
 The claim for payment of the sums referred to in Article 8(1) and (2) shall be made to the guaranteeing association at the
         earliest three months after the date on which the association was informed that the carnet had not been discharged or had
         been discharged conditionally or that the certificate of discharge had been obtained in an improper or fraudulent manner and
         at the latest not more than two years after that date. However, in cases which, during the abovementioned period of two years,
         become the subject of legal proceedings, any claim for payment shall be made within one year of the date on which the decision
         of the court becomes enforceable.
         
3.
 The guaranteeing association shall have a period of three months, from the date when a claim for payment is made upon it,
         in which to pay the amounts claimed. The sums paid shall be reimbursed to the association if, within the two years following
         the date on which the claim for payment was made, it has been established to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that
         no irregularity was committed in connection with the transport operation in question.
         
            
 Article of the TIR Convention provides: When it is not possible to establish in which territory an irregularity was committed it shall be deemed to have been committed
         in the territory of the Contracting Party where it is detected.
          Community law
         
            
 For the purpose of applying the TIR Convention, the European Community constitutes a single customs territory. 
         
            
 Article of the implementing regulation contains a number of provisions specific to the TIR Convention and to the Customs
         Convention on the ATA Carnet for the Temporary Admission of Goods (
         the ATA Convention) done at Brussels on December 1961. That article provides: 
         
1.
 This Article shall apply without prejudice to the specific provisions of the TIR and ATA Conventions concerning the liability
         of the guaranteeing associations when a TIR or an ATA carnet is being used.
         
2.
 Where it is found that, in the course of or in connection with a transport operation carried out under cover of a TIR carnet
         or a transit operation carried out under cover of an ATA carnet, an offence or irregularity has been committed in a particular
         Member State, the recovery of duties and other charges which may be payable shall be effected by that Member State in accordance
         with Community or national provisions, without prejudice to the institution of criminal proceedings.
         
3.
 Where it is not possible to determine in which territory the offence or irregularity was committed, such offence or irregularity
         shall be deemed to have been committed in the Member State where it was detected unless, within the period laid down in Article
         455(1), proof of the regularity of the operation or of the place where the offence or irregularity was actually committed
         is furnished to the satisfaction of the customs authorities.
          Where no such proof is furnished and the said offence or irregularity is thus deemed to have been committed in the Member
         State in which it was detected, the duties and other charges relating to the goods concerned shall be levied by that Member
         State in accordance with Community or national provisions.If the Member State where the said offence or irregularity was actually committed is subsequently determined, the duties and
         other charges (apart from those levied, pursuant to the second subparagraph, as own resources of the Community) to which the
         goods are liable in that Member State shall be returned to it by the Member State which had originally recovered them. In
         that case, any overpayment shall be repaid to the person who had originally paid the charges.Where the amount of the duties and other charges originally levied and returned by the Member State which had recovered them
         is smaller than that of the duties and other charges due in the Member State where the offence or irregularity was actually
         committed, that Member State shall levy the difference in accordance with Community or national provisions.The customs administrations of the Member States shall take the necessary measures to deal with any offence or irregularity
         and to impose effective penalties.
         
            
 Article of the implementing regulation provides: 
         
1.
 Where an offence or irregularity is found to have been committed in the course of or in connection with a transport operation
         carried out under cover of a TIR carnet or a transit operation carried out under cover of an ATA carnet, the customs authorities
         shall notify the holder of the TIR carnet or ATA carnet and the guaranteeing association within the period prescribed in Article
         11(1) of the TIR Convention or Article 6(4) of the ATA Convention, as the case may be.
         
2.
 Proof of the regularity of the operation carried out under cover of a TIR carnet or an ATA carnet within the meaning of the
         first subparagraph of Article 454(3) shall be furnished within the period prescribed in Article 11(2) of the TIR Convention
         or Article 7(1) and (2) of the ATA Convention, as the case may be.
         
3.
 Such proof may be furnished to the satisfaction of the customs authorities  
         inter alia:
         
(a)
 by production of a document certified by the customs authorities establishing that the goods in question have been presented
         at the office of destination. This document must include information enabling the goods to be identified; or 
         
(b)
 by the production of a customs document issued in a third country showing release for home use, or a copy or photocopy thereof;
         such copy or photocopy must be certified as a true copy either by the body which endorsed the original document, or by the
         authorities of the third country concerned, or by the authorities of one of the Member States. This document must include
         information enabling the goods in question to be identified; or 
         
(c)
 for the purposes of the ATA Convention, by the evidence referred to in Article of that Convention.
         
            
 Under Article of the implementing regulation: For the purposes of Article 8(4) of the TIR Convention, where a consignment enters the customs territory of the Community
         or starts from a customs office of departure situated in the customs territory of the Community, the guaranteeing association
         shall become or shall be responsible to the customs authorities of each Member State the territory of which the TIR consignment
         enters, up to the point at which it leave the customs territory of the Community or up to the customs office of destination
         in that territory.
         
            
 Articles and of the implementing regulation were amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 2787/of December
         (OJ L 330, p. 1). 
         
            
 Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 2787/reads as follows: Certain corrections should be made to the content with regard to references to the TIR Convention.
         
            
 Article 1(54) of Regulation No 2787/provides: In the first subparagraph of Article 454(3), the words  
         Article 455(1) are replaced by the words  
         Article 455(2).
         
            
 Article 1(55) of Regulation No 2787/provides: In Article 455(2), the words  
         Article 11(2) of the TIR Convention are replaced by the words  
         Article 11(3) of the TIR Convention.
         
            
 In accordance with the first subparagraph of Article 4(2) of Regulation No 2787/2000, those provisions apply from July 2001.
         
          Mutual assistance between the administrative authorities of the Member States
         
            
 This is provided for by Council Regulation (EEC) No 1468/of May on mutual assistance between the administrative
         authorities of the Member States and cooperation between the latter and the Commission to ensure the correct application of
         the law on customs or agricultural matters (OJ L 144, p. 1), as amended by Council Regulation (EEC) No 945/of March
         (OJ L 90, p. 3) (
         Regulation No 1468/81). 
         
            
 Article 9(1) of Regulation No 1468/provides: 
         
1.
 At the request of the applicant authority, the requested authority shall carry out appropriate enquiries or arrange for such
         enquiries to be carried out concerning operations which are or appear to the applicant authority to be contrary to the law
         on customs or agricultural matters.
          In order to carry out these enquiries the requested authority or the administrative authority which it has addressed shall
         proceed as though it were acting on its own account or at the request of another authority in its own country.The requested authority shall communicate the results of these enquiries to the applicant authority.
         The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 It appears from the order for reference that on March the British transport undertaking Freight Forwarding Services
         (
         FFS), as the holder of a TIR carnet issued by Freight Transport Association Ltd, a British member association of the IRU, cleared
         at the Hauptzollamt, the customs office of departure, a consignment of 12.million cigarettes from Switzerland to be transported
         to Morocco via the customs office of destination of Algeciras (Spain). 
         
            
 The national court states that BGL is an association governed by German law which is authorised as a guaranteeing association
         in accordance with Article of the TIR Convention. Its liability as guarantor for the holder of a TIR carnet is limited to
         a maximum of ECU 000. Since this is a guarantee as  
         principal debtor under German law, BGL cannot require the Hauptzollamt to proceed against the holder of the TIR carnet first. If BGL has to
         perform its obligation under the guarantee it has given, it will then have a right of recourse under the guarantee agreement
         entered into with the IRU. The IRU has in turn concluded an insurance contract with an insurance pool to which Préservatrice
         Foncière Tiard SA (
         PFA), the intervener in the main proceedings, belongs. 
         
            
 The latest date for presenting the goods at the Algeciras customs office had been fixed at March 1994. However, the Hauptzollamt
         did not receive a certificate of discharge from the customs office of destination. In response to its request, however, the
         customs office of destination informed the Hauptzollamt on July that the goods had not been presented. The original
         TIR carnet, subsequently found and sent to the IRU, bore the forged stamp of the customs office of destination with the date
         March 1994. 
         
            
 By letter of August 1994, the Hauptzollamt notified BGL of the failure to discharge the TIR carnet. It sent FFS, by registered
         letter with return receipt, a notice of assessment dated August for DEM in respect of the transport operation
         in question. FFS did not pay that sum. 
         
            
 By an action brought before the Landgericht (Regional Court) Frankfurt am Main (Germany) in February 1996, the Hauptzollamt
         claimed from BGL, in respect of the duties owed as a result of the failure to discharge the TIR carnet, the maximum amount
         under the guarantee, namely DEM 132.75, plus default interest. In its defence submitted on May 1996, BGL claimed that
         the consignment of cigarettes in question had been unloaded in Spain and offered to produce witnesses to prove that claim.
         The national court states that, if that fact were proved, it would be the Spanish State, not the German State, which was owed
         the duties by FFS, in which case the action on the guarantee would be unfounded. The Landgericht Frankfurt am Main and the
         Oberlandesgericht (Higher Regional Court) Frankfurt am Main (Germany) on appeal nevertheless ruled in favour of the Hauptzollamt.
         
         
            
 BGL appealed on a point of law to the Bundesgerichtshof. In the context of that appeal, the Bundesgerichtshof is uncertain
         as to whether, because of the expiry of the period for submitting proof, BGL may be barred from providing proof of the place
         where the irregularity or offence was committed, as a guarantor is entitled to under Paragraph of the Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch
         (German Civil Code,  
         the BGB). The national court observes that BGL first raised this plea only in the defence it submitted to the Landgericht Frankfurt
         am Main on May 1996, although the Hauptzollamt had informed it by letter of August of the failure to discharge the
         TIR carnet. 
         
            
 The Bundesgerichtshof states that, in the present case, the TIR carnet bearing the forged stamp of the customs office of destination
         does not amount to a certificate of discharge obtained in an improper or fraudulent manner within the meaning of the second
         sentence of Article 11(1) of the TIR Convention. According to that court, it is therefore the first sentence of that provision
         which applies, and the period for notifying the guaranteeing association of the failure to discharge the TIR carnet is therefore
         one year from the date of acceptance of the TIR carnet. 
         
            
 The national court considers that the provisions applicable are unclear. It is aware of the judgment in Joined Cases C-310/and C-406/Met-Trans and Sagpol [2000] ECR I-1797, in which the Court stated, in paragraph 44, that the first subparagraph of Article 454(3) of the implementing
         regulation unambiguously refers, as regards the length of the period in question, to Article 455(1) of that regulation, which
         in turn refers, as regards the length of the period it lays down, to Article 11(1) of the TIR Convention. The Court further
         observed, in that paragraph, that only one period is mentioned in Article 11(1) of the TIR Convention, namely a period of
         one year. The national court says, however, that that judgment does not refer to the period for furnishing proof applicable
         to the guaranteeing association. 
         
            
 In those circumstances the Bundesgerichtshof decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following questions to the Court
         for a preliminary ruling: 
         
1.
(a)
 Does the time-limit laid down in the first subparagraph of Article 454(3) of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2454/... for
         furnishing proof of the actual place of an offence or irregularity apply also where a Member State, pursuant to Article 454(2)
         and the first and second subparagraphs of Article 454(3) of Regulation No 2454/93, brings proceedings against the guaranteeing
         association for the payment of duties, and the association wishes to prove in those proceedings that the place where the offence
         or irregularity was actually committed is situated in another Member State? 
         
(b)
 If the answer to Question 1(a) is in the affirmative: 
         
(i)
 In such a case does the one-year time-limit in the first subparagraph of Article 454(3) and Article 455(1) of Regulation No
         2454/in conjunction with the first sentence of Article 11(1) of the TIR Convention or the two-year time-limit in Article
         455(2) of that regulation in conjunction with the first sentence of Article 11(2) of the TIR Convention apply? 
         
(ii)
 Does the time-limit for furnishing proof in the case set out in Question 1(a) apply in such a way that the guaranteeing association
         must submit its allegation under tender of evidence that the offence or irregularity was actually committed in another Member
         State within the time-limit and, if that is not done, is barred from offering that proof? 
         
2.
(a)
 Under Articles and of Regulation No 2454/93, is the Member State which finds that an offence or irregularity has been
         committed in connection with a transport operation under cover of a TIR carnet obliged as against the guaranteeing association,
         in addition to the notifications under Article 455(1) of that regulation and an enquiry to the customs office of destination,
         to investigate where the offence or irregularity was actually committed and who is the customs debtor within the meaning of
         Article 203(3) of Regulation No 2913/92, by requesting another Member State for administrative assistance in ascertaining
         the facts (see Council Regulation (EEC) No 1468/of May 1981, OJ L 144, p. 1)? 
         
(b)
 If the answer to Question 2(a) is in the affirmative, 
         
(i)
 If such an investigative obligation is infringed, is the offence or irregularity not deemed under the first subparagraph of
         Article 454(3) of Regulation No 2454/to have been committed in the Member State in which it was detected? 
         
(ii)
 Must the Member State which has detected the offence or irregularity, when claiming against the guaranteeing association,
         demonstrate and prove that such an investigative obligation has been complied with?
         
The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 Parts (a) and (b)(ii) of Question should be examined together. 
          Question 1(a) on the application to the guaranteeing association of the period for furnishing proof of the place of the irregularity
         and Question 1(b)(ii) on the nature of that period
         
            
 By parts (a) and (b)(ii) of Question 1, the national court essentially asks whether the period referred to in the first subparagraph
         of Article 454(3) of the implementing regulation, within which proof may be furnished that the actual place where the offence
         or irregularity was committed is in a Member State other than that which recovers the customs duties, is applicable to a guaranteeing
         association against which proceedings are brought by a Member State for payment of a sum representing customs duties, and
         whether that guaranteeing association must furnish such proof within that period and is otherwise barred from furnishing proof.
         
          Observations submitted to the Court
         
            
 BGL submits that a guaranteeing association is entitled to furnish proof of the place where the offence or irregularity was
         committed, but the time-limit referred to in the first subparagraph of Article 454(3) of the implementing regulation does
         not apply to it. The right to furnish such proof is recognised by German law, which applies to the guarantee contract concluded
         between the German State and BGL, and more particularly by Paragraph of the BGB on the guarantor's right to put forward
         the same defences as the principal debtor. The latter is entitled to provide such proof. BGL moreover observes that the guarantor's
         right to put forward the same defences as the principal debtor is not subject to any time-limit. 
         
            
 At the hearing, BGL pointed out the importance for it of proving that the irregularity was committed in another Member State,
         since under the guarantee contract it guarantees debts resulting from a TIR transport only with respect to the Federal Republic
         of Germany. Moreover, the system of compensation laid down in the third subparagraph of Article 454(3) of the implementing
         regulation refers only to the principal debtor of the customs debt, not the guaranteeing association. 
         
            
 PFA likewise considers that the guaranteeing association is entitled to furnish proof of the place where the offence or irregularity
         was committed. It submits that the notification of the existence of an irregularity to the guaranteeing association provided
         for in Article of the implementing regulation is an indication that the latter is entitled to furnish such proof. The
         reference to Article of the TIR Convention, a provision which mentions the guaranteeing association in all three paragraphs,
         confirms that view. 
         
            
 According to PFA, the entitlement of the guaranteeing association to furnish that proof must lead to the conclusion that the
         period laid down in the first subparagraph of Article 454(3) of the implementing regulation applies to such an association.
         It would otherwise have been necessary to make express provision for a different period. The reference to the TIR Convention
         also confirms that view. 
         
            
 As regards the nature of the period, PFA submits that it is not a peremptory period but one of a non-binding character, since
         all the relevant customs law is based on the idea that the customs debt must be paid by the real debtor to the real creditor.
         Material accuracy must therefore ultimately always take priority over subsidiary formal considerations such as rebuttable
         presumptions. 
         
            
 The Hauptzollamt and the German Government consider, on the other hand, that the guaranteeing association is not entitled
         to furnish proof of the place where the offence or irregularity was committed, and that the period laid down in the first
         subparagraph of Article 454(3) of the implementing regulation therefore does not apply to it. Neither the TIR Convention nor
         the implementing regulation provides for the possibility of furnishing that proof. 
         
            
 The German Government states that allowing the guaranteeing association the possibility of providing such proof, in the context
         of proceedings against the customs authorities in a civil court, would have the result that two different courts could have
         the same question to decide and might deliver contradictory judgments. The finance court would have jurisdiction over recovery
         of the customs debt owed by the holder of the TIR carnet, while recovery of the sums owed by the guaranteeing association
         would fall within the jurisdiction of the civil court, since the action for recovery is based on the guarantee contract. Those
         courts could arrive at different answers. 
         
            
 The German Government submits, consequently, that when interpreting Article of the implementing regulation account should
         be taken of the purpose of the guarantee, so that the findings of the finance court as to the place of the offence or irregularity
         cannot be called into question by divergent findings of the civil court. That has the consequence that the guarantor cannot
         raise the same defences as the principal debtor nor, in the present case, furnish proof of the place where the offence or
         irregularity was committed. 
         
            
 Should the Court accept that the guaranteeing association has a period within which it may furnish such proof, the Hauptzollamt
         and the German Government submit that that period is peremptory. The German Government states that, if it were accepted that
         that period is a procedural one, when relied on in proceedings between the customs authorities and the guaranteeing association,
         the latter would under German law have available the ordinary limitation period of years to provide proof of the place
         of the offence or irregularity, which would not guarantee the necessary legal certainty in relations between the guarantor
         and the customs authorities. Moreover, that would give rise to an obvious contradiction with the cases where Article 11(1)
         of the TIR Convention is directly applicable. 
         
            
 At the hearing, the Commission submitted that neither the TIR Convention nor the implementing regulation precludes the guaranteeing
         association from relying, in accordance with German law, on the defences which the principal debtor could raise, or, in the
         present case, from being able to prove the place where the offence or irregularity was committed. However, Community law requires
         that proof to be furnished within the period laid down in the first subparagraph of Article 454(3) of the implementing regulation.
         Moreover, that time-limit must be peremptory, since there is no reason why a guaranteeing association should be in a better
         position if it is taken to court than if it is not. 
          Findings of the Court
         
            
 BGL's rights and obligations are governed simultaneously by the TIR Convention, Community law and the guarantee contract,
         subject to German law, which it concluded with the Federal Republic of Germany. 
         
            
 Article 454(1) of the implementing regulation states that the regulation is to apply without prejudice to the specific provisions
         of the TIR Convention concerning the liability of the guaranteeing associations when a TIR carnet is used. 
         
            
 No provision of the TIR Convention expressly regulates the question whether the guaranteeing association may furnish proof
         of the place where an offence or irregularity was committed. Article 8(1) of the Convention merely sets out certain obligations
         towards the contracting parties to the Convention which the guaranteeing associations must enter into when they apply for
         authorisation to issue TIR carnets. Moreover, Article 11(3) of the Convention refers only to proof that there were no irregularities
         during a transport operation. 
         
            
 In German law, a guarantor is entitled to put forward against the creditor the same defences as the principal debtor. If German
         law alone were applicable in the main proceedings, then, provided this was not ruled out by the guarantee contract concluded
         between the parties, BGL would be entitled to furnish proof of the place where the offence or irregularity was committed,
         and would be subject to the conditions as regards time-limits prescribed by German law. 
         
            
 In the present case, however, it must be ascertained whether the implementing regulation, which, in accordance with the second
         paragraph of Article of the EC Treaty (now the second paragraph of Article EC), is directly applicable, contains provisions
         that preclude the right of the guaranteeing association to furnish proof of the place of the irregularity or lay down conditions
         for the exercise of that right which are essential for Community law to have full effect. 
         
            
 With respect to the right to furnish proof of the place where the offence or irregularity was committed, it must be observed
         that Articles and of the implementing regulation do not specify the person who must or may furnish that proof, and
         in any event do not exclude the possibility of that proof being furnished by the guaranteeing association. 
         
            
 Moreover, Article of that regulation refers to Article of the TIR Convention, which deals exclusively with the guaranteeing
         association in each of its three paragraphs. It follows that Article must be interpreted as not precluding the guaranteeing
         association from being able to furnish such proof. 
         
            
 Furthermore, respect for the right to a fair hearing in any procedure brought against a person which may lead to an act adversely
         affecting him, in particular a procedure which may lead to penalties being imposed, constitutes a fundamental principle of
         Community law. That principle requires that any person on whom a penalty may be imposed must be placed in a position in which
         he can effectively make known his view of the matters on the basis of which the penalty is imposed and can produce any evidence
         relevant to his defence (see, to that effect, Case C-135/Fiskano v  
         Commission [1994] ECR I-2885, paragraphs and 40, and Case C-142/Belgium v  
         Commission (
         Tubemeuse) [1990] ECR I-959, paragraphs and 47). 
         
            
 It follows from the above that the first subparagraph of Article 454(3) of the implementing regulation must be interpreted
         as not precluding a guaranteeing association from furnishing proof of the place where the offence or irregularity was committed.
         
         
            
 With respect to the period within which such proof must be furnished, it must be noted that the purpose of that proof is to
         contest the jurisdiction of the Member State which recovers the customs duties while identifying the Member State which will
         have jurisdiction to recover those duties where the presumption as to the place of the offence or irregularity is considered
         to be rebutted. 
         
            
 That other Member State must be determined speedily, so that it can take the necessary measures to recover the amounts due.
         The full effectiveness of Community law would therefore be affected if the question of the period for furnishing proof depended
         exclusively on national law, which might prescribe a period that was too long to make it legally and materially possible to
         recover amounts due in another Member State. 
         
            
 Consequently, the first subparagraph of Article 454(3) of the implementing regulation must be interpreted as meaning that
         the period it prescribes applies to a guaranteeing association against which proceedings are brought by a Member State for
         payment of customs duties on the basis of the guarantee contract it has concluded with that State in accordance with the TIR
         Convention, where that association wishes to furnish proof of the place where the offence or irregularity was committed. 
         
            
 The same aim of giving full effect to Community law requires that that time-limit should be a peremptory one, in that the
         guaranteeing association concerned must furnish the proof of the place where the offence or irregularity was committed within
         the period laid down in the first subparagraph of Article 454(3) of the implementing regulation, the proof otherwise being
         inadmissible. 
         
            
 The answer to parts (a) and (b)(ii) of Question must therefore be that the first subparagraph of Article 454(3) of the implementing
         regulation does not preclude a guaranteeing association against which proceedings are brought by a Member State for payment
         of customs duties on the basis of the guarantee contract it has concluded with that State in accordance with the TIR Convention
         from being able to furnish proof of the place where the offence or irregularity was committed, provided that that proof is
         furnished within the period laid down in that provision, that time-limit being peremptory. 
          Question 1(b)(i) on the period for furnishing proof
         
            
 By part (b)(i) of Question 1, the national court essentially asks what precisely is the length of the period prescribed in
         the first subparagraph of Article 454(3) of the implementing regulation. 
          Observations submitted to the Court
         
            
 The parties to the main proceedings, the German Government and the Commission acknowledge that the provisions applicable in
         this respect are unclear and inconsistent. They submit that the reference in the first subparagraph of Article 454(3) of the
         implementing regulation to Article 455(1) of that regulation and thereby to Article 11(1) of the TIR Convention is incorrect
         and was expressly corrected by Regulation No 2787/2000, which is not, however, applicable in the main proceedings. It was
         also observed that the latter regulation scarcely improves the situation, since it for its part again refers to a provision
         containing several time-limits. 
         
            
 The periods regarded as applicable in the present case are three months, one year or two years, depending on which part of
         Article of the TIR Convention is addressed by the reference in Article 455(1) of the implementing regulation. 
         
            
 BGL and PFA submit that, in the case in the main proceedings, it is a period of two years for furnishing proof which applies,
         under the first subparagraph of Article 454(3) in conjunction with Article 455(2) of the implementing regulation and the second
         sentence of Article 11(3) of the TIR Convention. According to BGL, those provisions must be interpreted consistently and logically.
         PFA observes that, having regard to the penal effect of the time-limit for bringing proof, the provision which is most favourable
         to the guaranteeing association should be taken into consideration, namely the provision as amended by Regulation No 2787/2000.
         The Hauptzollamt and the German Government, on the other hand, submit that, if it is possible for the guaranteeing association
         to furnish proof, the period for doing so is one year, as the Court held in  
         Met-Trans and Sagpol. 
          Findings of the Court
         
            
 The provisions in question are unclear and inconsistent. 
         
            
 As Advocate General Mischo observed in point of his Opinion in the  
         Met-Trans and Sagpol case, it may be considered that it was by inadvertence that the legislature inserted a reference to Article 455(1) in the
         first subparagraph of Article 454(3) of the implementing regulation, and that the reference should have been to Article 455(2)
         of that regulation. 
         
            
 Article 455(1) makes no mention anywhere of a period relating to proof of the place where the offence or irregularity was
         committed, but refers to the period within which the customs authorities must notify the holder of the TIR carnet and the
         guaranteeing association of the existence of such an offence or irregularity. By contrast, paragraph of that article deals
         with the period for proof of the regularity of the operation carried out under cover of the TIR carnet, and a reference to
         that provision would appear more consistent with regard to proof of the place where an offence or irregularity has been committed.
         
         
            
 Moreover, if the first subparagraph of Article 454(3) of the implementing regulation were to be read and interpreted as referring
         in fact to Article 455(1) of that regulation, the period for proof of the place of the offence or irregularity would be the
         same as that prescribed for notification of the offence or irregularity and would run from the same date; it would thus be
         one year from the acceptance of the TIR carnet. It would suffice in that case for the customs authorities to notify the existence
         of an irregularity on the last day of that period for it to be materially impossible for the guaranteeing association to furnish
         that proof. 
         
            
 It was moreover in line with the interpretation suggested by Advocate General Mischo in his Opinion in the  
         Met-Trans and Sagpol case that the implementing regulation was amended by Regulation No 2787/2000, with an express statement in recital that
          
         certain corrections should be made to the content with regard to references to the TIR Convention. 
         
            
 It is possible that the period of three months is the one which should be taken into consideration. A period of three months
         from the date of the claim to the guaranteeing association for payment is mentioned in Article 11(3) of the TIR Convention,
         to which the first subparagraph of Article 454(3) of the implementing regulation refers, if the amendments made by Regulation
         No 2787/are taken into account. A period of three months had, moreover, been recognised as applicable by an administrative
         agreement concluded by the Member States and accepted by the Community transit committee (see on this point the Opinion of
         Advocate General Mischo in  
         Met-Trans and Sagpol). Finally, a short period appears preferable here in order to determine swiftly the Member State responsible for requiring
         payment of the customs duties and thus to avoid difficulties relating to limitation periods for debts. 
         
            
 However, it must be remembered that the amendment introduced by Regulation No 2787/did not enter into force until July
         2001. It does not therefore apply to the case in the main proceedings. 
         
            
 Moreover, Article 11(3) of the TIR Convention contains two separate sentences referring to periods of different length. The
         first period mentioned, a period of three months, is a period for payment, while the second period mentioned, a period of
         two years from the claim for payment by the customs authorities to the guaranteeing association, relates to proof that there
         was no irregularity in connection with the transport operation in question. It is not therefore certain that the reference
         to that provision relates only to the first period mentioned. 
         
            
 Since the provisions applicable to the case in the main proceedings are manifestly erroneous and provide for several periods
         which could be taken into consideration, it should be recalled that the principle of legal certainty constitutes a general
         principle of Community law, requiring in particular that rules imposing charges on a taxpayer be clear and precise so that
         he may be able to ascertain unequivocally what his rights and obligations are and take steps accordingly (Case 169/Gondrand Frères and Garancini [1981] ECR 1931, paragraph 17; Joined Cases 92/and 93/Commission v  
         France and United Kingdom [1989] ECR 405, paragraph 22; and Case C-143/Van Es Douane Agenten [1996] ECR I-431, paragraph 27). 
         
            
 In those circumstances, the period to be taken as applicable to the guaranteeing association is the one which is most favourable
         to it out of those which may be identified by the various references made in Articles and of the implementing regulation,
         as applicable at the material time, namely the period of two years running from the date of the claim for payment made to
         the guaranteeing association. 
         
            
 The answer to part (b)(i) of Question must therefore be that the first paragraph of Article 454(3) and Article of the
         implementing regulation must be interpreted as meaning that the guaranteeing association has available, to furnish proof of
         the place where the offence or irregularity was actually committed, a period of two years running from the date of the claim
         for payment made to it. 
          Question 2(a) on the existence of an obligation on the Member State to investigate
         
            
 By part (a) of Question 2, the national court essentially asks whether Articles and of the implementing regulation
         require the Member State which detects an offence or irregularity in connection with a transport operation under cover of
         a TIR carnet, in addition to making the notifications prescribed in Article 455(1) of that regulation and an enquiry to the
         office of destination, to investigate the place where the offence or irregularity was actually committed and the identity
         of the customs debtors, by seeking the administrative assistance of another Member State for elucidation of the facts. 
          Observations submitted to the Court
         
            
 BGL and PFA submit that there exists an obligation on the part of the Member State to investigate the place where the irregularity
         was committed. The basis of that obligation may be found in the principle of investigation of the authorities' own motion
         in German law, Articles and of the implementing regulation, and the TIR Convention, in particular Article 37. 
         
            
 They point out that the Member States have the necessary instruments available for ensuring compliance with their obligation
         to make a thorough investigation, in particular Regulation No 1468/81. Thus Article of that regulation gives the German
         customs authorities the possibility of making a request for assistance to the United Kingdom authorities so that all necessary
         investigations may be undertaken, in particular of FFS as the holder of the TIR carnet and the driver of the lorry, in order
         to determine the Member State in which the offence or irregularity was committed and the persons who owe the customs debt
         as a result of the offence or irregularity. 
         
            
 The Hauptzollamt, the German Government and the Commission submit that Articles and of the implementing regulation
         do not impose on the Member State which detects the offence or irregularity any obligation towards the guaranteeing association
         to investigate, in addition to making the notifications prescribed in Article 455(1) and an enquiry to the office of destination,
         the actual place where the offence or irregularity was committed. 
         
            
 The Hauptzollamt and the Commission observe that the burden of proving the regularity of the transport operation or the place
         where the offence or irregularity was committed is essentially on the operators. The customs authorities have only a secondary
         role in relation to the operators. Offences are investigated with a view to punishing irregularities, not in the interests
         of the customs debtor. Such a requirement for those authorities would, moreover, be contrary to the fundamental concept which
         underlies the system of transit under the TIR Convention, which was created in the interests of the haulage industry and provisionally
         exempts the participants from customs duties on import. The customs authorities cannot, however, help participants in that
         system to escape those duties definitively, and must leave them to bear the burden of proof. 
         
            
 As regards Regulation No 1468/81, the Commission considers that it does not create any right for economic operators. The regulation
         recognises the need to coordinate action by the customs authorities in order to preserve the Community's own resources, but
         not in order to enable those operators to escape their obligations. The balance of the obligations of the various parties
         involved in the TIR system would be upset by the creation of an obligation to investigate on the part of the customs authorities,
         to the benefit of operators, which was clearly not intended by the Community legislature. 
          Findings of the Court
         
            
 Articles and of the implementing regulation do not lay down any obligation towards the guaranteeing association for
         the Member State which detects an offence or irregularity in connection with a transport operation under cover of a TIR carnet
         to investigate the actual place where the offence or irregularity was committed and the identity of the customs debtors. 
         
            
 Both the TIR Convention and the implementing regulation establish presumptions as to the existence of an offence or irregularity
         and the place where it was committed. Consequently, the operator required to pay the customs debt claimed on the basis of
         that presumption or the association guaranteeing payment of that debt bears the burden of proof both of the regularity of
         the transport operation and of the place where the offence or irregularity was committed. 
         
            
 The fifth subparagraph of Article 454(3) of the implementing regulation provides that the customs administrations of the Member
         States are to take the necessary measures to deal with any offence or irregularity and to impose effective penalties. However,
         that provision does not create an obligation on the part of those administrations towards the guaranteeing association. 
         
            
 As regards Regulation No 1468/81, it too regulates only relations between the Member States and between them and the Commission.
         
         
            
 The answer to part (a) of Question must therefore be that Articles and of the implementing regulation do not require
         the Member State which detects an offence or irregularity in connection with a transport operation under cover of a TIR carnet,
         in addition to making the notifications prescribed in Article 455(1) of that regulation and an enquiry to the office of destination,
         to investigate the actual place where the offence or irregularity was committed and the identity of the customs debtors, by
         seeking the administrative assistance of another Member State for elucidation of the facts. Question 2(b)
            
 Since part (b) of Question was put only in the case of part (a) of that question being answered in the affirmative, it need
         not be answered. 
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the German Government and by the Commission, which have submitted observations to the Court, are not
         recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings pending before
         the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT,
 in answer to the questions referred to it by the Bundesgerichtshof by order of January 2001, hereby rules: 
         
1.
 The first subparagraph of Article 454(3) of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2454/of July laying down provisions for
            the implementation of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/establishing the Community Customs Code does not preclude a guaranteeing
            association against which proceedings are brought by a Member State for payment of customs duties on the basis of the guarantee
            contract it has concluded with that State in accordance with the Customs Convention on the International Transport of Goods
            under cover of TIR Carnets from being able to furnish proof of the place where the offence or irregularity was committed,
            provided that that proof is furnished within the period laid down in that provision, that time-limit being peremptory. 
            
2.
 The first paragraph of Article 454(3) and Article of Regulation No 2454/must be interpreted as meaning that the guaranteeing
            association has available, to furnish proof of the place where the offence or irregularity was actually committed, a period
            of two years running from the date of the claim for payment made to it. 
            
3.
 Articles and of Regulation No 2454/do not require the Member State which detects an offence or irregularity in
            connection with a transport operation under cover of a TIR carnet, in addition to making the notifications prescribed in Article
            455(1) of that regulation and an enquiry to the office of destination, to investigate the actual place where the offence or
            irregularity was committed and the identity of the customs debtors, by seeking the administrative assistance of another Member
            State for elucidation of the facts. 
            
Rodríguez Iglesias
Wathelet 
Schintgen 
Timmermans
Gulmann 
La Pergola 
Skouris
Macken 
Colneric 
Cunha Rodrigues
Rosas 
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on September 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: German.
Top  
 