
Case C-95/Strong Segurança SA
v
Município de Sintra
and
Securitas-Serviços e Tecnologia de Segurança
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Supremo Tribunal Administrativo)
(Public service contracts – Directive 2004/18/EC – Article 47(2) – Direct effect – Whether applicable to the services referred to in Annex II B to that directive)
Summary of the Judgment
Approximation of laws – Procedures for the award of public works contracts, public supply contracts and public service contracts
            – Services referred to in Annex II B Directive 2004/(European Parliament and Council Directive 2004/18, Art. 47(2) and Annex II B)
Directive 2004/on the coordination of procedures for the award of public works contracts, public supply contracts and public
         service contracts does not create the obligation, for Member States, to apply Article 47(2) of that directive also to contracts
         which have as their object services referred to in Annex II B thereto. However, that directive does not preclude Member States
         and, possibly, contracting authorities from providing for such application in, respectively, their legislation and the documents
         relating to the contract.
      
(see para. 46, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
March (*)
      
(Public service contracts – Directive 2004/18/EC – Article 47(2) – Direct effect – Whether applicable to the services referred to in Annex II B to that directive)
In Case C‑95/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Supremo Tribunal Administrativo (Portugal), made by decision
         of January 2010, received at the Court on February 2010, in the proceedings
      
Strong Segurança SA
v
Município de Sintra,
Securitas-Serviços e Tecnologia de Segurança,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, E. Juhász (Rapporteur), G. Arestis, J. Malenovský and T. von Danwitz, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Strong Segurança SA, by C. Varela Pinto and J. Oliveira e Carmo, advogadas,
–        Município de Sintra, by N. Cárcomo Lobo and M. Vaz Loureiro, advogados,
–        Securitas-Serviços e Tecnologia de Segurança, by A. Calapez, advogada,
–        the Italian Government, by G. Palmieri, acting as Agent, assisted by G. Aiello, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Austrian Government, by M. Fruhmann, acting as Agent,
–        the European Commission, by D. Kukovec and G. Braga da Cruz, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
The present reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of the relevant provisions of Directive 2004/18/EC
         of the European Parliament and of the Council of March on the coordination of procedures for the award of public works
         contracts, public supply contracts and public service contracts (OJ L 134, p. 114).
      
The reference has been made in the context of a dispute between Strong Segurança SA (‘Strong Segurança’) and Município de
         Sintra (Sintra Municipal Council, Portugal) concerning the award of a contract for surveillance and security services for
         the installations of that municipality.
      
 Legal context
 The relevant provisions of Directive 2004/Recitals and in the preamble to Directive 2004/state:
      
‘(18) The field of services is best delineated, for the purpose of applying the procedural rules of this Directive and for monitoring
         purposes, by subdividing it into categories corresponding to particular headings of a common classification and by bringing
         them together in two Annexes, II A and II B, according to the regime to which they are subject. As regards services in Annex
         II B, the relevant provisions of this Directive should be without prejudice to the application of Community rules specific
         to the services in question.
      
(19)      As regards public service contracts, full application of this Directive should be limited, for a transitional period, to contracts
         where its provisions will permit the full potential for increased cross-frontier trade to be realised. Contracts for other
         services need to be monitored during this transitional period before a decision is taken on the full application of this Directive.
         In this respect, the mechanism for such monitoring needs to be defined. This mechanism should, at the same time, enable interested
         parties to have access to the relevant information.’
      
Under the terms of the first subparagraph of Article (1)(2)(d):
      
‘“Public service contracts” are public contracts other than public works or supply contracts having as their object the provision
         of services referred to in Annex II.’ 
      
Article 2, entitled ‘Principles of awarding contracts’, provides:
      
‘Contracting authorities shall treat economic operators equally and non‑discriminatorily and shall act in a transparent way.’
         
      
Article 4, entitled ‘Economic operators’, provides in paragraph 2:
      
‘Groups of economic operators may submit tenders or put themselves forward as candidates. In order to submit a tender or a
         request to participate, these groups may not be required by the contracting authorities to assume a specific legal form; however,
         the group selected may be required to do so when it has been awarded the contract, to the extent that this change is necessary
         for the satisfactory performance of the contract.’
      
Chapter III of Title II, entitled ‘Arrangements for public service contracts’, contains Articles to 22.
      
Article 20, entitled ‘Service contracts listed in Annex II A’, provides:
      
‘Contracts which have as their object services listed in Annex II A shall be awarded in accordance with Articles to 55.’
         
      
Article 21, entitled ‘Service contracts listed in Annex II B’, is worded as follows:
      
‘Contracts which have as their object services listed in Annex II B shall be subject solely to Article and Article 35(4).’
         
      
Article 23, which features in Chapter IV entitled ‘Specific rules governing specifications and contract documents’, relates
         to the technical specifications that must be set out in contract documentation in order to afford equal access for tenderers
         and not to create unjustified obstacles to the opening-up of public procurement to competition, while Article 35(4), which
         features in Chapter VI entitled ‘Rules on advertising and transparency’, refers to the contracting authorities’ obligations
         to give notice of the results of the contract award procedure. 
      
The subject of Annex II B, Category 23, is ‘Investigation and security services, …’.
      
Article 47, entitled ‘Economic and financial standing’, provides in paragraph 2:
      
‘An economic operator may, where appropriate and for a particular contract, rely on the capacities of other entities, regardless
         of the legal nature of the links which it has with them. It must in that case prove to the contracting authority that it will
         have at its disposal the resources necessary, for example, by producing an undertaking by those entities to that effect.’
      
Article 48, entitled ‘Technical and/or professional ability’, includes a paragraph 3, the content of which is substantially
         identical to that of Article 47(2).
      
Under Article 80(1), the Member States were required to bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions
         necessary to comply with Directive 2004/no later than January and forthwith to inform the European Commission thereof.
      
 National legislation
Directive 2004/was transposed into Portuguese law by Decree-Law No 18/of January approving the Public Procurement
         Code (Código dos Contratos Públicos), which entered into force six months after its publication on that date.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
By a notice published in the Official Journal of the European Union of July 2008, the Sintra Municipal Council issued an international open invitation to tender for the procurement of surveillance
         and security services for the municipal installations for and 2010. That invitation to tender was subject to the terms
         of the specifications and the contract documents, and the contract was to be awarded on the basis of the criterion of the
         generally most economically advantageous tender.
      
Strong Segurança participated in this invitation to tender and submitted the documents necessary for that purpose. Furthermore,
         it annexed to its tender a comfort letter from the company Trivalor (SGPS) SA (‘Trivalor’) in which that company made the
         following declaration:
      
‘By virtue of the relationship of total direct control (100%) between Trivalor and [Strong Segurança], Trivalor is responsible
         for the latter’s obligations, in accordance with the Commercial Companies Code (Código das Sociedades Comerciais). 
      
To that effect, we declare that we undertake:
–        to guarantee that [Strong Segurança] has the necessary technical and financial means for the proper performance of the contractual
         obligations;
      
–        to indemnify Sintra Municipal Council in full for any loss or damage suffered as a result of any impediment that may occur
         to prevent the proper performance of the contract, should it be awarded.’
      
The selection board initially favoured awarding the contract to Strong Segurança, as its tender had obtained the highest weighting.
         However, following the complaint made by a competitor, the selection board, basing itself on the contention that Strong Segurança
         was not authorised to report on the economic and financial standing of a third company such as Trivalor, revised its assessment
         and proposed that the contract be awarded to the competitor which had lodged the complaint. Sintra Municipal Council, at its
         meeting of February 2009, approved this proposal and decided to award to that competitor the services for and covered by the invitation to tender. 
      
The appeal by Strong Segurança against that decision was dismissed by the Tribunal Administrativo e Fiscal de Sintra (Administrative
         and Tax Court of Sintra), the ruling of which was upheld by a judgment of the Tribunal Central Administrativo Sul (Administrative
         Court of Appeal, South) of September 2009. Strong Segurança thereupon brought an appeal against that judgment before the
         Supremo Tribunal Administrativo (Supreme Administrative Court).
      
The Supremo Tribunal Administrativo states that the central question which arises in this case is whether or not Article 47(2)
         of Directive 2004/is also applicable to the services referred to in Annex II B to that directive, such as those to which
         the procedure in the main proceedings relates. It points out, first, that that procedure had begun before the entry into force
         of Decree-Law No 18/of January and, second, that the period for transposition of the directive had already expired
         when the invitation to tender was issued.
      
Thus, the first issue that arises in this regard is that of the direct effect of Article 47(2) of Directive 2004/18. The national
         court takes the view that the first part of that provision is, in accordance with the case-law of the Court, sufficiently
         clear, precise and unconditional and, as such, leaves the Member States no option with regard to compliance. However, as to
         the second part of that provision, the national court expresses doubts, in so far as that part appears to leave the Member
         States with some discretionary power as to what is to be proved and as to what evidence may be required for the economic operator
         to demonstrate its economic and financial capacity to the contracting authority when it relies on the capacities of other
         entities.
      
The second issue raised in this case is that of the interpretation of Article 47(2) of Directive 2004/18, in relation to which
         the case-law of the Court provides no answer. The national court notes that a strictly literal interpretation of that provision
         would lead to the conclusion that it applies only to the service contracts referred to in Annex II A. It points out, however,
         that that would exclude, for service contracts referred to in Annex II B, the application of essential provisions of Directive
         2004/such as, for example, those specifying the criteria for qualitative selection of candidates (Articles to 52) and
         the contract award criteria (Articles to 55). 
      
Since it had doubts as to whether such an interpretation is indeed correct, and aware that it was ruling on the matter at
         final instance, the Supremo Tribunal Administrativo decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to
         the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Is Article of Directive 2004/… directly applicable in the domestic legal order as from January 2006, in the sense
         that it confers on individuals a right on which they can rely in proceedings against organs of the Portuguese authorities?
      
2.      If so, is that principle applicable, despite the provision contained in Article of that directive, to contracts which have
         as their object services referred to in Annex II B [to Directive 2004/18]?’
      
 The questions referred to the Court
 The second question
By this question, which it is appropriate to consider first, the national court is asking whether Article 47(2) of Directive
         2004/is also applicable to contracts which have as their object services referred to in Annex II B to that directive, notwithstanding
         the fact that such applicability is not apparent from the wording of the other relevant provisions of that directive, in particular
         Article thereof.
      
In order to answer that question, it should be observed, at the outset, that the distinction between service contracts according
         to their classification into two separate categories was not introduced for the first time by Directive 2004/18. It already
         existed under Council Directive 92/50/EEC of June relating to the coordination of procedures for the award of public
         service contracts (OJ L 209, p. 1), as codified and recast by Directive 2004/18.
      
It should be observed, next, that the distinction that must be made between service contracts depending on whether they are
         referred to in Annex II A or in Annex II B to Directive 2004/was already unambiguously referred to in the recitals to that
         directive.
      
Thus, recital in the preamble to Directive 2004/states that, for the purpose of applying its rules, it is appropriate
         to subdivide the services into categories and to bring them together in two Annexes, II A and II B, according to the regime
         to which they are subject.
      
For its part, recital in the preamble to Directive 2004/reflects the legislature’s intention to limit the full application
         of that directive, for a transitional period, to service contracts where its provisions will permit the full potential for
         increased cross-frontier trade to be realised, those contracts being for the services referred to in Annex II A, and to monitor
         the other contracts, that is, those for services referred to in Annex II B, during that transitional period and before a decision
         is taken on the full application of Directive 2004/to those contracts.
      
That subdivision of the service contracts, referred to in the abovementioned recitals, is set out in greater detail in the
         provisions of Directive 2004/18.
      
Thus, Article provides, for contracts having as their object the provision of services referred to in Annex II A, the practically
         full application of the provisions of that directive, whereas Article refers to Articles and 35(4) only and thus imposes,
         with regard to the contracts for services referred to in Annex II B, ‘solely’ the obligation of the contracting authorities
         concerning the technical specifications of such contracts, as well as their obligation to inform the Commission of the results
         of their procurement procedures.
      
Contrary to what Strong Segurança maintains, there is no indication from the wording of the provisions of Directive 2004/18,
         or from its spirit and general scheme, that the subdivision of the services into two categories is based on a distinction
         between the ‘substantive’ and ‘procedural’ provisions of that directive. Furthermore, as the Commission rightly points out,
         such a distinction would risk creating legal uncertainty with regard to the scope of the various provisions of that directive.
      
The division of arrangements for public service contracts into two separate categories according to the classification of
         services, brought about by the relevant rules of European Union law, is corroborated by the case-law of the Court.
      
Thus, the Court has held that the classification of the services in Annexes I A and I B to Directive 92/(which correspond,
         respectively, to Annexes II A and II B to Directive 2004/18) is in accordance with the system laid down by that directive,
         which envisages the application of the provisions of that directive on two levels (see, to that effect, Case C‑411/Felix Swoboda [2002] ECR I‑10567, paragraph 55).
      
The Court has also held, in the context of Directive 92/50, that, where the contracts concern services which fall under Annex
         I B, the contracting authorities are bound only by the obligations to define the technical specifications by reference to
         national standards implementing European standards, which must be given in the general or contractual documents relating to
         each contract, and to send a notice of the results of the award procedure to the OPOCE (Office for Official Publications of
         the European Communities) (see Case C-507/Commission v Ireland [2007] ECR I-9777, paragraph 24).
      
The Court has stated that the European Union legislature based itself on the assumption that contracts for the services referred
         to in Annex I B to Directive 92/are, in principle, in the light of their specific nature, not of sufficient cross-border
         interest to justify their award being subject to the conclusion of a tendering procedure intended to enable undertakings from
         other Member States to examine the contract notice and submit a tender (see, to that effect, Commission v Ireland, paragraph 25). However, the Court has held that even such contracts, where they have a certain cross-border interest, are
         subject to the general principles of transparency and equal treatment resulting from Articles TFEU and TFEU (see, to
         that effect, Commission v Ireland, paragraphs and to 31).
      
In light of the foregoing, it must be concluded that the system established by Directive 2004/does not directly create,
         for the Member States, the obligation to apply Article 47(2) of that directive also to the public service contracts referred
         to in Annex II B to that directive.
      
With regard to the Commission’s contention that the general principle of ‘effective competition’ specific to Directive 2004/could lead to such an obligation, it must be noted that, whereas effective competition constitutes the essential objective
         of that directive, that objective, as important as it is, cannot lead to an interpretation that is contrary to the clear terms
         of the directive, which do not mention Article 47(2) thereof as being among the provisions which the contracting authorities
         are obliged to apply when awarding contracts concerning the services referred to in Annex II B to that directive.
      
However, in accordance with the abovementioned case-law, it remains to be considered whether, where such a contract has a
         certain cross-border interest – this being a matter which it is for the national court to determine –, particularly having
         regard to the fact that, in the main proceedings, an invitation to tender had been published in the Official Journal of the European Union, an obligation such as that set out in Article 47(2) of Directive 2004/may result from the application of the general
         principles of transparency and equal treatment.
      
With regard, firstly, to the principle of transparency, it must be stated that this principle is not infringed if an obligation
         such as that laid down by Article 47(2) of Directive 2004/is not imposed on the contracting authority in respect of a contract
         which has as its object services referred to in Annex II B to that directive. Indeed, the fact that an economic operator cannot
         rely on the economic and financial capacities of other entities has no connection with the transparency of the contract award
         procedure. It should be observed, moreover, that the application of Articles and 35(4) of Directive 2004/during the
         contract award procedures relating to such ‘non-priority’ services is also intended to ensure the degree of transparency that
         corresponds to the specific nature of those contracts.
      
Nor, it should be noted, can the principle of equal treatment lead to the imposition of an obligation, such as that laid down
         by Article 47(2) of Directive 2004/18, at the time of the award of the service contracts listed in Annex II B, notwithstanding
         the distinction drawn by that directive.
      
The absence of such an obligation cannot give rise to any discrimination, direct or indirect, on the basis of nationality
         or place of establishment.
      
It should be noted that such a broad approach to the applicability of the principle of equal treatment could lead to the application,
         to the service contracts referred to in Annex II B to Directive 2004/18, of other essential provisions of that directive,
         for example, as the national court observes, provisions which establish the qualitative criteria for the selection of candidates
         (Articles to 52) as well as the contract award criteria (Articles to 55). That would involve the risk of rendering entirely
         ineffective the distinction drawn by Directive 2004/between the services of Annexes II A and II B, as well as the application
         of that directive on two levels, under the terms used by the case-law of the Court.
      
Furthermore, according to the case-law of the Court, the contracts relating to the services listed in Annex II B to Directive
         2004/are specific in nature (Commission v Ireland, paragraph 25). Thus, at least some of those services have particular characteristics that would justify the contracting
         authority taking into account, on a personalised and specific basis, the individual bid presented by the candidates. This
         is the case, for example, for ‘legal services’, ‘personnel placement and supply services’, ‘education and vocational education
         services’ or ‘investigation and security services’. 
      
Consequently, the general principles of transparency and equal treatment do not impose on the contracting authorities an obligation,
         such as that laid down by Article 47(2) of Directive 2004/18, for contracts concerning the services set out in Annex II B
         to that directive.
      
However, the scope of Directive 2004/is determined, as is clear from recital in its preamble, by a progressive approach
         taken by the European Union legislature which, admittedly, during the transition period mentioned in that recital does not
         require the application of Article 47(2) when awarding contracts such as those at issue in the main proceedings, but which
         does not prohibit a Member State and, possibly, a contracting authority, from requiring the application of the abovementioned
         provision to such contracts in, respectively, its legislation and the documents relating to the contract.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the second question is that Directive 2004/does not create the obligation,
         for Member States, to apply Article 47(2) of that directive also to contracts which have as their object services referred
         to in Annex II B thereto. However, that directive does not preclude Member States and, possibly, contracting authorities from
         providing for such application in, respectively, their legislation and the documents relating to the contract.
      
 The first question
In the light of the answer given to the second question, there is no need to answer the first question.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
Directive 2004/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of March on the coordination of procedures for
            the award of public works contracts, public supply contracts and public service contracts does not create the obligation,
            for Member States, to apply Article 47(2) of that directive also to contracts which have as their object services referred
            to in Annex II B thereto. However, that directive does not preclude Member States and, possibly, contracting authorities from
            providing for such application in, respectively, their legislation and the documents relating to the contract.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Portuguese.
      
Top  
 