
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-469/Ravil SARLvBellon import SARL and Biraghi SpA(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Cour de cassation (France))
         
«(Protected designations of origin – Regulation (EEC) No 2081/– Regulation (EEC) No 1107/– Grana Padano freshly grated – Specification – Convention between two Member States – Condition that the cheese is grated and packaged in the region of production – Articles EC and EC – Justification – Whether the condition may be relied on against third parties – Legal certainty – Publicity)»
Opinion of Advocate General Alber delivered on April I - Judgment of the Court, May I - Summary of the Judgment
1..
Free movement of goods – Quantitative restrictions of exports – Measures having equivalent effect – Convention between two Member States applying the condition that cheese covered by a designation of origin is grated and packaged
                     in the region of production – Justification – Protection of industrial and commercial property – Measure that is necessary and proportionate and capable of upholding the reputation of the designation of origin   
                  (Arts EC and EC) 
2..
Agriculture – Uniform laws – Protection of geographical indications and designations of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs – Use of a protected designation of origin subject to the condition that operations such as grating and packaging the product
                     take place in the region of production – Whether permissible  
                  (Council Regulation No 2081/92) 
3..
Free movement of goods – Quantitative restrictions of exports – Measures having equivalent effect – Use of the protected designation of origin Grana Padano subject, under a Community measure, to the condition that the product
                     is grated and packaged in the region of production – Justification – Protection of industrial and commercial property – Measure that is necessary and proportionate and capable of upholding the reputation of the designation of origin –   Whether condition may be relied on against economic operators – Not in the absence of adequate publicity – Exception  
                  (Arts EC and EC; Commission Regulation No 1107/96) 
1.
 As regards the period prior to the entry into force of Regulation No 1107/on the registration of geographical indications
         and designations of origin under the procedure laid down in Article of Regulation No 2081/92, Article EC must be interpreted
         as not precluding a convention concluded between two Member States A and B, such as the Convention between the French Republic
         and the Italian Republic on the protection of designations of origin, indications of provenance and names of certain products,
         signed in Rome on April 1964, from making applicable in Member State A national legislation of Member State B under which
         the designation of origin of a cheese, protected in Member State B, is reserved, for cheese marketed in grated form, to cheese
         grated and packaged in the region of production. While such a convention has the specific effect of restricting patterns of exports of cheese eligible for the designation
         of origin and thereby of establishing a difference in treatment between the domestic trade of a Member State and its export
         trade, and therefore constitutes a measure having equivalent effect to a quantitative restriction on exports within the meaning
         of Article EC, it may apply in relations between the two contracting Member States, as a measure that is justified on grounds
         of the protection of industrial and commercial property, in so far as it renders applicable a condition that the product be
         grated and packaged in the region of production, in order to preserve the reputation of the product by strengthening control
         over its particular characteristics and its quality, thus constituting a measure protecting the designation of origin which
         may be used by all the operators concerned and is of decisive importance to them, and in so far as the resulting restriction
         may be regarded as necessary for attaining the objective pursued, in the sense that there are no alternative less restrictive
         measures capable of attaining it.  see paras 43-44, 51, 63-64, 67, operative part 2.
 Regulation No 2081/on the protection of geographical indications and designations of origin for agricultural products and
         foodstuffs must be interpreted as not precluding the use of a protected designation of origin from being subject to the condition
         that operations such as the grating and packaging of the product take place in the region of production, where such a condition
         is laid down in the specification. The wording of Article of that regulation, which makes eligibility to use a protected designation of origin subject to the
         product's compliance with a specification and gives a non-exhaustive list of the items to be included in the specification,
         does not exclude the application of special technical rules to operations leading to different presentations on the market
         of the same product, so that in each case it can satisfy the criterion of quality to which consumers have in recent years
         tended to attach greater importance, and guarantee an identifiable geographical origin.  see paras 76-77, 81, 83, operative part 3.
 The fact that Regulation No 1107/96, registering inter alia the protected designation of origin  
         Grana Padano, makes the use of that designation for cheese marketed in grated form subject to the condition that grating and packaging
         operations be carried out in the region of production has the specific effect of restricting patterns of exports of cheese
         eligible for the designation of origin and thereby of establishing a difference in treatment between the domestic trade of
         a Member State and its export trade, and thus constitutes a measure having equivalent effect to a quantitative restriction
         on exports within the meaning of Article EC.  Such a condition may, however, be regarded as justified on grounds of the  protection of industrial and commercial property,
         and hence compatible with Article EC, since its aim is to preserve the reputation of the product by strengthening control
         over its particular characteristics and its quality, thus constituting a measure protecting the designation of origin which
         may be used by all the operators concerned and is of decisive importance to them, and since the resulting restriction may
         be regarded as necessary for attaining the objective pursued, in the sense that there are no alternative less restrictive
         measures capable of attaining it.  However, the condition in question may not be relied on against economic operators, as it was not brought to their knowledge
         by adequate publicity in Community legislation. Nevertheless, the principle of legal certainty does not preclude that condition
         from being regarded by the national court as capable of being relied on against operators who carried on the activity of grating
         and packaging the product in the period prior to the entry into force of Regulation No 1107/96, should that court consider
         that during that period the relevant legislation of the Member State of export was applicable by virtue of a convention between
         that State and the Member State of import and capable of being relied on against those concerned by virtue of the national
         rules on publicity. see paras 43, 63-64, 88, 90, 103, operative parts 3-JUDGMENT OF THE COURTMay (1)
((Protected designations of origin – Regulation (EEC) No 2081/– Regulation (EEC) No 1107/– Grana Padano freshly grated – Specification – Convention between two Member States – Condition that the cheese is grated and packaged in the region of production – Articles EC and EC – Justification – Whether the condition may be relied on against third parties – Legal certainty – Publicity))
In Case C-469/00, 
            REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Cour de cassation (France) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings
            pending before that court between 
            
 Ravil SARL
and
 Bellon import SARL, Biraghi SpA,
on the interpretation of Article EC,
THE COURT,,
composed of: G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias, President, J.-P. Puissochet, M. Wathelet, R. Schintgen and C.W.A. Timmermans (Presidents of Chambers), C. Gulmann (Rapporteur), D.A.O. Edward, P. Jann, V. Skouris, F. Macken, N. Colneric, S. von Bahr and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: S. Alber, Registrar: M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
Ravil SARL, by A. Lyon-Caen, F. Fabiani and F. Thiriez, avocats, 
               
─
Bellon import SARL and Biraghi SpA, by M. Baffert and A. Baurand, avocats, and F. Giuggia, avvocato, 
               
─
the French Government, by G. de Bergues and L. Bernheim, acting as Agents, 
               
─
the Spanish Government, by R. Silva de Lapuerta, acting as Agent, 
               
─
the Italian Government, by U. Leanza, acting as Agent, assisted by O. Fiumara, avvocato dello Stato, 
               
─
the Commission of the European Communities, by H. van Lier and A.-M. Rouchaud, acting as Agents, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of Bellon import SARL and Biraghi SpA, the French Government, the Italian Government and
               the Commission at the hearing on February 2002,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 2002, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By judgment of December 2000, received at the Court on December 2000, the Cour de cassation (France) referred to the
         Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC a question on the interpretation of Article EC. 
         
            
That question was raised in proceedings between Ravil SARL (
         Ravil), established in France, and Biraghi SpA (
         Biraghi), established in Italy, a producer of Grana Padano cheese, and Bellon import SARL (
         Bellon), established in France, the exclusive importer and distributor of Biraghi products in France, concerning the marketing in
         France by Ravil under the designation  
         Grana Padano râpé frais (Grana Padano freshly grated) of Grana Padano cheese grated and packaged in that Member State. 
         
Legal background
International law and national legislation
         
            
Articles and of the Convention between the French Republic and the Italian Republic on the protection of designations
         of origin, indications of provenance and names of certain products, signed in Rome on April (
         the Franco-Italian Convention), provide: Article 1Each of the Contracting States undertakes to take all necessary measures to ensure the effective protection of natural and
         manufactured products originating in the territory of the other State against unfair competition in the course of trade and
         to ensure effective protection for the designations listed in Annexes A [products originating in France] and B [products originating
         in Italy] to this Convention, in accordance with the provisions of Articles to below....Article 3The designations in Annex B to this Convention are reserved exclusively, on the territory of the French Republic, to Italian
         products or goods and may be used there only under the conditions laid down by the legislation of the Italian Republic.
         
            
Annex B to the Franco-Italian Convention mentions  
          inter alia , under cheese products, the Italian cheese Grana Padano. 
         
            
In Italy, the rules on protection of designations of origin of cheeses made in that Member State, including Grana Padano,
         and their areas of production were defined by Legge No 125, tutela delle denominazioni di origine e tipiche dei formaggi (Law
         No on the protection of designations of origin and typical designations of cheeses) of April (GURI No 99, April
         1954, p. 1294), and Decreto del Presidente della Repubblica No 1269, riconoscimento delle denominazioni circa i metodi di
         lavorazione, caratteristiche merceologiche e zone di produzione dei formaggi (Decree of the President of the Republic No on the recognition of designations relating to methods of production, characteristics of marketing and areas of production
         of cheeses) of October (GURI No 295, December 1955, p. 4401). 
         
            
The  
         Grana Padano designation of origin was extended to the grated form of the product by the Decreto del Presidente del Consiglio dei ministri,
         estensione della denominazione di origine del formaggio  
         Grana Padano alla tipologia  
         grattugiato (Decree of the Prime Minister on the extension of the designation of origin of  
         Grana Padano cheese to the  
         grated typology) of November (GURI No 83, April 1992, p. 12,  
         the Decree of November 1991), where the grated product is obtained exclusively from a whole cheese entitled to the designation of origin in question,
         and on condition that the grating operations are carried out in the area of production and that the packaging is done immediately
         with no processing and with no addition of substances such as to alter the conservation and the original organoleptic characteristics.
         
         Community law
         
            
Article EC states: Quantitative restrictions on exports, and all measures having equivalent effect, shall be prohibited between Member States.
         
            
Under Article EC, Article EC does not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on exports justified  
          inter alia  on grounds of the protection of industrial and commercial property. 
         
            
Article of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2081/of July on the protection of geographical indications and designations
         of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs (OJ L 208, p. 1), as amended by the Act concerning the conditions
         of accession of the Republic of Austria, the Republic of Finland and the Kingdom of Sweden and the adjustments to the Treaties
         on which the European Union is founded (OJ C 241, p. 21, and OJ L 1, p. 1) (
         Regulation No 2081/92), provides: 
         
1.
 Community protection of designations of origin and of geographical indications of agricultural products and foodstuffs shall
         be obtained in accordance with this Regulation.
         
2.
 For the purposes of this Regulation:
         
(a)
 designation of origin : means the name of a region, a specific place or, in exceptional cases, a country, used to describe an agricultural product
         or a foodstuff: 
         
─
originating in that region, specific place or country, and 
               
─
the quality or characteristics of which are essentially or exclusively due to a particular geographical environment with its
                  inherent natural and human factors, and the production, processing and preparation of which take place in the defined geographical
                  area; 
               
...
         
            
Article of that regulation provides: 
         
1.
 To be eligible to use a protected designation of origin (PDO) ... an agricultural product or foodstuff must comply with a
         specification.
         
2.
 The product specification shall include at least:
         
(a)
the name of the agricultural product or foodstuffs, including the designation of origin ... 
         
(b)
a description of the agricultural product or foodstuff including the raw materials, if appropriate, and principal physical,
         chemical, microbiological and/or organoleptic characteristics of the product or the foodstuff; 
         
(c)
the definition of the geographical area ... 
         
(d)
evidence that the agricultural product or the foodstuff originates in the geographical area, within the meaning of Article
         2(2)(a) ... 
         
(e)
a description of the method of obtaining the agricultural product or foodstuff and, if appropriate, the authentic and unvarying
         local methods; 
         
(f)
the details bearing out the link with the geographical environment or the geographical origin within the meaning of Article
         2(2)(a) ... 
         
(g)
details of the inspection structures provided for in Article 10; 
         
(h)
the specific labelling details relating to the indication PDO ... or the equivalent traditional national indications; 
         
(i)
any requirements laid down by Community and/or national provisions.
         
            
Articles to lay down an ordinary procedure for registration of a PDO. In that procedure, an application is to be made
         to the Commission through the intermediary of a Member State (Article 5(4) and (5)). The application is to include the specification
         in accordance with Article (Article 5(3)). The Commission is to verify that the application includes all the particulars
         provided for in Article (Article 6(1)). If it reaches a positive conclusion, it is to publish in the  
          Official Journal of the European Communities  among other things the name of the product, the main points of the application and the references to national provisions
         governing the preparation, production or manufacture of the product (Article 6(2)). Any Member State or any legitimately concerned
         natural or legal person may object to the registration, in which case the objection is to be examined in accordance with a
         specified procedure (Article 7). If there is no objection, the Commission is to register the designation and publish it in
         the  
          Official Journal of the European Communities  (Article 6(3) and (4)). 
         
            
Article states: The indications PDO ... or equivalent traditional national indications may appear only on agricultural products and foodstuffs
         that comply with this Regulation.
         
            
Article 10(1) provides: Member States shall ensure that not later than six months after the entry into force of this Regulation inspection structures
         are in place, the function of which shall be to ensure that agricultural products and foodstuffs bearing a protected name
         meet the requirements laid down in the specifications ...
         
            
Article 13(1)(a) provides that registered names are to be protected against any direct or indirect commercial use of a name
         registered in respect of products not covered by the registration, in so far as those products are comparable to the products
         registered under that name or in so far as using the name exploits the reputation of the protected name. 
         
            
Article establishes a simplified registration procedure for names which are already legally protected: 
         
1.
 Within six months of the entry into force of the Regulation, Member States shall inform the Commission which of their legally
         protected names ... they wish to register pursuant to this Regulation ...
         
2.
 In accordance with the procedure laid down in Article [assistance of a committee composed of representatives of the Member
         States and, in certain cases, action by the Council], the Commission shall register the names referred to in paragraph which
         comply with Articles and 4. Article [on the right to object] shall not apply ...
         
3.
 Member States may maintain national protection of the names communicated in accordance with paragraph until such time as
         a decision on registration has been taken.
         
            
On June the Commission adopted Regulation (EC) No 1107/on the registration of geographical indications and designations
         of origin under the procedure laid down in Article of Regulation No 2081/(OJ L 148, p. 1). 
         
            
That regulation, which entered into force on June 1996, registers  
          inter alia  the protected designation of origin (PDO)  
         Grana Padano, under the heading  
         Cheeses. 
         The main proceedings
            
Ravil imports, grates, pre-packages and distributes various kinds of cheese in France. At the time when the main proceedings
         were brought, it did so in particular with respect to Grana Padano, which it marketed under the designation  
         Grana Padano râpé frais, and for which it had in developed techniques for packaging. 
         
            
In Bellon and Biraghi brought proceedings against Ravil in the Tribunal de commerce de Marseille (Commercial Court, Marseilles)
         (France), seeking an order that Ravil cease all distribution of cheese bearing the designation  
         Grana Padano râpé frais and make good the damage they claimed to have suffered from 1992. 
         
            
They based their action on Articles and of the Franco-Italian Convention and on the Decree of November 1991, which entered
         into force in 1992, in so far as it makes the use of the Grana Padano designation for grated cheese subject to the condition
         that the grating operations are carried out in the region of production and packaging takes place immediately under specified
         conditions. 
         
            
By judgment of November 1997, the Tribunal de commerce de Marseille granted the application, ordering Ravil to pay damages
         for the acts of marketing from and prohibiting it from distributing cheese under the designation  
         Grana Padano râpé frais. 
         
            
Ravil appealed against that judgment. 
         
            
By judgment of March 1998, the Cour d'appel d'Aix-en-Provence (Court of Appeal, Aix-en-Provence) (France) upheld the judgment,
         stating that the acts of unfair competition were sufficiently made out by the marketing in France since of  
         Grana Padano cheese in grated form, since Ravil had circumvented the Italian rules in order to carry out operations at a lower cost and
         win markets from competitors who complied with the legislation. 
         
            
The Cour de cassation, to which Ravil appealed on a point of law, referring to the judgments in Case C-47/Delhaize and Le Lion  [1992] ECR I-and C-388/Belgium  v  
          Spain  [2000] ECR I-3123, considered that the outcome of the case depended on the interpretation of Article EC. 
         
            
It therefore decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following question to the Court for a preliminary ruling: Is Article [EC] to be interpreted as precluding national legislation reserving the  
         Grana Padano designation of origin for cheese grated in the region of production, in so far as such an obligation is not indispensable
         for preserving the specific characteristics which the product has acquired?
         The question referred for a preliminary ruling
            
It should be observed, as a preliminary point, that the specification on the basis of which the PDO  
         Grana Padano was registered by Regulation No 1107/refers expressly to the Decree of November as constituting requirements laid
         down by national provisions within the meaning of Article 4(2)(i) of Regulation No 2081/92. 
         
            
In the procedure established by Article EC providing for cooperation between national courts and the Court of Justice,
         it is for the latter to provide the national court with an answer which will be of use to it and enable it to determine the
         case before it. To that end, the Court may have to reformulate the question referred to it (see,  
          inter alia , Case C-88/Roquette Frères  [2000] ECR I-10465, paragraph 18). It may also find it necessary to consider provisions of Community law to which the national
         court has not referred in its question (see,  
          inter alia , Case C-230/Schiavon  [2000] ECR I-3547, paragraph 37). 
         
            
In the grounds of its judgment, the Cour de cassation considers that the Decree of November constitutes a measure having
         equivalent effect to a quantitative restriction on exports. In its opinion, the question thus arises whether Article EC
         precludes such national legislation. 
         
            
The main proceedings concern two successive periods. The first, governed by the Franco-Italian Convention, runs from 1992,
         when the Decree of November entered into force, to June 1996. The second, governed by Regulations No 2081/and
         No 1107/96, started on June 1996, the date of entry into force of Regulation No 1107/96, which registered the PDO  
         Grana Padano. 
         
            
To decide the main proceedings, the national court will have to consider each of the two periods separately. 
         
            
In order to give a useful answer to the question referred for a preliminary ruling, it will be reformulated as regards each
         of those periods, governed respectively by the Franco-Italian Convention and by Regulations No 2081/and No 1107/96, to
         which the national court has not referred. 
         
            
It should also be observed that the main proceedings concern grating and packaging operations carried out at a stage other
         than that of retail sale and restaurant sale, for which it is common ground that the Decree of November does not apply.
         
         
            
Consequently, where reference is made in the present judgment to the condition of grating and packaging in the region of production,
         that relates only to grating and packaging operations carried out at a stage other than that of retail sale and restaurant
         sale. 
         The period before the entry into force of Regulation No 1107/With respect to the period from to June 1996, the Italian Government points out that the Decree of November entered into force after the Franco-Italian Convention, which required compliance on French territory with the Italian designations
         of origin listed in the annex to the convention. There may be doubt as to the applicability of that decree to the main proceedings,
         in that the Franco-Italian Convention makes no reference to  
         Grana Padano râpé frais, laying down only the obligation to comply with the designation of origin of the whole cheese. The Italian Government considers
         that it is for the national court to examine this point of law, and that, were it to conclude that the Decree of November
         does not apply, Ravil could not be accused of any infringement of that decree for the period in question. 
         
            
On this point, it is indeed for the national court to assess whether the Decree of November is applicable to that period
         under the Franco-Italian Convention. Only if that is the case will an answer to the question referred for a preliminary ruling
         be of use in deciding the main proceedings with respect to that period. 
         
            
Subject to that reservation, the national court seeks essentially to know, as regards the period prior to the entry into force
         of Regulation No 1107/96, whether Article EC is to be interpreted as precluding a convention concluded between two Member
         States A and B, such as the Franco-Italian Convention, from making applicable in Member State A national legislation of Member
         State B, such as that referred to by the national court, under which the designation of origin of a cheese, protected in Member
         State B, is reserved, for cheese marketed in grated form, to cheese grated and packaged in the region of production. 
         
            
It should be observed, first, that the provisions of a convention between two Member States cannot apply in the relations
         between those States if they are found to be contrary to the rules of the Treaty, in particular the rules on the free movement
         of goods (see, to that effect, Case C-3/Exportur  [1992] ECR I-5529, paragraph 8). 
         
            
Second, the issue raised by the question as reformulated is essentially whether the bilateral convention, in so far as it
         applies in Member State A national legislation of Member State B such as that at issue in the main proceedings, constitutes
         a measure having equivalent effect to a quantitative restriction on exports, and if so whether that restriction is justified
         by the protection of industrial and commercial property rights, in particular the reputation of the designation of origin
         in question, by maintaining the quality and characteristics of the product and guaranteeing its authenticity. 
         Whether a bilateral convention that renders applicable, for a designation of origin such as  
         Grana Padano, a condition that the product be grated and packaged in the region of production constitutes a measure having equivalent
         effect to a quantitative restriction on exports
         
            
Ravil, the Spanish Government and, implicitly, the Italian Government and the Commission consider that a condition that the
         product must be grated and packaged in the region of production constitutes a measure having equivalent effect to a quantitative
         restriction of exports within the meaning of Article EC. 
         
            
It must be remembered that Article EC prohibits all measures which have as their specific object or effect the restriction
         of patterns of exports and thereby the establishment of a difference in treatment between the domestic trade of a Member State
         and its export trade, in such a way as to provide a particular advantage for national production or for the domestic market
         of the State in question (see,  
          inter alia , with respect to national measures, Case C-209/Sydhavnens Sten & Grus  [2000] ECR I-3743, paragraph 34). 
         
            
A bilateral convention that renders applicable a condition of grating and packaging the product in the region of production
         for a designation of origin such as  
         Grana Padano has the consequence that cheese produced in the region of production and fulfilling the other conditions required for use
         of the designation of origin cannot be grated outside that region without losing that designation. 
         
            
By contrast, cheese of the designation of origin transported within the region of production retains its right to the designation
         of origin if it is grated and packaged there in accordance with the national legislation. 
         
            
The bilateral convention making that legislation applicable in another Member State thus has the specific effect of restricting
         patterns of exports of cheese eligible for the designation of origin and thereby of establishing a difference in treatment
         between the domestic trade of a Member State and its export trade. It therefore introduces quantitative restrictions on exports
         within the meaning of Article EC (see, to that effect, with respect to a national measure,  
          Belgium  v  
          Spain , paragraphs and to 42). 
         
            
A convention between two Member States A and B such as the Franco-Italian Convention, in so far as it applies in Member State
         A national legislation of Member State B such as that at issue in the main proceedings, therefore constitutes a measure having
         equivalent effect to a quantitative restriction on exports within the meaning of Article EC. 
         Whether a bilateral convention is justified in so far as it renders applicable a condition that the product be grated and
         packaged in the region of production
         
            
Ravil submits that a condition that the product must be grated and packaged in the region of production is contrary to Article
         EC, in that such an obligation is not indispensable for preserving the specific characteristics which the product has acquired.
         
         
            
Bellon, Biraghi, the Spanish and Italian Governments and the Commission consider that the condition at issue in the main proceedings
         is justified on the ground of protection of industrial and commercial property. They submit that it is possible to apply to
         the present case the reasoning in  
          Belgium  v  
          Spain , in which the Court held that a measure having equivalent effect to a quantitative restriction on exports, constituted by
         the obligation to bottle a wine with a designation of origin in the region of production in order to be able to use the designation
         of origin, was justified in that its aim was to preserve the reputation of the designation by guaranteeing, in addition to
         the authenticity of the product, the maintenance of its qualities and characteristics. 
         
            
It should be noted that, in accordance with Article EC, Article EC does not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on
         exports which are justified  
          inter alia  on grounds of the protection of industrial and commercial property. 
         
            
Community legislation displays a general tendency to enhance the quality of products within the framework of the common agricultural
         policy, in order to promote the reputation of those products through  
          inter alia  the use of designations of origin which enjoy special protection (see  
          Belgium  v  
          Spain , paragraph 53). That tendency took the form in the quality wines sector of the adoption of Council Regulation (EEC) No 823/of March laying down special provisions relating to quality wines produced in specified regions (OJ L 84, p.
         59), repealed and replaced by Council Regulation (EC) No 1493/of May on the common organisation of the market
         in wine (OJ L 179, p. 1). It was also manifested, in relation to other agricultural products, in the adoption of Regulation
         No 2081/92, which, according to its preamble, is intended  
          inter alia  to meet consumers' expectations as regards products of quality and an identifiable geographical origin and to enable producers,
         in conditions of fair competition, to secure higher incomes in return for a genuine effort to improve quality. 
         
            
Designations of origin fall within the scope of industrial and commercial property rights. The applicable rules protect those
         entitled to use them against improper use of those designations by third parties seeking to profit from the reputation which
         they have acquired. They are intended to guarantee that the product bearing them comes from a specified geographical area
         and displays certain particular characteristics. They may enjoy a high reputation amongst consumers and constitute for producers
         who fulfil the conditions for using them an essential means of attracting custom. The reputation of designations of origin
         depends on their image in the minds of consumers. That image in turn depends essentially on particular characteristics and
         more generally on the quality of the product. It is on the latter, ultimately, that the product's reputation is based (see
          
          Belgium  v  
          Spain , paragraphs to 56). For consumers, the link between the reputation of the producers and the quality of the products also
         depends on his being assured that products sold under the designation are authentic. 
         
            
A bilateral convention such as the Franco-Italian Convention, by applying a condition of grating and packaging in the region
         of production, is intended to allow the persons entitled to use the designation of origin to keep under their control one
         of the ways in which the product appears on the market. The condition it lays down aims better to safeguard the quality and
         authenticity of the product, and consequently the reputation of the designation of origin, for which those who are entitled
         to use it assume full and collective responsibility. 
         
            
Against that background, such a bilateral convention may apply in relations between the two contracting Member States despite
         its restrictive effects on trade if it is shown that it is necessary and proportionate and capable of upholding the reputation
         of the designation of origin concerned (see, to that effect,  
          Belgium  v  
          Spain , paragraphs and 59). 
         
            
A cheese such as Grana Padano is consumed to a substantial extent in grated form and the operations leading to that presentation
         are all designed to obtain in particular a specific flavour, colour and texture which will be appreciated by consumers. 
         
            
The grating and packaging of the cheese thus constitute important operations which may harm the quality and hence the reputation
         of the designation of origin if they are carried out in conditions that result in a product not possessing the organoleptic
         qualities expected. Those operations may also compromise the guarantee of the product's authenticity, because they necessarily
         involve removal of the mark of origin of the whole cheeses used. 
         
            
The Decree of November defines in detail the conditions which must be fulfilled by grated cheese marketed under the
         designation  
         Grana Padano. 
         
            
Under Article 1, the grated cheese must be obtained without any processing or addition of substances such as to alter the
         conservation and the original organoleptic characteristics of the product. 
         
            
Under Article 2, the grated cheese must have the following characteristics: 
         
─
fat content in proportion to dry matter: not less than 32%; 
         
─
age: not less than nine months and within the limits fixed by the production standard; 
         
─
additives: in accordance with the legislation; 
         
─
organoleptic characteristics: in accordance with the definitions laid down by the production standard; 
         
─
humidity: not less than 25% and not greater than 35%; 
         
─
aspect: not crumbly, homogeneous, particles of diameter less than 0.mm not exceeding 25%; 
         
─
rind quantity: not greater than 18%; 
         
─
amino-acid composition: specific to that of  
            Grana Padano. 
         
            
Compliance with those requirements involves technical operations and strict checks relating to the authenticity and quality
         of the cheese. Some of these require specialist assessments, in particular as regards the organoleptic characteristics and
         the composition of the product. 
         
            
Moreover, since freshly grated cheese is a highly sensitive product, the preservation of its organoleptic characteristics
         requires it to be packaged immediately in conditions such as to avoid any drying out. 
         
            
Furthermore, immediate packaging in a packaging bearing the designation of origin is better able to guarantee the authenticity
         of the grated product, which by nature is more difficult to identify than a whole cheese. 
         
            
In this context, it must be accepted that checks performed outside the region of production would provide fewer guarantees
         of the quality and authenticity of the product than checks carried out in the region of production under the responsibility
         of those entitled to use the designation (see, to that effect,  
          Belgium  v  
          Spain , paragraph 67). First, checks performed in the region of production under the responsibility of those entitled to use the
         designation of origin are thorough and systematic in nature and are done by experts who have specialised knowledge of the
         characteristics of the product. Second, it is hardly conceivable that representatives of the persons entitled to use the designation
         could effectively introduce such checks in other Member States. 
         
            
The risk to the quality and authenticity of the product finally offered to consumers is consequently greater where it has
         been grated and packaged outside the region of production than when that has been done within the region (see, to that effect,
          
          Belgium  v  
          Spain , paragraph 74). 
         
            
That conclusion is not affected by the fact that the product may be grated, at least under certain conditions, by retailers
         and restaurateurs outside the region of production. That operation must in principle be performed in front of the consumer,
         or at least the consumer can require that it is, in order to verify in particular that the whole cheese used bears the mark
         of origin. Above all, grating and packaging operations carried out upstream of the retail sale or restaurant stage constitute,
         because of the quantities of products concerned, a much more real risk to the reputation of a designation of origin, where
         there is inadequate control of the authenticity and quality of the product, than operations carried out by retailers and restaurateurs.
         
         
            
Consequently, a bilateral convention that renders applicable a condition of grating and packaging in the region of production,
         whose aim is to preserve the reputation of the product by strengthening control over its particular characteristics and its
         quality, may be regarded as justified as a measure protecting the designation of origin which may be used by all the operators
         concerned and is of decisive importance to them (see, to that effect,  
          Belgium  v  
          Spain , paragraph 75). 
         
            
The resulting restriction is necessary for attaining the objective pursued, in the sense that there are no alternative less
         restrictive measures capable of attaining it. 
         
            
The designation of origin would not receive comparable protection from an obligation imposed on operators established outside
         the region of production to inform consumers, by means of appropriate labelling, that the grating and packaging has taken
         place outside that region. Any deterioration in the quality or authenticity of cheese grated and packaged outside the region
         of production, resulting from the materialisation of the risks associated with grating and packaging, might harm the reputation
         of all cheese marketed under the designation of origin, including that grated and packaged in the region of production under
         the control of the group of producers entitled to use the designation (see, to that effect,  
          Belgium  v  
          Spain , paragraphs and 77). 
         
            
Accordingly, the restriction following from a bilateral convention such as that at issue in the main proceedings is justified
         by the protection of industrial and commercial property rights, in particular the reputation of the designation of origin
         in question, by maintaining the quality and characteristics of the product and guaranteeing its authenticity. 
         
            
As regards the period prior to the entry into force of Regulation No 1107/96, the answer to the national court's question
         must therefore be that Article EC is to be interpreted as not precluding a convention concluded between two Member States
         A and B, such as the Franco-Italian Convention, from making applicable in Member State A national legislation of Member State
         B, such as that referred to by the national court, under which the designation of origin of a cheese, protected in Member
         State B, is reserved, for cheese marketed in grated form, to cheese grated and packaged in the region of production. 
         The period after the entry into force of Regulation No 1107/In so far as it relates to the period starting on June 1996, the question referred for a preliminary ruling raises similar
         points of interpretation to those examined by the Court in the judgment of today's date in Case C-108/Consorzio del Prosciutto di Parma and Salumificio S. Rita  [2003] ECR I-5121, concerning a condition of slicing and packaging in the region of production of  
         Prosciutto di Parma (Parma ham), another product enjoying a PDO under Regulations No 2081/and No 1107/96. 
         
            
As in that judgment, the national court's question in the present case requires an interpretation to be given with respect
         to four points of law. 
         
            
The first point is whether Regulation No 2081/must be interpreted as precluding the use of a PDO from being conditional
         on operations such as the grating and packaging of the product taking place in the region of production. 
         
            
The second point is whether imposing such a condition on the use of the PDO  
         Grana Padano for cheese marketed in grated form constitutes a measure having equivalent effect to a quantitative restriction on exports
         within the meaning of Article EC. 
         
            
The third point is whether, if that is so, the condition in question may be regarded as justified, and hence compatible with
         Article EC. 
         
            
The fourth point is whether that condition can be relied on against economic operators when it has not been brought to their
         notice. 
         Whether the use of a PDO may be subjected to a condition that operations such as the grating and packaging of the product
         be carried out in the region of production
         
            
Bellon, Biraghi, the French and Italian Governments and the Commission consider essentially that Regulation No 2081/does
         not preclude the use of a PDO from being subject to a condition that operations such as the grating and packaging of the product
         take place in the region of production. 
         
            
On this point, it is apparent from both the wording and the structure of Regulation No 2081/that the specification constitutes
         the instrument which determines the extent of the uniform protection given by that regulation within the Community. 
         
            
Article 4(1) of Regulation No 2081/makes eligibility to use a PDO subject to the product's compliance with a specification.
         Article of that regulation makes the affixing of the indication  
         PDO on a product subject to its compliance with the regulation, and hence with the specification. Article then determines
         the content of the uniform protection conferred on the registered name. Article 10(1) states that the function of the inspection
         structure put in place in each Member State is to ensure that products bearing a PDO meet the requirements laid down in the
         specification. 
         
            
In accordance with Article 4(2) of Regulation No 2081/92, the specification is to include at least the items listed non-exhaustively
         in that provision. 
         
            
It thus includes  
          inter alia  those mentioned in indents (b), (d), (e), (h) and (i) of that provision, namely: 
         
─
a description of the product, and its principal physical, chemical, microbiological and/or organoleptic characteristics; 
         
─
evidence that the product originates in a defined geographical area; 
         
─
a description of the method of obtaining the product and, if appropriate, the authentic and unvarying local methods; 
         
─
the specific labelling details relating to the indication PDO; 
         
─
any requirements laid down by Community and/or national provisions. 
         
            
The specification thus contains the detailed definition of the protected product drawn up by the producers concerned, under
         the control of the Member State which transmits it and then of the Commission which registers the PDO, in the framework of
         either the ordinary procedure under Articles to or the simplified procedure under Article of Regulation No 2081/92.
         
         
            
That definition determines both the extent of the obligations to be complied with for the purposes of using the PDO and, as
         a corollary, the extent of the right protected against third parties by the effect of registration of the PDO, which lays
         down at Community level the rules set out or referred to in the specification. 
         
            
The wording of Article of Regulation No 2081/does not exclude the application of special technical rules to operations
         leading to different presentations on the market of the same product, so that in each case it can satisfy the criterion of
         quality to which, according to the third recital in the preamble to that regulation, consumers have in recent years tended
         to attach greater importance, and guarantee an identifiable geographical origin, for which, according to that recital, there
         is a growing demand. 
         
            
In view of those two objectives, special technical rules may therefore be laid down for operations such as grating and packaging
         the product. 
         
            
It must therefore be concluded that Regulation No 2081/must be interpreted as not precluding the use of a PDO from being
         subject to the condition that operations such as the grating and packaging of the product take place in the region of production,
         where such a condition is laid down in the specification. 
         Whether the condition for the PDO  
         Grana Padano that the product must be grated and packaged in the region of production constitutes a measure having equivalent effect to
         a quantitative restriction of exports
         
            
Bellon and Biraghi consider that the registration of the PDO  
         Grana Padano by Regulation No 1107/excludes the possibility of finding that there is a measure having equivalent effect to a quantitative
         restriction on exports. Such a measure can come only from a Member State. After registration of a PDO by the Commission, the
         protection conferred no longer depends on the legislation of the Member State of origin of the product, but on Community legislation,
         which, in view of the hierarchy of rules of law, is binding on the Member States and their nationals. 
         
            
The French Government takes the view that there is no need to consider the interpretation of Article EC with respect to
         national rules reserving the designation of origin  
         Grana Padano to cheese grated in the region of production, since those rules were endorsed by Regulation No 1107/96. 
         
            
It is settled case-law that the prohibition of quantitative restrictions and measures having equivalent effect applies not
         only to national measures but also to measures adopted by the Community institutions (see,  
          inter alia , Case C-114/Kieffer and Thill  [1997] ECR I-3629, paragraph 27, and Case C-169/Schwarzkopf  [2001] ECR I-5901, paragraph 37). 
         
            
As stated in paragraph above, the specification of the PDO  
         Grana Padano expressly mentions the Decree of November as constituting requirements laid down by national provisions within the
         meaning of Article 4(2)(i) of Regulation No 2081/92. In registering the PDO  
         Grana Padano, Regulation No 1107/thus makes grating and packaging in the region of production a condition for the use of the PDO  
         Grana Padano for cheese marketed in grated form. 
         
            
Accordingly, for the reasons stated in paragraphs to above, which are applicable  
          mutatis mutandis  to the situation under examination, where the use of the PDO  
         Grana Padano for cheese marketed in grated form is made subject to the condition that grating and packaging operations be carried out
         in the region of production, this constitutes a measure having equivalent effect to a quantitative restriction on exports
         within the meaning of Article EC. 
         Whether the condition that the product be grated and immediately packaged in the region of production is justified
         
            
The specification of the PDO  
         Grana Padano, by the requirements laid down by national provisions to which it refers, namely the Decree of November 1991, defines in
         detail the conditions which must be fulfilled by grated cheese marketed under the PDO. Those conditions include in particular
         an obligation of grating and immediate packaging in the region of production. 
         
            
For the reasons stated in paragraphs to above, which are applicable  
          mutatis mutandis  to the point under examination, the fact that the use of the PDO  
         Grana Padano for cheese marketed in grated form is conditional on the grating and packaging operations being carried out in the region
         of production may be regarded as justified, and hence compatible with Article EC. 
         Whether the condition of grating and packaging in the region of production can be relied on against economic operators
         
            
In accordance with the second paragraph of Article EC, a regulation, which is a measure of general application, is binding
         in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. 
         
            
As such, it creates not only rights but also obligations for individuals, on which they may rely against other individuals
         before national courts. 
         
            
Nevertheless, the requirement of legal certainty means that Community rules must enable those concerned to know precisely
         the extent of the obligations which they impose on them (see Case C-209/United Kingdom  v  
          Commission  [1998] ECR I-5655, paragraph 35). 
         
            
Regulation No 2081/states, in the 12th recital in its preamble, that to enjoy protection in every Member State designations
         of origin must be registered at Community level, with entry in a register also providing information to those involved in
         trade and to consumers. 
         
            
However, where the simplified procedure is adopted, it does not provide for publication of the specification or extracts from
         the specification. 
         
            
Regulation No 1107/merely provides that the name  
         Grana Padano is to be registered as a PDO under Article of Regulation No 2081/92. 
         
            
The effect of that registration is to lay down at Community level the condition set out in the specification which makes the
         use of the PDO for cheese marketed in grated form subject to the condition that grating and packaging operations be carried
         out in the region of production. That condition implies for third parties a negative obligation, breach of which may give
         rise to civil or even criminal penalties. 
         
            
As all the parties who have expressed a view on this point acknowledged during the procedure, the protection conferred by
         a PDO does not normally extend to operations such as grating and packaging the product. Those operations are prohibited to
         third parties outside the region of production only if a condition to that effect is expressly provided for in the specification.
         
         
            
In those circumstances, the principle of legal certainty required that the condition in question be brought to the knowledge
         of third parties by adequate publicity in Community legislation, which could have been done by mentioning that condition in
         Regulation No 1107/96. 
         
            
As it was not brought to the knowledge of third parties, that condition cannot be relied on against them before a national
         court, whether for the purposes of criminal penalties or in civil proceedings. 
         
            
Nevertheless, the principle of legal certainty does not preclude that the condition at issue be regarded by the national court
         as capable of being relied on against operators such as Ravil who carried on the activity of grating and packaging the product
         in the period prior to the entry into force of Regulation No 1107/96, should that court consider that during that period the
         Decree of November was applicable by virtue of the Franco-Italian Convention and capable of being relied on against
         those concerned by virtue of the national rules on publicity. 
         
            
Such operators may be considered to have been aware, on the date of entry into force of Regulation No 1107/96, of the condition
         at issue imposed by the Decree of November 1991. They may therefore be deemed to be aware, also in the context of the Community
         system of PDOs, of the condition of grating and packaging in the region of production attached to the designation  
         Grana Padano, which was previously  
         legally protected at national level within the meaning of Article 17(1) of Regulation No 2081/on the territory of the Italian Republic,
         and was registered on that basis pursuant to that regulation at the request of that Member State. 
         
            
It must therefore be concluded that the condition that Grana Padano cheese must be grated and packaged within the region of
         production may not be relied on against economic operators, as it was not brought to their knowledge by adequate publicity
         in Community legislation, which could have been done by mentioning that condition in Regulation No 1107/96. Nevertheless,
         the principle of legal certainty does not preclude the condition at issue from being regarded by the national court as capable
         of being relied on against operators who carried on the activity of grating and packaging the product in the period prior
         to the entry into force of Regulation No 1107/96, should that court consider that during that period the Decree of November
         was applicable by virtue of the Franco-Italian Convention and capable of being relied on against those concerned by virtue
         of the national rules on publicity. 
         
            
In conclusion, with respect to the Community system of protection of PDOs, the answer to the question referred for a preliminary
         ruling must be as follows: Regulation No 2081/must be interpreted as not precluding the use of a PDO from being subject to the condition that operations
         such as the grating and packaging of the product take place in the region of production, where such a condition is laid down
         in the specification.Where the use of the PDO  
         Grana Padano for cheese marketed in grated form is made subject to the condition that grating and packaging operations be carried out
         in the region of production, this constitutes a measure having equivalent effect to a quantitative restriction on exports
         within the meaning of Article EC, but may be regarded as justified, and hence compatible with that provision.However, the condition in question may not be relied on against economic operators, as it was not brought to their knowledge
         by adequate publicity in Community legislation. Nevertheless, the principle of legal certainty does not preclude that condition
         from being regarded by the national court as capable of being relied on against operators who carried on the activity of grating
         and packaging the product in the period prior to the entry into force of Regulation No 1107/96, should that court consider
         that during that period the Decree of November was applicable by virtue of the Franco-Italian Convention and capable
         of being relied on against those concerned by virtue of the national rules on publicity.
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the French, Spanish and Italian Governments and by the Commission, which have submitted observations
         to the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings
         pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT,
in answer to the question referred to it by the Cour de cassation by judgment of December 2000, hereby rules: 
         
1.
 As regards the period prior to the entry into force of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1107/of June on the registration
            of geographical indications and designations of origin under the procedure laid down in Article of Council Regulation (EEC)
            No 2081/92, Article EC must be interpreted as not precluding a convention concluded between two Member States A and B,
            such as the Convention between the French Republic and the Italian Republic on the protection of designations of origin, indications
            of provenance and names of certain products, signed in Rome on April 1964, from making applicable in Member State A national
            legislation of Member State B, such as that referred to by the national court, under which the designation of origin of a
            cheese, protected in Member State B, is reserved, for cheese marketed in grated form, to cheese grated and packaged in the
            region of production. 
            
2.
 Council Regulation (EEC) No 2081/of July on the protection of geographical indications and designations of origin
            for agricultural products and foodstuffs, as amended by the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Republic of
            Austria, the Republic of Finland and the Kingdom of Sweden and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union
            is founded, must be interpreted as not precluding the use of a protected designation of origin from being subject to the condition
            that operations such as the grating and packaging of the product take place in the region of production, where such a condition
            is laid down in the specification. 
            
3.
 Where the use of the protected designation of origin  
            Grana Padano for cheese marketed in grated form is made subject to the condition that grating and packaging operations be carried out
            in the region of production, this constitutes a measure having equivalent effect to a quantitative restriction on exports
            within the meaning of Article EC, but may be regarded as justified, and hence compatible with that provision. 
            
4.
 However, the condition in question may not be relied on against economic operators, as it was not brought to their knowledge
            by adequate publicity in Community legislation. Nevertheless, the principle of legal certainty does not preclude that condition
            from being regarded by the national court as capable of being relied on against operators who carried on the activity of grating
            and packaging the product in the period prior to the entry into force of Regulation No 1107/96, should that court consider
            that during that period the Decree of November was applicable by virtue of the aforesaid Convention between the French
            Republic and the Italian Republic and capable of being relied on against those concerned by virtue of the national rules on
            publicity. 
            
Rodríguez Iglesias
Puissochet 
Wathelet 
Schintgen
Timmermans 
Gulmann 
Edward
Jann 
Skouris 
Macken
Colneric 
von Bahr
Cunha Rodrigues 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on May 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: French.
Top  
 