
ORDER OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Rectification of judgment)
In Case C‑585/P REC,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on November 2013,
Europäisch-Iranische Handelsbank AG, established in Hamburg (Germany), represented by S. Jeffrey, S. Ashley and A. Irvine, Solicitors, H. Hohmann, Rechtsanwalt,
         D. Wyatt QC and R. Blakeley, Barrister,
      
applicant,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
Council of the European Union, represented by F. Naert and M. Bishop, acting as Agents, 
      
defendant at first instance,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, represented by V. Kaye, acting as Agent, and by R. Palmer, Barrister,
      
European Commission,
interveners at first instance,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
composed of T. von Danwitz, President of the Chamber, C. Vajda, A. Rosas (Rapporteur), E. Juhász and D. Šváby, Judges,
Advocate General: P. Mengozzi,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
after hearing the Advocate General,
makes the following 
Order
On March 2015, the Court (Fifth Chamber) delivered its judgment in Europäisch-Iranische Handelsbank v Council (C‑585/P, EU:C:2015:145).
      
That judgment contains errors which it is appropriate for the Court to rectify at the request of Europäisch-Iranische Handelsbank
         AG pursuant to Article 154(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fifth Chamber) hereby orders: 
1.      Paragraph of the judgment in Europäisch-Iranische Handelsbank v Council (C‑585/P, EU:C:2015:145) shall be rectified as follows:
‘Since the Council has applied for costs and the appellant has been unsuccessful, the appellant must be ordered to bear its
            own costs and to pay those incurred by the Council.’
2.      Point of the operative part of that judgment shall be rectified as follows:
‘Orders Europäisch-Iranische Handelsbank AG to bear its own costs and to pay those incurred by the Council of the European
            Union.’
3.      The original of this order shall be annexed to the original of the rectified judgment. A note of this order shall be made
            in the margin of the original of the rectified judgment.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 