
Case C-559/Deli Ostrich NV
v
Belgische Staat
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
rechtbank van eerste aanleg te Antwerpen)
(Common Customs Tariff – Combined Nomenclature – Tariff classification – Frozen camel meat not from farm-raised animals – Classification under subheading (other game meat) or (other))
Summary of the Judgment
Common Customs Tariff – Tariff headings – Camel meat – Classification under subheading of the Combined Nomenclature
            – Condition – Camels which lived in the wild and were hunted 
(Council Regulation No 2658/87, Annex I; Commission Regulation No 1549/2006)
The Combined Nomenclature constituting Annex I to Regulation No 2658/on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on
         the Common Customs Tariff, as amended by Regulation No 1549/2006, must be interpreted as meaning that camel meat must be classified
         under subheading as ‘other game meat’ if the camels from which that meat comes lived in the wild and were hunted.
      
(see para. 31, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Eighth Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Common Customs Tariff – Combined Nomenclature – Tariff classification – Frozen camel meat not from farm-raised animals – Classification under subheading (other game meat) or (other))
In Case C‑559/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the rechtbank van eerste aanleg te Antwerpen (Belgium), made
         by decision of November 2010, received at the Court on November 2010, in the proceedings
      
Deli Ostrich NV
v
Belgische Staat,
THE COURT (Eighth Chamber),
composed of K. Schiemann, acting for the President of the Eighth Chamber, L. Bay Larsen and E. Jarašiūnas (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: P. Mengozzi,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Deli Ostrich NV, by K. Spagnoli, advocaat,
–        the Belgian Government, by M. Jacobs and J.-C. Halleux, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by L. Bouyon and B. Burggraaf, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of the Combined Nomenclature in Annex I to Council Regulation
         (EEC) No 2658/of July on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff (OJ L 256,
         p. 1), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1549/of October (OJ L 301, p. 1) (‘the CN’), in particular
         subheadings and 95. 
      
The reference has been made in the course of proceedings between Deli Ostrich NV (‘Deli Ostrich’) and the Belgische Staat
         (Belgian State), represented by the Federale Overheidsdienst Financiën, Douane en Accijnzen (Federal Finance, Customs and
         Excise Authority), concerning the tariff classification of frozen camel meat from Australia. 
      
 Legal context
 The CN
The customs classification of goods imported into the European Union is governed by the CN set out in Annex I to Regulation
         No 2658/87. The version of the CN in force at the material time is that resulting from Regulation No 1549/2006.
      
The CN is based on the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System drawn up by the Customs Cooperation Council, now
         the World Customs Organisation, and established by the International Convention on the Harmonised Commodity Description and
         Coding System concluded at Brussels on June 1983, which, together with the Protocol of Amendment thereto of June 1986,
         was approved on behalf of the European Economic Community by Council Decision 87/369/EEC of April (OJ L 198, p. 1).
      
Part One of the CN contains preliminary provisions. In Part One, Section I, which contains general rules, subsection A, headed
         ‘General rules for the interpretation of the [CN]’, states:
      
‘Classification of goods in the [CN] shall be governed by the following principles:
1.      The titles of sections, chapters and sub-chapters are provided for ease of reference only; for legal purposes, classification
         shall be determined according to the terms of the headings and any relative section or chapter notes and, provided such headings
         or notes do not otherwise require, according to the following provisions.
      
…
6.      For legal purposes, the classification of goods in the subheadings of a heading shall be determined according to the terms
         of those subheadings and any related subheading notes and, mutatis mutandis, to the above rules, on the understanding that only subheadings at the same level are comparable. For the purposes of this
         rule, the relative section and chapter notes also apply, unless the context requires otherwise.’
      
Part Two of the CN contains a classification of goods in sections, chapters, headings and subheadings.
      
In Part Two of the CN, Section I, entitled ‘Live animals; animal products’, includes Chapter 2, which is entitled ‘Meat and
         edible meat offal’. That chapter includes heading 0208, which is worded as follows:
      
‘Other meat and edible meat offal, fresh, chilled or frozen.
…
– Other:
– – Of domestic pigeons
                  – – Of game, other than of rabbits or hares:
– – – Of quails
– – – Other
– – Seal meat
– – Of reindeer
– – Frogs’ legs
– – Other’.
Pursuant to the second indent of Article 9(1)(a) and Article of Regulation No 2658/87, the European Commission draws up
         explanatory notes to the CN, which are published in the Official Journal of the European Union.
      
The explanatory notes in force at the material time are those which were published in the Official Journal of the European Union of February (OJ C 50, p. 1). As regards subheading 40, the explanatory notes are worded as follows:
      
‘This subheading includes the meat and edible meat offal of:
1.      furred game: fallow deer, roe-deer, chamois or izard (Rupicapra rupicapra), moose or elk, goat-antelope, antelopes, gazelles, bears and kangaroos;
      
2.      feathered game: wild pigeons, wild geese, wild duck, partridges, pheasants, woodcock, snipe, grouse, ortolans and ostriches.
The meat and edible meat offal of animals generally the object of hunting and shooting (pheasants, fallow deer, ostriches,
         etc.) remain classified as meat and edible meat offal of game even when such animals have been raised in captivity.
      
The meat and edible meat offal of reindeer is excluded from this subheading (subheading 60). However, the meat and
         edible meat offal of certain species of reindeer (e.g., caribou) are classified in this subheading provided that proof is
         furnished that such meat and edible meat offal come from animals which lived in the wild and which were hunted.
      
This subheading does not cover the meat and edible meat offal of wild rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus) or hares, which fall in subheading 90.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
On October 2007, the company DHL Global Forwarding NV (‘DHL’) lodged at the kantoor der douane en accijnzen te Antwerpen
         (Customs and Excise Office, Antwerp) a declaration for release for consumption of cartons of boneless pieces of frozen
         camel meat. Deli Ostrich was referred to in the declaration as the recipient of those goods. The camel meat was declared under
         subheading of the CN.
      
DHL attached to the declaration a veterinary certificate from the competent Australian authority, dated September 2007,
         which stated that the camel meat in question came from animals which lived in the wild and had been slaughtered. 
      
On December 2007, DHL, on the instructions of Deli Ostrich, submitted an application for reimbursement of a certain amount
         of import duty, on the ground that those goods should have been declared under subheading of the CN. Since that
         application and the administrative appeal brought by Deli Ostrich were both rejected, Deli Ostrich brought the matter before
         the rechtbank van eerste aanleg te Antwerpen (Court of First Instance, Antwerp).
      
The referring court points out that neither party to the main proceedings disputes that the meat at issue comes from camels
         which are not farm‑raised. However, Deli Ostrich submits that the issue is whether the animals in question are wild animals,
         whereas the Federale Overheidsdienst Financiën, Douane en Accijnzen takes the view that the pertinent test for the tariff
         classification must be whether the animals in question are generally hunted, a category into which camels do not fall.
      
As it took the view that the outcome of the proceedings before it hinged on the interpretation of the provisions of the CN
         relating to animal products, the rechtbank van eerste aanleg te Antwerpen decided to stay those proceedings and to refer the
         following question to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘[W]hich tariff subheading should be applied, as at the date of the declaration of October 2007, in respect of import duties
         on meat from camels which, indisputably, have not been raised in captivity?’
      
 Consideration of the question referred
 Admissibility 
In its written observations, Deli Ostrich questions the admissibility of the reference for a preliminary ruling. According
         to Deli Ostrich, the question submitted does not concern an interpretation of European Union law, but an assessment of the
         facts in the main proceedings, which is a matter for the national court. 
      
In that regard, it is to be observed that the procedure laid down in Article TFEU is based on a clear separation of functions
         between the national courts and the Court of Justice. It is solely for the national court before which the dispute has been
         brought, and which must assume responsibility for the subsequent judicial decision, to determine in the light of the particular
         circumstances of the case both the need for a preliminary ruling in order to enable it to deliver judgment and the relevance
         of the questions which it submits to the Court. Consequently, where the question submitted concerns the interpretation of
         Community law, the Court is in principle bound to give a ruling (see Joined Cases C‑290/and C‑333/Nádasdi and Németh [2006] ECR I‑10115, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
When the Court is requested to give a preliminary ruling on a matter of tariff classification, its task is to provide the
         national court with guidance on the criteria the implementation of which will enable the latter to classify the products correctly
         in the CN, rather than to effect that classification itself, particularly since the Court does not necessarily have available
         to it all the information which is essential in that regard (see Case C‑56/Pärlitigu [2009] ECR I‑6719, paragraph 23, and Case C‑370/Data I/O [2010] ECR I-0000, paragraph 24). 
      
In the present case, it is apparent from the file that, by its question, the referring court seeks an interpretation of the
         CN and, more precisely, clarification of the criteria enabling goods to be classified in one of the subheadings under heading
         of the CN, in order to resolve the dispute before it.
      
Consequently, the reference for a preliminary ruling must be held admissible.
      
 Substance
By its question, the referring court asks, in essence, if meat from camels which have not been raised in captivity must be
         classified under subheading of the CN (‘other game meat’) or under subheading of the CN (‘other’).
      
According to Deli Ostrich and the Commission, the CN must be interpreted as meaning that the camel meat in question must be
         classified under subheading of the CN, concerning ‘other game meat’. By contrast, the Belgian Government claims,
         in its written observations, that that meat must be classified under subheading of the CN.
      
In that regard, it should be recalled that the Court has consistently held that, in the interests of legal certainty and for
         ease of verification, the decisive criterion for the classification of goods for customs purposes is in general to be sought
         in their objective characteristics and properties as defined in the wording of the CN and the section or chapter notes (see
         Case C‑196/Paderborner Brauerei Haus Cramer [2011] ECR I-0000, paragraph and the case-law cited). 
      
The explanatory notes to the CN drawn up by the Commission are an important aid to the interpretation of the scope of the
         various tariff headings but do not have legally binding force (see Case C‑123/Roeckl Sporthandschuhe [2010] ECR I‑4065, paragraph 37, and Case C‑423/X [2010] ECR I-0000, paragraph 16).
      
By contrast, a letter from a head of unit of the Commission, such as that of April from the Head of the Directorate-General
         for Customs and Indirect Taxation (DG XXI) of the Commission, responding to a question from the Federale Overheidsdienst Financiën,
         Douane en Accijnzen on the classification of camel meat, which was relied upon by the Belgian Government in its written observations,
         has none of the import of the explanatory notes. 
      
In the present case, it must be noted that camel meat is not explicitly covered by the wording of the headings and subheadings
         of the CN or by its section or chapter notes, or by the explanatory notes concerning subheading of the CN.
      
Indeed, the explanatory note specifies that ‘[t]he meat and edible meat offal of animals generally the object of hunting and
         shooting … remain classified as meat and edible meat offal of game even when such animals have been raised in captivity’.
         However, it does not follow from that explanation that only the meat and offal of animals which are generally the object of
         hunting or shooting can be classified under that subheading. 
      
In that regard, it is to be recalled that, at paragraph of the judgment in Case 149/Witt [1973] ECR 1587, the Court observed, in relation to reindeer meat, which can come from wild or domesticated animals, that
         the word ‘game’, in its ordinary meaning, designates those categories of animals which live in the wild and are hunted.
      
In the same paragraph of the judgment in Witt, the Court, in essence, stated that the customs authorities can legitimately require conclusive evidence that the animals
         whose meat is declared by the importer as being covered by the subheading relating to other game meat are game, thus allowing
         meat to be classified differently according to whether it comes from wild or domesticated animals of the same species.
      
As regards the objective characteristics and properties enabling camel meat to be classified under subheading of
         the CN as ‘other game meat’, the criterion to be taken into consideration is thus whether the meat whose classification is
         in issue comes from animals that lived in the wild and were hunted, which is a matter for the national court before which
         the dispute has been brought to ascertain. 
      
In the present case, it is apparent from the decision of the referring court that the parties to the main proceedings do not
         dispute that the meat at issue comes from camels which are not farm-raised. Furthermore, the Commission provided, in its written
         observations, factual details which confirm that a large proportion of the camel population in Australia has returned to the
         wild and that those wild camels are indeed regularly harvested, in particular for processing into food and feed, facts from
         which it can, if appropriate, be inferred that the meat at issue comes from camels which were hunted. 
      
Consequently, the answer to the question referred is that the CN must be interpreted as meaning that camel meat must be classified
         under subheading as ‘other game meat’ if the camels from which that meat comes lived in the wild and were hunted.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Eighth Chamber) hereby rules:
The Combined Nomenclature constituting Annex I to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July on the tariff and statistical
            nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff, as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1549/of October 2006, must
            be interpreted as meaning that camel meat must be classified under subheading as ‘other game meat’ if the camels
            from which that meat comes lived in the wild and were hunted. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 