
Avis juridique important
|
61988O0152(01)
Order of the Court (Fifth Chamber) of January 1992.  -  Sofrimport SARL v Commission of the European Communities.  -  Community protective measures - Non-contractual liability - No need to give a decision.  -  Case C-152/88.  
European Court reports Page I-Parties
Grounds
Operative part
Keywords
++++Procedure - Costs - No need to give a decision  (Rules of Procedure Art. 69(6) )  
Parties
In Case C-152/88,  Sofrimport SARL, a company incorporated under French law whose registered office is in Paris, represented by H.J. Bronkhorst, a member of the Hague Bar with right of audience before the Hoge Raad (Supreme Court of the Netherlands], and E.H. Pijnacker Hordijk, of the Amsterdam Bar, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Chambers of Jacques Loesch, Rue Zithe,  applicant,  v  Commission of the European Communities, represented by Peter Oliver, a member of its Legal Service, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of Roberto Hayder, a representative of its Legal Service, Wagner Centre, Kirchberg,  defendant,  APPLICATION for the annulment of Commission Regulations (EEC) No 962/and No 984/of and April suspending the issue of import licences for dessert apples originating in Chile (Official Journal L 95, p. 10, and L 98, p. 37) and Commission Regulation (EEC) No 1040/of April fixing quantities of imports of dessert apples originating in third countries and amending Regulation (EEC) No 962/suspending the issue of import licences for dessert apples originating in Chile (Official Journal L 102, p. 23) and for damages,  THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),  composed of: R. Joliet, President of the Chamber, Sir Gordon Slynn, J.C. Moitinho de Almeida, G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias and M. Zuleeg, Judges,  Advocate General: G. Tesauro,  Registrar: J.-G. Giraud,  after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General,  makes the following  Order  
Grounds
By interlocutory judgment of June the Court (Fifth Chamber) upheld the applicant' s claim and annulled Commission Regulations (EEC) No 962/and No 984/of and April and Commission Regulation (EEC) No 1040/of April in so far as they concerned products in transit to the Community and ordered the European Economic Community to make good the damage suffered by the applicant as a result of the application of Regulations (EEC) No 962/88, No 984/and No 1040/88; it reserved its decision on costs.  The Court asked the parties to settle the amount of compensation payable, on the basis of objective data enabling that amount to be calculated, within a period of months, which was extended by an order of the Court of July until December 1991.  The Court also held that interest was payable on that sum at the rate of 8% from the date of the judgment.  By a letter lodged at the Court Registry on November 1991, the Commission informed the Court that the negotiations between the parties had been successfully concluded and that the compensation agreed with the applicant had been paid to it in October 1991. By a letter lodged by fax at the Court Registry on November 1991, the applicant confirmed that agreement concerning the amount of damages to be paid had been reached.  In those circumstances, the Court holds that with the exception of the question of costs, the dispute between the parties in this case has been resolved and consequently there is no longer any need to rule on the amount of compensation.  As regards costs, pursuant to Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs; under Article 69(6), where a case does not proceed to judgment the costs are in the discretion of the Court.  Since the judgment of June and the agreement reached by the parties upheld for the most part the applicant' s claims, the defendant institution must be ordered to pay the costs, including those of the interlocutory proceedings.  
Operative part
On those grounds,  THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)  hereby orders:  1. There is no longer any need to rule on the amount of compensation in Case C-152/88;  2. The Commission of the European Communities is ordered to pay the costs, including those of the interlocutory proceedings.  Luxembourg, January Top  
 