
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-72/Carbonati Apuani Srl
v
Comune di Carrara
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Commissione tributaria provinciale di Massa Carrara)
(Charges having effect equivalent to a customs duty – Tax levied on marble excavated in the territory of a municipality on its being transported across the boundaries of the municipal
         territory)
      
Summary of the Judgment
Free movement of goods – Customs duty – Charges having equivalent effect – Definition –Tax levied in a municipality of a Member
            State and imposed on a class of goods on account of their being transported beyond the boundaries of the municipal territory
            – Included 
(Art. EC)
A tax proportionate to the weight of goods, levied in one municipality of a Member State only and imposed on one class of
         goods when those goods are transported beyond the territorial boundaries of that municipality, constitutes a charge having
         effect equivalent to a customs duty on exports within the meaning of Article EC, despite the fact that it is imposed also
         on goods the final destination of which is within the Member State concerned.
      
First, the very principle of the customs union, as provided for by Article EC, requires the free movement of goods to be
         ensured within the union generally, not in trade between Member States alone, but more broadly throughout the territory of
         the customs union, and the absence of charges – whether between States or within a State – exhibiting the features of a customs
         duty or of a charge having equivalent effect is a precondition essential to the realisation of such a customs union.  Second,
         given that the tax at issue is imposed on all goods in the category in question that cross the territorial boundaries of the
         municipality where they are produced, no distinction being made between goods the final destination of which is in the Member
         State of production and goods destined for other Member States, it impinges by its nature and terms on trade between Member
         States.
      
(see paras 22, 24, 26, 35, operative part 1)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)September 2004(1)
(Charges having effect equivalent to a customs duty  –  Tax levied on marble excavated in the territory of a municipality on its being transported across the boundaries of the municipal
                  territory)
               
 In Case C-72/03,REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC,from the Commissione tributaria di Massa Carrara (Italy), made by decision of December 2002, registered at the Court on February 2003, in the proceedings brought by
            
Carbonati Apuani Srl
against
Comune di Carrara,
            
THE COURT (First Chamber),,
 composed of P. Jann, President of the Chamber, A. Rosas, S. von Bahr, R. Silva de Lapuerta and K. Lenaerts (Rapporteur), Judges,
            
 Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro,Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
             having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on March 2004,after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
            
–
 Carbonati Apuani, by G. Andreani and R. Diamanti, avvocati,
            
–
 the Comune di Carrara, by A. Calamia, F. Batistoni Ferrara, L. Buselli, G.M. Roberti and A. Franchi, avvocati,
            
–
 the Italian Government, by M. Fiorilli, avvocato dello Stato,
            
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by X. Lewis and R. Amorosi, acting as Agents, and  G. Bambara, avvocato,
            
after hearing the Advocate General's Opinion at the sitting on May 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles EC, EC, EC and EC.
         
            
 The reference was made in the course of proceedings challenging the compatibility with Community law of a charge levied by
         the Comune di Carrara on marble excavated within its territory on its being transported across the boundaries of municipal
         territory.
         
The relevant provisions of Italian law
            
 The single article of Law No of July 1911, as amended by Article 55(18) of Law No of December (GURI No
         302, December 1997), provides:
         ‘There shall be established in favour of the Comune di Carrara a tax on marble excavated within, and transported from, its
         territory.  That tax shall be applied and collected by the Comune when the marble leaves its territory on the basis of a special
         regulation, to be decided upon by the Consiglio Comunale [municipal council] after consultation of the social partners.
          Every year, when setting the budget for the Comune, the Consiglio Comunale shall fix the rate at which that tax shall be levied
         in the following year.  However, when the Comune has to meet ongoing commitments to be paid from or guaranteed by the tax
         yield, the Consiglio Comunale may fix in advance the minimum amount of that tax for several years.
          The Comune may, following a decision of the Council, in accordance with municipal and provincial law, and subject to approval
         by the Giunta provinciale amministrativa [Administrative Provincial Council], provide that the tax yield should be allocated,
         in part, to discharge the costs or charges of the construction and operation of the port of Marina di Carrara, where appropriate
         pursuant to Law No of February and, in part, to underwrite the subscriptions of the workers in the marble industry
         to the Cassa nazionale di previdenza per gli operai [National Workers’ Insurance Fund].  …’
         
            
 Article 2(2)(b) of Decree-Law No of January 1999, converted, with amendments, into Law No of March (GURI No
         of March 1999), provides:
         ‘The single article of Law No 749/… shall be interpreted as meaning that the tax … applies to marble and its derivatives
         and is to be decided in relation to the municipality’s overheads directly or indirectly arising from activities in the local
         marble industry.’
         
            
 On the basis of those provisions the Comune di Carrara imposes, by council regulation, a tax on marble excavated in its territory
         and transported out of that municipal territory.  At the material time, the rate of tax was fixed at ITL per tonne for
         blocks of marble.
         
            
 By contrast, marble excavated and used within the municipal territory is exempt from the tax.  In addition, the order for
         reference states that exemptions may also be provided for in favour of marble used or worked in municipalities neighbouring
         the Comune di Carrara.
         
The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred
            
 The applicant in the main proceedings challenged before the Commissione tributaria provinciale di Massa Carrara the tax notice
         by which the Comune di Carrara assessed the marble tax payable by the applicant for the month of May 2001.  Before that court
         it raised the question of the compatibility of that tax with the provisions of the EC Treaty.
         
            
 The Commissione tributaria provinciale di Massa Carrara – taking the view that the marble tax could be regarded as a customs
         duty or as a charge having effect equivalent to such a duty and that application of that tax could distort competition – decided
         to stay proceedings and to refer the following question to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
         ‘Are the rules laid down in Italian Laws No of July 1911, No of December and in Decree-Law No of January
         1999, as converted with amendments into Law No 75/– imposition of the marble tax in the Comune di Carrara – compatible
         with Articles 23, 81, and of the Treaty establishing the European Community, in the version in force following amendment
         by the Treaty of Amsterdam, which was ratified in Italy by Law No 209/1998?’
         
On the admissibility of the question referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 According to the Commission, the order for reference does not set out sufficiently clearly the factual and legal background
         to the question referred.  It is therefore of the view that the question is inadmissible.
         
            
 Here it has to be pointed out that the need to provide an interpretation of Community law which will be of use to the national
         court makes it necessary that the national court should define the factual and legislative context of the question it is asking
         or, at the very least, explain the factual circumstances on which that question is based (see, inter alia, the judgment in
         Joined Cases C-320/to C-322/Telemarsicabruzzo and Others [1993] ECR I-393, paragraph 6; the orders in Case C-157/Banchero [1993] ECR I-1085, paragraph 4; Joined Cases C-128/and C-137/Testa and Modesti [1998] ECR I-2181, paragraph 5, and Case C-9/Agostini [1998] ECR I-4261, paragraph 4).
         
            
 The Court has likewise held that it is essential that the national court should give at the very least some explanation of
         the reasons for the choice of the Community provisions which it requires to be interpreted and on the link it establishes
         between those provisions and the national legislation applicable to the dispute (order in Case C-116/Laguillaumie [2000] ECR I-4979, point 16).
         
            
 In the circumstances of this case, it must be stated that the Court has enough information available to it to enable it to
         give a reply that may be of some use to the national court, in so far as the question referred turns on the interpretation
         of Article EC.  As a matter of fact, first, the order for reference specifically sets out the legislative framework of
         the marble tax which, according to the national court, could be regarded as a customs duty or as a measure having equivalent
         effect.  Second, with regard to the factual context, the order for reference makes it clear that the applicant in the main
         proceedings, which transported Carrara marble out of the municipal territory, has challenged before the national court the
         lawfulness of the tax notice by which the Comune assessed the marble tax imposed on it for the month of May 2001.
         
            
 In contrast, as the Advocate General has pointed out in paragraphs to of his Opinion, the national court has supplied
         no useful information concerning the connection it makes between Articles EC, EC and EC and the national legislation
         applicable to the dispute.  All it says is that the tax may affect competition, without, however, explaining what link there
         could be between the marble tax and supposedly anti-competitive conduct on the part of undertakings.
         
            
 In those circumstances, the reference for a preliminary ruling is admissible only in so far as it concerns the interpretation
         of Article EC.
         
On the question referred
            
 By its question, the national court seeks in substance to ascertain whether a tax such as the marble tax, levied solely in
         one municipality of a Member State and imposed on one class of goods – namely, marble excavated in that municipality’s territory
         – when such goods are transported out of that municipality, constitutes a charge having effect equivalent to a customs duty.
         
            
 The Italian Government and the Comune di Carrara maintain that the marble tax is applicable without distinction to marble
         exported to other Member States and to marble sent to other parts of Italy.  Since the tax is not imposed solely on goods
         intended for export, they argue that it cannot be regarded as falling within the ambit of Article EC.  At the very most,
         the tax at issue constitutes internal taxation for the purposes of Article EC, compatible with the Treaty because it is
         imposed in the same manner and at the same stage of marketing on marble processed and marketed in Italy and on marble exported
         to other Member States (see Case C-90/Haahr Petroleum [1997] ECR I-4085, and Case C-234/Nygård [2002] ECR I-3657).
         
            
 It ought here to be borne in mind that the Court has previously held that a charge does not constitute a charge having effect
         equivalent to a customs duty, but internal taxation within the meaning of Article EC, if it relates to a general system
         of internal dues applied systematically to categories of products in accordance with objective criteria irrespective of the
         origin or destination of the products (Case 90/Commission v France [1981] ECR 283, paragraph 14, and Case C-163/Legros and Others [1992] ECR I-4625, paragraph 11).
         
            
 In the circumstances of the present case, it is to be observed that the tax at issue is applied to Carrara marble when it
         is transported across the territorial boundaries of the Comune di Carrara.  The chargeable event thus consists of the crossing
         of those boundaries.  Marble used within the Comune di Carrara is exempt from the tax, precisely because it is used locally
         and not on account of objective criteria that might apply equally to marble transported out of the municipality.  Because
         of those factors, the tax at issue cannot be described as internal taxation within the meaning of Article EC (see Legros, paragraph 12).
         
            
 The next question to be considered is whether a tax such as the marble tax constitutes a charge having effect equivalent to
         a customs duty for the purposes of Article EC.
         
            
 As the Court has held before on many occasions, any pecuniary charge, however small, and whatever its designation and mode
         of application, which is imposed unilaterally on domestic or foreign goods by reason of the fact that they cross a frontier,
         and which is not a customs duty in the strict sense, constitutes a charge having equivalent effect, within the meaning of
         Article EC (see Case 158/Commission v Denmark [1983] ECR 3573, paragraph 18; Legros and Others, paragraph 13; Case C-426/Deutsches Milch-Kontor [1994] ECR I-2757, paragraph 50; Joined Cases C-485/and C-486/Simitzi [1995] ECR I-2655, paragraph 15; and Case C-347/UCAL [1997] ECR I-4911, paragraph 18).
         
            
 The Italian Government and the Comune di Carrara argue, nevertheless, that the prohibition laid down in Article EC, which
         is repeated again in Article EC,  must refer only to customs duties and charges having equivalent effect in trade ‘between
         Member States’.
         
            
 On this point it ought to be recalled that the justification for the prohibition of customs duties and charges having equivalent
         effect is that any pecuniary charges imposed on goods by reason of the fact that they cross a frontier constitutes an obstacle
         to the movement of such goods (see, in particular, Joined Cases 2/and 3/Brachfeld and Chougol [1969] ECR 211, point 14, and Joined Cases C-363/93, C-407/to C-411/Lancry and Others [1994] ECR I-3957, paragraph 25).  The very principle of a customs union, as provided for by Article EC, requires the
         free movement of goods to be ensured within the union generally, not in trade between Member States alone, but more broadly
         throughout the territory of the customs union.  If Articles EC and EC make express reference only to trade between Member
         States, that is because the framers of the Treaty took it for granted that there were no charges exhibiting the features of
         a customs duty in existence within the Member States.
         
            
 Again, it is to be borne in mind that in the Single European Act added to the EEC Treaty Article 8a (then Article 7a
         of the EC Treaty, and now, after amendment, Article EC), which set as an aim the establishment of an internal market before
         December 1992.  Article 14(2) EC defines the internal market as ‘an area without internal frontiers in which the free movement
         of goods, persons, services and capital is ensured’, without drawing any distinction between inter-State frontiers and frontiers
         within a State.
         
            
 Since Article EC et seq. must be read in conjunction with Article 14(2) EC, the absence of charges – whether between States
         or within a State – exhibiting the features of a customs duty is a precondition essential to the realisation of a customs
         union in which the free movement of goods is ensured.
         
            
 The Court has ruled to that effect before in Legros and Others, paragraph 18, Lancry and Others, paragraph 32, and Simitzi, paragraph 17, holding that a charge imposed when goods cross a territorial boundary within a Member State constitutes a
         charge having effect equivalent to a customs duty.
         
            
 It must moreover be emphasised that the issue raised in the case in the main proceedings does not appear to be a situation
         in which all the components are wholly confined to one Member State.  Indeed, it has been established that the marble tax
         is imposed on all marble from Carrara that crosses that municipality’s territorial boundaries, no distinction being made between
         marble the final destination of which is in Italy and marble destined for other Member States.  By its nature and terms, the
         marble tax therefore impinges on trade between Member States (see Lancry and Others, paragraph 30; see, to the same effect, with regard to measures having effect equivalent to a quantitative restriction, Case
         286/Oosthoek’s Uitgeversmaatchaapij [1982] ECR 4575, paragraph 9; Joined Cases C-277/91, C-318/and C-319/Ligur Carni and Others [1993] ECR I-6621, paragraphs and 37; Case C-254/TK-Heimdienst [2000] ECR I-151, paragraphs to 31; and Case C-448/Guimont [2000] ECR I-10663, paragraphs to 23).
         
            
 Nevertheless, the Comune di Carrara argues that various facts militate against the classifying of the marble tax as a charge
         having an effect equivalent to a customs duty.  On this point it observes that the tax at issue in the main proceedings, unlike
         the charge concerned in Legros and Others, Lancry and Others and Simitzi, is levied by a territorial administrative authority of no great size, and that it is imposed on one class of goods, viz.,
         Carrara marble, and not on all goods crossing the municipality’s territorial boundaries.
         
            
 Those arguments cannot be accepted.  Indeed, it must be borne in mind that, just like Article EC, Article EC prohibits
         any pecuniary charge, albeit minimal, that might create an impediment to trade in the form of customs duty, unilaterally imposed
         by a competent public authority of a Member State (see paragraph above).  For the purposes of classifying a tax as a charge
         having effect equivalent to a customs duty, the size of the territorial administrative authority which levied the tax is therefore
         immaterial, in so far as that tax constitutes an obstacle to trade in the internal market.
         
            
 In addition, given that Articles EC and EC seek to abolish all obstacles to trade created by customs duties, it is irrelevant
         that the tax in question is imposed on one specific category of goods (see Case C-109/CRT France International [1999] ECR I‑2237, and Joined Cases C-441/and C-442/Michaïlidis [2000] ECR I‑7145) or on all goods crossing the territorial boundaries of the authority concerned (Legros and Others and Lancry and Others).
         
            
 In addition, the defendant in the main proceedings stresses the particular purpose of the tax at issue in the main proceedings.
          The revenue from the tax is intended to cover the expenses borne by the Comune di Carrara as a consequence of the marble
         industry’s activities in its territory.  The tax responds to an interest of all operators in that industry, including those
         that market the goods concerned abroad.
         
            
 The Court has held before that customs duties and charges having equivalent effect are prohibited regardless of the purpose
         for which they were introduced and the destination of the revenue from them (Case 24/Commission v Italy [1969] ECR 193, paragraph 7, and Simitzi, paragraph 14).  None the less, the Court has accepted that a charge which represents payment for a service actually rendered
         to an economic operator, of an amount in proportion to that service, does not constitute a charge having an effect equivalent
         to a customs duty (Case 63/Cadsky [1975] ECR 281, paragraph 8; Case 158/Commission v Denmark [1983] ECR 3573, paragraph 19; and CRT France International, paragraph 17).
         
            
 That is not, however, the case in the present circumstances.  As a matter of fact there is at best an indirect link between
         the tax at issue and the services provided for the operators on which the tax is imposed.  The Comune di Carrara’s observations
         make it clear that that charge is intended, in particular, to cover the costs incurred by the municipal authority in repairing
         and maintaining the road network, installing infrastructure for the harbour, the upkeep of a museum, research into safety
         in quarries, training activities in the field of mining engineering, or social benefits for workers.  Some of those services
         do not specifically benefit the operators that transport marble out of the territory of the Comune di Carrara.
         
            
 With regard to the argument that ‘local’ operators paying municipal taxes are already contributing to the expenses which the
         marble industry causes the municipal authority to bear, it has to be recalled that the chargeable event in respect of this
         tax occurs when marble crosses the municipality’s territorial boundaries, irrespective of whether the operator concerned is
         subject to municipal taxes.
         
            
 In any case, the fact that a tax imposed on the crossing of a frontier between States or within a State was introduced in
         order to compensate for a local charge applying to similar domestic products is not sufficient to exempt that tax from being
         classified as a charge having equivalent effect.  If it were, it would make the prohibition on charges having an effect equivalent
         to customs duties empty and meaningless (see, to that effect, Case 132/Denkavit [1979] ECR 1923, paragraph 8, and Michaïlidis, paragraph 23).
         
            
 It follows therefore from all the foregoing that a tax proportionate to the weight of goods, levied in one municipality of
         a Member State only and imposed on one class of goods when those goods are transported across the territorial boundaries of
         that municipality, constitutes a charge having effect equivalent to a customs duty on exports within the meaning of Article
         EC, despite the fact that the tax is imposed also on goods the final destination of which is within the Member State concerned.
         
On the temporal effects of this judgment
            
 Supposing the Court were to consider a tax such as that at issue in the proceedings to be incompatible with the relevant provisions
         of the Treaty, the Comune di Carrara asks it to limit the temporal effects of this judgment.  It refers, on the one hand,
         to uncertainty concerning the provisions of law applicable to the tax in question and, on the other, to the ensuing serious
         financial consequences for the Comune di Carrara’s budget if the effects of the judgment were not limited in time.
         
            
 It is to be observed that it is only exceptionally that the Court may, in application of the general principle of legal certainty
         inherent in the Community legal order, be moved to restrict for any person concerned the opportunity of relying upon the provisions
         thus interpreted with a view to calling in question legal relationships established in good faith (Legros and Others, paragraph 30, and Case C-104/Buchner and Others [2000] ECR I-3625, paragraph 39).
         
            
 In this respect, the Court found in Legros and Others that, on grounds of overriding considerations of legal certainty, the Treaty provisions relating to charges having an effect
         equivalent to customs duties on imports could not be relied on in support of claims for refunds of charges such as dock dues
         paid before the date of that judgment (July 1992), except by claimants who had, before that date, initiated legal proceedings
         or raised an equivalent claim.
         
            
 Now, the tax in question – as a tax imposed on the crossing of a territorial boundary within a Member State – must be treated
         as a charge of the same kind as the dock dues at issue in Legros and Others.  It may, therefore, be conceded that until July the Comune di Carrara could reasonably believe that the duty in
         question was in conformity with Community law.
         
            
 The same considerations of legal certainty must therefore apply here and consequently the temporal limitation set by the Court
         in Legros and Others must also be held to apply to claims for refunds of sums levied by way of the tax at issue in the main proceedings.
         
            
 In contrast, there are no grounds for limiting the effects of this judgment after July 1992, the date of the judgment in
         Legros and Others. After that date, the Comune di Carrara must in fact have been aware that the contested duty was incompatible with Community
         law.
         
            
 In conclusion, it must be stated that the provisions of the Treaty relating to charges having an effect equivalent to customs
         duties cannot be relied on in support of claims for refunds of sums levied by way of the tax at issue before July 1992,
         except by claimants who had, before that date, initiated legal proceedings or raised an equivalent claim. 
         
Costs
            
 Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court.  Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the
         costs of those parties, are not recoverable.
         
 On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) rules as follows:
         
 
1.
A tax proportionate to the weight of goods, levied in one municipality of a Member State only and imposed on one class of
                     goods when those goods are transported beyond the territorial boundaries of that municipality, constitutes a charge having
                     effect equivalent to a customs duty on exports within the meaning of Article EC, despite the fact that it is imposed also
                     on goods the final destination of which is within the Member State concerned.
                  
 
2.
Article EC cannot be relied on in support of claims for refunds of sums levied by way of the marble tax before July
                     1992, except by claimants who had, before that date, initiated legal proceedings or raised an equivalent claim. 
                  
 Signatures.
      
 –
            
Language of the case: Italian.
Top  
 