
Order of the Court (Seventh Chamber) of October — Vivaio dei Molini Azienda Agricola Porro Savoldi(Case C-502/11)
Public works contracts – Directive 93/37/EEC – Article – Principles of equal treatment and openness – Admissibility of rules reserving the right to participate in public tendering procedures to companies engaged in a commercial
         activity and excluding civil partnerships (società semplici) – Institutional and statutory objectives – Agricultural undertakings
      
1.                     Approximation of laws – Procedures for the award of public works contracts – Directive 93/– Purpose (Council Directive
            93/37) (see para. 31)
2.                     Approximation of laws – Procedures for the award of public works contracts – Tenderers – National legislation excluding candidates
            of a certain legal form – Not permissible – Contactor – Notion – Classification not dependent on direct performance with the
            contractor’s own resources, on its legal status and its systematic presence on the market (Council Directive 93/37) (see paras 32-35)
3.                     Approximation of laws – Procedures for the award of public works contracts – Directive 93/– Exclusion from participation
            in a contract – Limited nature of the list of causes set out in the first paragraph of Article of the Directive – Power
            of the Member Stes to provide for other means of exclusion – Conditions (Council Directive 93/37, Art. 24, first para.) (see
            para 37-42)
4.                     Approximation of laws – Procedures for the award of public works contracts – Directive 93/– Exclusion from participation
            in a contract – National legislation excluding individual agricultural undertakings engaged in commercial activities in the
            form of civil partnerships – Not permissible (Council Directive 93/37, Art. 6) (see paras 47-51)
Re: 
Reference for a preliminary ruling – Consiglio di Stato – Interpretation of Article of Council Directive 93/37/EEC of June
                  concerning the coordination of procedures for the award of public works contracts (OJ L 199, p. 54) – Principle
                  of non-discrimination – National legislation reserving the right to participate in public tendering procedures to companies
                  engaged in a commercial activity and excluding agricultural undertakings in the form of civil partnerships (società semplici).
               
Operative part 
European Union law, in particular Article of Council Directive 93/37/EEC of June concerning the coordination of
         procedures for the award of public works contracts, as amended by Commission Directive 2001/78/EC of September 2001, precludes
         national legislation, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which prohibits an undertaking such as a civil partnership
         having the status of ‘contractor’ within the meaning of Directive 93/from participating in public procurement procedures
         solely on the ground of its legal form.
Top  
 