
Case C-334/Commission of the European Communities
v
Hellenic Republic
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 79/409/EEC – Annex I – Conservation of wild birds – Special protection areas – IBA – Value – Quality of the data – Criteria – Margin of discretion – Manifestly insufficient classification – Wetlands)
Opinion of Advocate General Kokott delivered on September Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), October Summary of the Judgment
Environment – Conservation of wild birds – Directive 79/– Classification as special protection area 
(Council Directive 79/409, Art. 4(1) and (2))
Article of Directive 79/on the conservation of wild birds lays down a system which is specifically targeted and reinforced
         both for the species listed in Annex I to that directive and for migratory species not included in that annex, an approach
         justified by the fact that they are, respectively, the most endangered species and the species constituting a common heritage
         of the Community. Furthermore, it is clear from the ninth recital in the preamble to that directive that the preservation,
         maintenance or restoration of a sufficient diversity and area of habitats is essential to the conservation of all species
         of birds. The Member States are therefore required to adopt the measures necessary for the conservation of those species and
         thus to classify as special protection areas (SPAs) all the sites which, applying ornithological criteria, appear to be the
         most suitable for conservation of the species in question.
      
For that purpose, the updating of scientific data is necessary to determine the situation of the most endangered species and
         the species constituting the common heritage of the Community.   The Inventory of Important Bird Areas in the European Community
         (IBA 2000) provides an up-to-date inventory of the areas of importance for the conservation of birds which, in the absence
         of scientific evidence to the contrary, constitutes a basis of reference for assessing whether that Member State has classified
         as SPAs areas sufficient in number and size to offer protection to all the species of birds listed in Annex I to Directive
         79/and also to the migratory species not included in that annex.
      
In the absence of the submission of scientific studies capable of disproving the results of the IBA 2000, a Member State fails
         to fulfil its obligations under Article 4(1) and (2) of Directive 79/if it classifies as SPAs territories the number and
         overall size of which fall clearly short of the number and overall size of the territories fulfilling the preconditions for
         classification as SPAs, fails to designate SPAs to offer protection to certain species, and classifies as SPAs areas in which
         other species are insufficiently represented.
      
Although the Member States bear sole responsibility for the classification of SPAs and must base that classification on the
         best scientific knowledge available, that does not mean that such an obligation does not apply as long as the competent authorities
         have not evaluated and verified the new scientific knowledge. Such an obligation to classify has existed since the expiry
         of the period for transposition of Directive 79/409.
      
(see paras 24-25, 28, 32, 34, 48, 60, 62, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 79/409/EEC – Annex I – Conservation of wild birds – Special protection areas – IBA – Value – Quality of the data – Criteria – Margin of discretion – Manifestly insufficient classification – Wetlands)
In Case C‑334/04,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on July 2004,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by M. Patakia and M. van Beek, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Hellenic Republic, represented by E. Skandalou, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant,
supported by:
Kingdom of Spain, represented by N. Díaz Abad, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
French Republic, represented by G. de Bergues and C. Jurgensen-Mercier, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
Portuguese Republic, represented by L. Fernandes and M. Lois, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
Republic of Finland, represented by T. Pynnä, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
interveners,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, L. Bay Larsen, R. Silva de Lapuerta, P. Kūris (Rapporteur) and J.
         Klučka, Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on June 2006,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application the Commission of the European Communities seeks a declaration from the Court that,
–       by classifying as special protection areas (SPAs) territories the number and overall size of which fall clearly short of the
         number and overall size of the territories fulfilling the preconditions for classification as SPAs within the meaning of Article
         4(1) of Council Directive 79/409/EEC of April on the conservation of wild birds (OJ L 103, p. 1), as amended,
         inter alia, by Commission Directive 97/49/EC of July (OJ L 223, p. 9) (‘Directive 79/409’),
      
–       by designating SPAs of a size clearly smaller than the corresponding territories in the Inventory of Important Bird Areas
         in the European Community published in (‘the IBA 2000’) which fulfil the preconditions for classification as SPAs,
      
–       by failing to designate SPAs for many species of birds included in Annex I to Directive 79/or by classifying as SPAs areas
         where those species are insufficiently represented,
      
–       by failing to designate SPAs for many migratory species or by classifying as SPAs areas where those species are insufficiently
         represented,
      
the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 4(1) and (2) of Directive 79/409.
 Legal context
The ninth recital in the preamble to Directive 79/states:
‘Whereas the preservation, maintenance or restoration of a sufficient diversity and area of habitats is essential to the conservation
         of all species of birds; whereas certain species of birds should be the subject of special conservation measures concerning
         their habitats in order to ensure their survival and reproduction in their area of distribution; whereas such measures must
         also take account of migratory species and be coordinated with a view to setting up a coherent whole.’
      
Article 1(1) of Directive 79/provides:
‘This Directive relates to the conservation of all species of naturally occurring birds in the wild state in the European
         territory of the Member States to which the Treaty applies. It covers the protection, management and control of these species
         and lays down rules for their exploitation.’
      
Article of that directive provides:
‘Member States shall take the requisite measures to maintain the population of the species referred to in Article at a level
         which corresponds in particular to ecological, scientific and cultural requirements, while taking account of economic and
         recreational requirements, or to adapt the population of these species to that level.’
      
Article 4(1), (2) and (3) is worded as follows: 
‘1.      The species mentioned in Annex I shall be the subject of special conservation measures concerning their habitat in order to
         ensure their survival and reproduction in their area of distribution.
      
In this connection, account shall be taken of:
(a)      species in danger of extinction;
(b)      species vulnerable to specific changes in their habitat;
(c)      species considered rare because of small populations or restricted local distribution;
(d)      other species requiring particular attention for reasons of the specific nature of their habitat.
Trends and variations in population levels shall be taken into account as a background for evaluations.
Member States shall classify in particular the most suitable territories in number and size as special protection areas for
         the conservation of these species, taking into account their protection requirements in the geographical sea and land area
         where this Directive applies.
      
2.      Member States shall take similar measures for regularly occurring migratory species not listed in Annex I, bearing in mind
         their need for protection in the geographical sea and land area where this Directive applies, as regards their breeding, moulting
         and wintering areas and staging posts along their migration routes. To this end, Member States shall pay particular attention
         to the protection of wetlands and particularly to wetlands of international importance.
      
3.      Member States shall send the Commission all relevant information so that it may take appropriate initiatives with a view to
         the coordination necessary to ensure that the areas provided for in paragraphs and above form a coherent whole which meets
         the protection requirements of these species in the geographical sea and land area where this Directive applies.’
      
 The pre-litigation procedure
According to the Commission, in 2001, the Hellenic Republic had not classified as SPAs all the areas of importance for the
         conservation of birds designated in the IBA 2000. The IBA designates, on the basis of ornithological criteria which it
         sets out and explains, areas of importance for the conservation of birds, of an overall size of hectares, representing
         25.2% of the national territory, which have to be classified as SPAs for the purposes of Directive 79/409.
      
On October 2001, the Greek authorities sent to the Commission a list of proposals relating to the creation of new SPAs,
         the extension of existing SPAs and the withdrawal of SPAs which were henceforth to be included in the new SPAs. As those proposals
         were not accompanied by either geographical data, in particular in terms of size, or by the technical information necessary
         to finalise the classification of areas as SPAs as required by Article 4(3) of Directive 79/409, the Commission took the view
         that the Hellenic Republic had failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 4(1) and (2) of that directive and sent a letter
         of formal notice to that Member State on December 2001.
      
In its reply to the letter of formal notice, on March 2002, the Greek Government challenged in part the methodology and
         the criteria used in drawing up the IBA and informed the Commission of the difficulties it was encountering in classifying
         certain areas in that inventory as SPAs. The Greek authorities subsequently undertook to send the Commission a list of some
         new areas which it intended to classify as SPAs.
      
By letter of September 2002, the Greek authorities sent cartographical and technical information supplementing the classification
         as SPAs of the areas on the list which had been sent on October 2001. On the basis of that information, the Commission
         found that the Hellenic Republic had designated SPAs with a size of hectares. As it did not receive supplementary
         information relating to the designation of other SPAs, the Commission sent a reasoned opinion on December requesting
         that Member State to take the measures necessary to comply with it within a period of two months.
      
In their initial reply to the reasoned opinion, the Greek authorities, by letter of February 2003, provided technical and
         cartographical information concerning areas and proposed a change in respect of the boundaries of of them.
      
After acquainting itself with that reply and the supplementary replies sent on May and December by the Greek authorities,
         the Commission, taking the view that the situation remained unsatisfactory, brought the present action.
      
By order of the President of the Court of December 2004, the Kingdom of Spain, the French Republic, the Portuguese Republic
         and the Republic of Finland were granted leave to intervene in support of the form of order sought by the Hellenic Republic.
      
 The action
 The first and second complaints concerning the classification as SPAs of territories the number and overall size of which
            fall clearly short of the number and overall size of territories fulfilling the preconditions for classification as SPAs within
            the meaning of Directive 79/and the designation of SPAs of a size clearly smaller than that of the corresponding territories
            identified in the IBA The first two complaints of the Commission must be examined as one single complaint alleging that there was failure to classify
         the territories identified in the IBA as SPAs and that that classification was inadequate.
      
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission submits that the Hellenic Republic did not carry out the classification of areas of importance for the conservation
         of birds and classified only partially of those areas which fulfil the preconditions for classification as SPAs within
         the meaning of Article 4(1) of Directive 79/409. Those areas form SPAs which have not been covered by any binding legal
         measure, as no joint order by the Ministers of the Environment, of Planning and Public Works and of Agriculture has been notified
         to the Commission. Furthermore, it adds that that designation covers an area of hectares, which represents only
         40% of the total area of the areas of importance for the conservation of birds listed in the IBA 2000.
      
Lastly, the Commission states that the finding that the Hellenic Republic partially classified the areas of importance for
         the conservation of birds identified in the IBA relates particularly to the wetlands referred to in Article 4(2) of Directive
         79/and, in particular, those of international importance such as those set out in the Convention on Wetlands of International
         Importance especially as Waterfowl Habitat, concluded on February at Ramsar (‘the Ramsar Convention’).
      
The Greek Government admits that areas of importance for the conservation of birds listed in the IBA have not been
         classified as SPAs and will be examined in the context of the ‘Programme of re-examination of important bird areas with
         a view to their classification as SPAs for avian fauna. Development of action plans for the protection of priority species’
         of February (‘the programme of re-examination’).
      
In addition, the Greek Government states that the classification of the SPAs was carried out on the basis of the latest
         ornithological data as established by the competent Greek authorities and by a special inter-ministerial committee, with participation
         by the Elliniki Ornithologiki Etaireia (Greek Ornithological Society, ‘the EOE’).
      
Furthermore, as regards the wetlands, the Greek Government takes the view that all of those which are important for the conservation
         of birds have been classified as SPAs. As regards more particularly the wetlands of international importance, it states that,
         with the exception of those of the Nestou delta and Vistonida, those areas have been classified as SPAs in respect of more
         than 85% of their area. The marine areas which are covered by the definition of wetlands in the Ramsar Convention have also
         been included in those SPAs. The sizes of the SPAs are different from those of the areas set out in that Convention as some
         of those areas do not exhibit any ornithological importance which enables them to be classified as SPAs.
      
Lastly, the Greek Government takes the view that, although the number and size of the territories which have been classified
         as SPAs fall short of the number and size of the areas of importance for the conservation of birds listed in the IBA 2000,
         such a classification does not fall clearly short of that inventory inasmuch as, by designating SPAs, it classified of the areas of importance for the conservation of birds listed in that inventory, which represents more than half of
         those areas.
      
According to the Spanish Government, the IBA has shortcomings, in particular in that no public authority having responsibility
         for environmental matters supervised the drawing up of that inventory to ensure the precision and accuracy of its data, and
         consequently it is not possible to attribute to it the same value as the Inventory of Important Bird Areas in the European Community published in (‘the IBA 89’). 
      
The French Government submits that the IBA constitutes a useful point of reference, but it is not sufficient to classify
         as SPAs, within the meaning of Directive 79/409, the areas appearing in that inventory and the directive does not establish
         criteria for the identification of SPAs in terms of overall size or percentage.
      
The Portuguese Government submits that Member States must be allowed a reasonable period of time to carry out the necessary
         studies. Inventories such as the IBA are recognised and indisputable bases of reference which cannot constitute quantitative
         matrices for the purpose of monitoring the implementation of the obligations imposed by Directive 79/409.
      
According to the Finnish Government, recourse to the IBA makes the burden of proof disproportionate, as Member States
         then have the obligation of submitting scientific data to establish that an area does not meet the criteria to be classified
         as an SPA despite being designated as such in that inventory.
      
 Findings of the Court
It must be borne in mind that Article of Directive 79/lays down a system which is specifically targeted and reinforced
         both for the species listed in Annex I to that directive and for migratory species not included in that annex, an approach
         justified by the fact that they are, respectively, the most endangered species and the species constituting a common heritage
         of the Community (Case C‑191/Commission v Portugal [2006] ECR I‑6853, paragraph and the case-law cited). Furthermore, it is clear from the ninth recital in the preamble to
         that directive that the preservation, maintenance or restoration of a sufficient diversity and area of habitats is essential
         to the conservation of all species of birds. The Member States are therefore required to adopt the measures necessary for
         the conservation of those species (Case C‑235/Commission v Spain [2007] I‑0000, paragraph 23).
      
For that purpose, the updating of scientific data is necessary to determine the situation of the most endangered species and
         the species constituting the common heritage of the Community in order to classify the most suitable areas as SPAs. It is
         therefore necessary to use the most up-to-date scientific data available at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned
         opinion (Commission v Spain, paragraph 24).
      
In that regard, it must be borne in mind that the national inventories, among them the IBA drawn up by the EOE, revised
         the first pan-European study carried out in the IBA 89, by presenting more precise and up-to-date scientific data.
      
As regards the IBA 89, the Court has held that, in view of its scientific nature and of the absence of any scientific evidence
         adduced by a Member State tending particularly to show that the obligations flowing from Article 4(1) and (2) of Directive
         79/could be satisfied by classifying as SPAs sites other than those appearing in that inventory and covering a smaller
         total area, that inventory, although not legally binding, could be used by the Court as a basis of reference for assessing
         whether a Member State had classified a sufficient number and size of areas as SPAs for the purposes of the abovementioned
         provisions of Directive 79/(see, to that effect, Case C‑3/Commission v Netherlands [1998] ECR I‑3031, paragraphs to 70; Case C‑378/Commission v Italy [2003] ECR I‑2857, paragraph 18; and Commission v Spain, paragraph 26).
      
The IBA provides an up-to-date inventory of the areas of importance for the conservation of birds in Greece which, in
         the absence of scientific evidence to the contrary, constitutes a basis of reference for assessing whether that Member State
         has classified as SPAs areas sufficient in number and size to offer protection to all the species of birds listed in Annex
         I to Directive 79/and also to the migratory species not included in that annex.
      
In that regard, it must be pointed out that, as the Greek Government itself states, the information contained in the IBA was determined, in respect of Greece, inter alia by the EOE. Furthermore, the choice of the SPAs was made in cooperation
         with that body, which provided scientific and technical assistance.
      
In the present case, it is common ground that, by continuing the programme of re-examination the results of which were still
         not available at the end of the period prescribed in the reasoned opinion and by not communicating to the Commission, at the
         end of that period, the information on the methodology followed in that programme as well as other scientific data, the Hellenic
         Republic has not submitted any evidence capable of disproving the results of the IBA 2000.
      
The above finding cannot be called in question by the argument that it is necessary to allow Member States a reasonable period
         of time to carry out long-term observation and cartographical studies for the purpose of establishing the areas of importance
         for the conservation of birds.
      
As Advocate General Kokott observed in points and of her Opinion, although the Member States bear sole responsibility
         for the classification of SPAs and must base that classification on the best scientific knowledge available, that does not
         mean that such an obligation does not apply as long as the competent authorities have not evaluated and verified the new scientific
         knowledge. Such an obligation to classify has existed since the expiry of the period for transposition of Directive 79/409,
         that is to say, since April 1981, so far as concerns the Hellenic Republic.
      
Having regard to all of the foregoing, it must be stated that, in the absence of the submission of scientific studies capable
         of disproving the results of the IBA 2000, that inventory constitutes the most precise and up-to-date source of reference
         for the identification of the most suitable sites in number and size for the conservation of birds.
      
Next, on the question of the clearly insufficient nature of the classification as SPAs of territories which satisfy the preconditions
         to be classified as SPAs within the meaning of Article 4(1) of Directive 79/409, it must be borne in mind that Member States
         are obliged to classify as SPAs all the sites which, applying ornithological criteria, appear to be the most suitable for
         conservation of the species in question (see Commission v Netherlands, paragraph 62).
      
In the present case, it is common ground that out of SPAs designated by the Hellenic Republic, of them make it possible
         to protect only 40% of the overall area of the areas of importance for the conservation of birds listed in the IBA 2000.
         It follows that areas of importance for the conservation of birds, representing 60% of the aforementioned overall area,
         have not been classified as SPAs.
      
It must be stated that, in the absence of scientific data making it possible to disprove the results of the IBA 2000, the
         Hellenic Republic classified as SPAs areas the number and overall size of which fall clearly short of the number and overall
         size of the sites considered to be the most suitable for conservation of the species in question. The Commission’s claim in
         this regard must therefore be accepted.
      
Lastly, as regards the partial classification of areas of importance for the conservation of birds and, in particular, that
         of wetlands, it should be recalled that Article 4(2) of Directive 79/provides that Member States are to pay particular
         attention to the protection of wetlands and particularly to wetlands of international importance (see Commission v Spain, paragraph 81).
      
In that regard, it is apparent from the IBA that wetlands provide a habitat for more than 1% of the biogeographical
         populations of aquatic birds and other areas provide a habitat for more than 1% of the migratory populations of one or
         more species of aquatic bird.
      
It must thus be examined whether, as submitted by the Commission, the Hellenic Republic classified as SPAs a number of wetlands
         of international importance, in particular those which are designated in the Ramsar Convention, which correspond only partially
         to the size of the corresponding areas of importance for the conservation of birds listed in the IBA and whether, again
         as submitted by the Commission, certain sites which satisfy the criteria set out in that Convention and constitute areas of
         importance for the conservation of the birds listed in the IBA must, under Article 4(2) of Directive 79/409, be classified
         as SPAs and have still not been so classified.
      
As examples of wetlands of international importance which have not been classified as SPAs or which have been classified as
         SPAs but less than 50% of whose area is covered by SPAs, the Commission specifies areas Nos (Lake Vegoritis and Lake Petron),
         (Lakes Trichonida and Lysimachia), (Kotychi Lagoon), (Mount Dikios, Cape Louros, Lake Psalidi, and Alyki) and (Lake Kourna, Almyrou Delta and Georgioupolis Beach), in respect of which the Greek Government states the reasons for the
         differences between the areas of importance for the conservation of birds listed in the IBA and the areas which it classified
         as SPAs.
      
It must be pointed out that, as regards area No 45, the Greek Government submits that only Lake Petron should be classified
         as an SPA because it alone provides a habitat for the pygmy cormorant (Phalacrocorax pygmaeus). The same is true of area No 91, where only Lake Lysimachia is of interest to the ferruginous duck (Aythya nyroca).
      
It should be noted that Member States’ margin of discretion in choosing the most suitable territories for classification as
         SPAs concerns the application of ornithological criteria for identifying the most suitable territories for conservation of
         the species in question (see, to that effect, Commission v Netherlands, paragraph 61).
      
As Advocate General Kokott points out in point of her Opinion, it is apparent that both of the abovementioned sites were
         selected by virtue of the criteria defined by the Ramsar Convention on account of their importance for the pygmy cormorant
         and the ferruginous duck. As the Commission does not dispute the lack of importance for those two species of the areas not
         covered, the Greek Government’s argument in that regard must be accepted.
      
As for area No 166, it is apparent from its description in the IBA that it consists of a large mountain mass dominated
         by scrub and forests and also containing wetlands. The area is described in the IBA as an important breeding area and
         staging post for birds of prey.
      
In addition, in the absence of scientific data to the contrary, area No referred to in the IBA appears to be the
         most suitable for conservation of the species in question (see Commission v Netherlands, paragraph 62). The classification as SPAs of only Lake Psalidi and Alyki, as wetlands, is thus not sufficient to meet the
         obligations arising out of Article 4(1) and (2) of Directive 79/409. The Commission’s claim in this regard must therefore
         be accepted.
      
As regards in particular areas Nos and 180, the Greek Government takes the view that they are not of ornithological interest.
         The Commission challenges that argument as no scientific assessment has been sent to it. As the Greek Government did not submit
         any scientific evidence to the contrary by the end of the period in the reasoned opinion, the Commission’s claim in this regard
         must be accepted.
      
As regards the other areas mentioned by the Commission, namely IBA areas Nos (Pinios Delta), (Reservoirs of former Lake Karla), (Lake Amvrakia), (Kalogria lagoon, Strofilia forest, and Lamia
         marshes), large parts of which are not covered by the SPA, (Lakes Khortaro and Alyki, Moudros gulf, Diapori fen, and Fakos
         peninsula), in which the Moudros gulf is not covered by the SPA, and (Gera Gulf-Dipi and Haramida marshes, Lesvos), which
         is partially covered, it must be stated that the Hellenic Republic announced that it would carry out a reassessment of those
         areas.
      
In the light of the foregoing, it must be held that, in the absence of the submission of scientific studies capable of disproving
         the results of the IBA 2000, the Hellenic Republic, by classifying as SPAs territories the number and overall size of which
         fall clearly short of the number and overall size of the territories fulfilling the preconditions for classification as SPAs,
         has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 4(1) and (2) of Directive 79/409.
      
 The third and fourth complaints concerning the non-designation of SPAs for many species of birds included in Annex I to Directive
            79/and many migratory species not included in that annex or the classification as SPAs of areas where those species are
            insufficiently represented
 Arguments of the parties
According to the Commission, the following species of birds, namely the shag (Mediterranean subspecies) (Phalacrocorax aristotelis desmarestii), bearded vulture (Gypaetus barbatus), black vulture (Aegypius monachus), lesser spotted eagle (Aquila pomarina), imperial eagle (Aquila heliaca), long-legged buzzard (Buteo rufinus), Bonelli’s eagle (Hieraaetus fasciatus), lesser kestrel (Falco naumanni), Eleonora’s falcon (Falco eleonorae), Lanner falcon (Falco biarmicus), Krüper’s nuthatch (Sitta krueperi) and cinereous bunting (Emberiza cineracea), included in Annex I to Directive 79/409, are insufficiently protected by SPAs.
      
As regards migratory species, the Commission submits that many areas identified in the IBA are also very important for
         those species, which are protected under Article 4(2) of Directive 79/409. This concerns inter alia some anseriformes, the
         charadriiformes and some more common species included in Annex I to that directive on account of migration or wintering.
      
The Greek Government takes the view that the species included in Annex I to Directive 79/are sufficiently protected, with
         the exception of the long-legged buzzard, lesser kestrel, Krüper’s nuthatch and the cinereous bunting. As regards the imperial
         eagle, it states that, on completion of the study of the pilot areas, more recent evidence will be available.
      
The Greek Government adds that the comparison, in respect of a given species, of the population protected by SPAs with that
         listed in the IBA cannot constitute the sole and indisputable criterion of whether the protection of that species is
         sufficient. According to the Greek Government, it is possible that, on the basis of the distribution of the species concerned
         within an area, the requirements laid down by the C group of criteria (the group relating to the countries of the European
         Union) in the IBA 2000, so far as concerns the population of that species, are not met.
      
As regards the methodology and the criteria used, the Commission submits, first, that the Greek authorities dispute the criteria
         in the IBA in some cases while using those criteria in other cases, thus lapsing into inconsistency, and, second, that
         they base their arguments on the importance of certain areas whereas the outcome sought is the protection of species.
      
 Findings of the Court
By its third and fourth complaints, the Commission complains that the Hellenic Republic failed to designate SPAs for many
         species of birds included in Annex I to Directive 79/and many migratory species not included in that annex, or classified
         as SPAs areas where those species are insufficiently represented.
      
It is appropriate at the outset to reject the Commission’s claim for a declaration that the Hellenic Republic, by failing
         to designate SPAs for many species of birds included in Annex I to Directive 79/and for the migratory species not included
         in that annex, has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 4(1) and (2) of Directive 79/409.
      
It is apparent from the procedure that, first, as regards the species included in Annex I to Directive 79/409, the only species
         in respect of which the main breeding area was not classified as an SPA is Krüper’s nuthatch and, second, as regards the migratory
         species not included in that annex, there is no species in respect of which no territory has been classified. As the Greek
         Government has accepted the Commission’s complaint as regards Krüper’s nuthatch, the Commission’s claim concerning failure
         to designate SPAs must be accepted only as regards that species.
      
By its complaint concerning the classification as SPAs of territories in which many species of birds included in Annex I to
         Directive 79/and many migratory species not included in that annex are insufficiently represented, the Commission alleges
         that, as regards specifically the population of species of birds, the SPAs demarcated by Greece cover insufficiently the
         area of the IBA areas in which those species are present.
      
As the Greek Government has expressly accepted the Commission’s complaint as regards the long-legged buzzard, lesser kestrel
         and cinereous bunting, the Commission’s claims must be accepted in respect of those species.
      
As regards the other species, namely the shag (Mediterranean subspecies), bearded vulture, black vulture, lesser spotted eagle,
         imperial eagle, Bonelli’s eagle, Eleonora’s falcon and Lanner falcon, it is clear that, by referring to the programme of re-examination
         and the study of pilot areas in respect of all of which the assessment has not been completed and by failing to notify
         the EOE’s study on the black vulture, the Greek Government has not submitted scientific studies capable of disproving the
         results of the IBA and of establishing that areas in which those species are sufficiently represented have been classified
         as SPAs. The Commission’s claim in this regard must therefore be accepted.
      
In the light of the foregoing, it must be held that, by failing to designate SPAs to offer protection to Krüper’s nuthatch
         and by classifying as SPAs areas in which the shag (Mediterranean subspecies), bearded vulture, black vulture, lesser spotted
         eagle, imperial eagle, long-legged buzzard, Bonelli’s eagle, lesser kestrel, Eleonora’s falcon, Lanner falcon and cinereous
         bunting are insufficiently represented, the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 4(1) and
         (2) of Directive 79/409.
      
Accordingly, the action brought by the Commission must be regarded as well founded.
In view of the foregoing, it must be held that:
–       by classifying as SPAs territories the number and overall size of which fall clearly short of the number and overall size
         of the territories fulfilling the preconditions for classification as SPAs for the purposes of Article 4(1) and (2) of Directive
         79/409,
      
–       by failing to designate SPAs to offer protection to Krüper’s nuthatch, and
–       by classifying as SPAs areas in which the shag (Mediterranean subspecies), bearded vulture, black vulture, lesser spotted
         eagle, imperial eagle, long-legged buzzard, Bonelli’s eagle, lesser kestrel, Eleonora’s falcon, Lanner falcon and cinereous
         bunting are insufficiently represented,
      
the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 4(1) and (2) of Directive 79/409.
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. As the Commission has applied for costs to be awarded against the Hellenic
         Republic, and as the latter has been unsuccessful in the essential aspects of its submissions, the Hellenic Republic must
         be ordered to pay the costs. Under the first subparagraph of Article 69(4) of those rules, the Kingdom of Spain, the French
         Republic, the Portuguese Republic and the Republic of Finland, which have intervened, are to bear their own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that:
–       by classifying as special protection areas territories the number and overall size of which fall clearly short of the number
            and overall size of the territories fulfilling the preconditions for classification as special protection areas for the purposes
            of Article 4(1) and (2) of Council Directive 79/409/EEC of April on the conservation of wild birds, as amended, inter
            alia, by Commission Directive 97/49/EC of July 1997,
–       by failing to designate special protection areas to offer protection to Krüper’s nuthatch (Sitta krueperi), and
–       by classifying as special protection areas areas in which the shag (Mediterranean subspecies) (Phalacrocorax aristotelis desmarestii), bearded vulture (Gypaetus barbatus), black vulture (Aegypius monachus), lesser spotted eagle (Aquila pomarina), imperial eagle (Aquila heliaca), long-legged buzzard (Buteo rufinus), Bonelli’s eagle (Hieraaetus fasciatus), lesser kestrel (Falco naumanni), Eleonora’s falcon (Falco eleonorae), Lanner falcon (Falco biarmicus) and cinereous bunting (Emberiza cineracea) are insufficiently represented,
the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article 4(1) and (2) of Directive 79/409, as amended by Directive
            97/49;
2.      Dismisses the remainder of the action;
3.      Orders the Hellenic Republic to pay the costs;
4.      Orders the Kingdom of Spain, the French Republic, the Portuguese Republic and the Republic of Finland to bear their own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Greek.
      
Top  
 