
Case C-441/Elektrownia Pątnów II sp. z o.o.
v
Dyrektor Izby Skarbowej w Poznaniu
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Naczelny Sad Administracyjny)
(Indirect taxes on the raising of capital – Loans taken up by a capital company before the accession of the Member State to the European Union – Liability to capital duty under national legislation – Conversion of the loans into shares after accession of the Member State to the European Union – Capital duty payable on that transaction increasing the capital – Immediate application of the new rules)
Summary of the Judgment
Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Indirect taxes on the raising of capital – Capital duty charged on capital companies
(Council Directive 69/335, Art. 5(3), second indent)
In accordance with the second indent of Article 5(3) of Directive 69/concerning indirect taxes on the raising of capital,
         as amended by the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic
         of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Republic
         of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union
         is founded, in determining the amount of capital duty chargeable on an increase in a company’s capital arising from the conversion
         into shares – following the accession of a Member State to the European Union on May – of loans taken up by that company
         before that accession, account must be taken of the previous taxation of those loans on the basis of the national law in force
         at the material time.
      
The introduction into the law of a Member State of such a rule prohibiting the same amounts from being taxed again following
         their transfer into capital cannot be considered to cast doubt on taxation which had already occurred, and thereby to have
         retroactive effect. That rule has, as its sole objective and scope, the prevention of double taxation of the same taxable
         amount and the rule applies, from its entry into force, both to loans already assumed before the Member State’s accession
         to the European Union – and so before the entry into force of that rule within the legal order of that Member State – and
         converted into shares subsequent to that accession, and to loans agreed after that accession.
      
The second indent of Article 5(3) of Directive 69/is, therefore, merely a new rule which applies immediately to transactions
         carried out after its entry into force in a Member State and coming within it scope without retroactive application of that
         directive to facts occurring before that Member State’s accession.
      
(see paras 36-38, 40, 42, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Indirect taxes on the raising of capital – Loans taken up by a capital company before the accession of the Member State to the European Union – Liability to capital duty under national legislation – Conversion of the loans into shares after accession of the Member State to the European Union – Capital duty payable on that transaction increasing the capital – Immediate application of the new rules)
In Case C‑441/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Naczelny Sąd Administracyjny (Poland), made by decision of
         July 2008, received at the Court on October 2008, in the proceedings
      
Elektrownia Pątnów II sp. zoo
v
Dyrektor Izby Skarbowej w Poznaniu,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
composed of J.-C. Bonichot (Rapporteur), President of the Fourth Chamber, acting as President of the Sixth Chamber, K. Schiemann
         and P. Kūris, Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: R. Şereş, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2009,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Elektrownia Pątnów II sp. zoo, by N. Półtorak, radca prawny,
–        the Polish Government, by M. Dowgielewicz, A. Rutkowska and A. Kraińska, acting as Agents,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by M. Afonso and K. Herrmann, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
The present reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of the second indent of Article 5(3) of Council
         Directive 69/335/EEC of July concerning indirect taxes on the raising of capital (OJ, English Special Edition (II) p. 412), as amended by the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia,
         the Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta,
         the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the
         European Union is founded (OJ L 236, p. 33) (‘Directive 69/335’).
      
The reference has been made in the course of proceedings between Elektrownia Pątnów II sp. zoo (‘Elektrownia Pątnów’) and
         the Dyrektor Izby Skarbowej w Poznaniu (Director of the Poznań Tax Office) relating to the application of the Polish law on
         the taxation of transactions concerning the raising of capital.
      
 Legal context
 Community law
Article of Directive 69/allows Member States to charge, on contributions of capital to capital companies, a duty harmonised
         in accordance with the provisions of Articles to of that directive and called ‘capital duty’. 
      
Article of Directive 69/defines the expression ‘capital company’. As regards the Republic of Poland, such companies
         are companies under Polish law known as: ‘spółka akcyjna’ (joint stock company) and ‘spółka z ograniczoną odpowiedzialnością’
         (limited liability company).
      
Article 4(1)(c) of that directive lists, among the transactions that are subject to capital duty, ‘an increase in the capital
         of a capital company by contribution of assets of any kind’. 
      
Article 4(2)(c) of Directive 69/states:
      
‘2.      The following transactions may, to the extent that they were taxed at the rate of 1% as at July 1984, continue to be subject
         to capital duty:
      
...
(c)      a loan taken up by a capital company, if the creditor is entitled to a share in the profits of the company’. 
Article of Directive 69/establishes the basis for the imposition of capital duty. Article 5(1) states:
      
‘The duty shall be charged:
(a)      in the case of formation of a capital company or of an increase in its capital or assets, as referred to in Article 4(1)(a),
         (c) and (d): on the actual value of assets of any kind contributed or to be contributed by the members, after the deduction
         of liabilities assumed and of expenses borne by the company as a result of each contribution. ...;
      
...
(e)      in the case of loans referred to in Article 4(2)(c) and (d): on the nominal amount of the loan taken up.’
The second indent of Article 5(3) of Directive 69/provides:
      
‘3.      The amount on which the duty is charged in the case of an increase in capital shall not include: 
…
–        the amount of the loans taken up by the capital company which are converted into shares in the company and which have already
         been subjected to capital duty’.
      
Article of Directive 69/states: 
      
‘Apart from capital duty, Member States shall not charge, with regard to companies, firms, associations or legal persons operating
         for profit, any taxes whatsoever: 
      
(a)      in respect of the transactions referred to in Article 4; 
(b)      in respect of contributions, loans or the provision of services, occurring as part of the transactions referred to in Article
         4;
      
...’
 National law 
 The legislation in force prior to the Republic of Poland’s accession to the European Union 
Article of the Law on the taxation of civil-law transactions (ustawa o podatku od czynności cywilnoprawnych) of September
         (‘the PCC Law’) states:
      
‘1.      Tax shall be chargeable on:
(1)      the following civil-law transactions:
… 
(k)      the Memorandum and Articles of Association (founding documents),
(2)      amendments to the agreements referred to in subparagraph 1, if they give rise to an increase in the basis of assessment for
         the taxation of civil-law transactions,
      
…
3.      In the case of the Memorandum and Articles of Association, the following shall be considered amendments to such documents:
…
(4)      subsidies, loans granted to the company by members (shareholders) and donations to it by a member (shareholder) of objects
         or property rights for unpaid use’.
      
Article 4(1) of the PCC Law provides:
      
‘The tax obligation in respect of civil-law transactions shall be imposed upon:
(1)      the parties to the civil-law transactions …’ 
Under Article 5(1) of that law:
      
‘Without prejudice to paragraph 2, natural persons, legal persons and organised entities lacking legal personality which are
         parties to civil-law transactions shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of the tax …’ 
      
Under Article 6(1)(8)(d) of that law, the basis for assessment comprises: 
      
‘in the event of a loan granted to the company by a member or shareholder – the amount or value of the loan’. 
Article of the Law amending the Law on the taxation of civil-law transactions (ustawa o zmianie ustawy o podatku od czynności
         cywilnoprawnych) of December provides:
      
‘The provisions preceding this Law shall apply to civil-law transactions in respect of which a tax obligation has arisen before
         the date of entry into force of this Law.’
      
 The legislation in force following the Republic of Poland’s accession to the European Union and up to December Pursuant to Article of the PCC Law, as amended by the Law of December 2003, (‘the amended PCC Law’): 
      
‘1.      Tax shall be chargeable on: 
(1)      the following civil-law transactions:
… 
(k)      the Memorandum and Articles of Association (founding documents),
(2)      amendments to the agreements referred to in subparagraph 1, if they give rise to an increase in the basis of assessment for
         the taxation of civil-law transactions …
      
3.      In the case of the Memorandum and Articles of Association, the following shall be considered to be amendments to such documents:
         
      
…
(2)      in the case of a capital company – a contribution of capital to the company or an increase in capital contributed to the company,
         the value of which gives rise to an increase in the share capital, and subsidies …’
      
Article 1a of the amended PCC Law provides:
      
‘For the purposes of this Law: 
…
(2)      “Capital company” means a limited liability company or a company limited by shares …’
Article of the amended PCC Law states: 
      
‘1.      A tax obligation shall arise:
…
(2)      at the time at which a resolution is passed on an increase in the capital of a company having legal personality’.
Pursuant to Article of that law: 
      
‘The tax obligation in respect of civil-law transactions shall be imposed upon:  
…
(2)      a company having legal personality – in cases where the share capital is increased’. 
Article of the amended PCC Law states:
      
‘1.      The basis of assessment shall be:
… 
(8)      in the case of the Memorandum and Articles of Association:
…
(b)      in the event of amendment to such documents – the value of invested capital increasing the partnership’s or company’s assets
         or the value by which the share capital is increased.
      
…’
Article of the amended PCC Law provides:
      
‘1.      The following rates of tax shall apply:
…
(9)      on the Memorandum and Articles of Association: 0.5%’.
Pursuant to Article of that law:
      
‘The following civil-law transactions shall be exempt from tax:
…
(10)      loans granted:
…
(h)      by a member (shareholder) to a capital company’.
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
Elektrownia Pątnów is the subsidiary of Zespół Elektrowni Pątnów‑Adamów-Konin SA (‘the parent company’). Between and
         2004, the latter granted a series of loans to Elektrowni Pątnów. In accordance with the Polish law which was in force at the
         time, Elektrowni Pątnów paid the tax on civil-law transactions in respect of the loans which it had taken up.
      
By an agreement of July 2005, the parent company agreed with Elektrownia Pątnów to transfer to the latter the rights to
         payment which the parent company had in respect of the loans, in consideration for a share subscription in Elektrownia Pątnów.
         
      
That offsetting resulted in the extinction of Elektrownia Pątnów’s debt to the parent company and in an increase in Elektrownia
         Pątnów’s share capital.
      
Furthermore, the parent company assumed the increased value of each of those shares in a total amount which was equivalent
         to Elektrownia Pątnów’s debt to the parent company. 
      
The increase in Elektrownia Pątnów’s share capital, decided upon by a resolution adopted on July by a general meeting
         of the members of that company, constituted, under Polish law, an amendment to the Memorandum and Articles of Association.
         That transaction was, in accordance with Polish law, subject to the tax on civil-law transactions.
      
Elektrownia Pątnów then lodged a complaint with the tax authorities on the basis that it had incurred double taxation in respect
         of capital duty in converting loans into shares, contrary to the second indent of Article 5(3) of Directive 69/335, which
         entered into force within the territory of the Republic of Poland on May following that State’s accession to the European
         Union. 
      
Following the rejection of its complaint, Elektrownia Pątnów brought proceedings before the administrative court. Its action
         was dismissed. Elektrownia Pątnów thereupon brought an appeal on a point of law. It is in those circumstances that the Naczelny
         Sąd Administracyjny (Supreme Administrative Court) decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question to
         the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘In the light of Community law (in particular the provisions of Directive 69/335…), are tax authorities obliged, when charging
         capital duty on an increase in capital, to take into account transactions relating to the same component of capital which
         were subject to capital duty before the date of Poland’s accession to the European Union?
      
In particular, does the mechanism provided for in the second indent of Article 5(3) of Directive 69/… apply to situations
         in which the conversion of loans granted to a capital company that are referred to in Article 4(2)(c) of the directive takes
         place after accession, but those loans have, on the basis of the national legislation in force until the date of accession,
         previously been taxed in accordance with the principles set out in the [PCC Law]?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
The referring court asks, in essence, whether the prohibition – laid down in the second indent of Article 5(3) of Directive
         69/– on taking into account, in calculating the amount on which the duty is charged in the case of an increase in capital,
         the amount of the loans taken up by the capital company which are converted into shares in the company and which have already
         been subjected to capital duty, applies in a situation in which the conversion into shares of loans granted to a capital company
         took place after the accession of the Member State to the European Union, even though the loans predated that accession and
         had been taxed at the time in accordance with the national law which was then in force. 
      
In order to give an answer to that question, account must be taken, when considering the interpretation and application of
         Directive 69/335, of the particular situation of a State, such as the Republic of Poland, which became a member of the European
         Union with effect from May (see, to that effect, Case C‑366/Optimus – Telecomunicações [2007] ECR I‑4985, paragraph 25). 
      
It follows from that fact that Directive 69/was not applicable in that State before that date. Any measures relating to
         the taxation or exemption from taxation of transactions falling within the definition of the raising of capital were adopted
         within the Polish legal system, before the date referred to above, solely on the basis of national law (see, to that effect,
         Optimus – Telecomunicações, paragraph 26).
      
It follows, furthermore, from settled case-law that new rules apply immediately to the future effects of a situation which
         arose under the old rules (see, inter alia, Case 270/Licata v ESC [1986] ECR 2305, paragraph 31). In application of that principle the Court has thus held that, if the Act concerning the
         conditions of accession of a Member State contains no specific conditions with regard to the application of a provision of
         the EC Treaty, that provision must be regarded as being immediately applicable and binding on that Member State from the date
         of its accession, with the result that it applies to the future effects of situations arising prior to that new Member State’s
         accession to the Communities (see, to that effect, Case C‑122/Saldanha and MTS [1997] ECR I‑5325, paragraph 14, and Case C‑162/Pokrzeptowicz‑Meyer [2002] ECR I‑1049, paragraph 50). 
      
It also follows from settled case‑law that, in order to ensure observance of the principles of legal certainty and the protection
         of legitimate expectations, the substantive rules of Community law must be interpreted as applying to situations existing
         before their entry into force only in so far as it follows clearly from their terms, objectives or general scheme that such
         effect must be given to them (see, inter alia, Case 21/Bout [1982] ECR 381, paragraph 13; Case C‑34/GruSa Fleisch [1993] ECR I‑4147, paragraph 22; and Pokrzeptowicz-Meyer, paragraph 49). 
      
As the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Republic of Poland to the European Union contains no specific conditions
         with regard to the application in time of Directive 69/335, it is appropriate therefore, in order to provide an answer to
         the question referred, to determine whether a situation such as that at issue in the main proceedings constitutes a situation
         which arose prior to the entry into force of Directive 69/in Poland and to which that directive could therefore apply
         retroactively only if it was clearly intended to have that effect, or whether it constitutes a situation which arose prior
         to the entry into force of that directive in Poland, but the future effects of which are governed by that directive from the
         date of its entry into force, in accordance with the principle that new rules apply immediately to current situations (see,
         to that effect, Pokrzeptowicz‑Meyer, paragraph 51).
      
In this regard, it should be noted that taxation of the loans at issue in the main proceedings, which were taken up prior
         to the Republic of Poland’s accession to the European Union, occurred on the basis of the legislation in force at the time
         of the act which triggered the imposition, consisting of the drafting of civil-law documents which recorded those loans. At
         that date, no rules existed under Polish law which precluded those transactions from being subject to tax once as loans and
         then again if they were converted into an increase in capital. 
      
The introduction into Polish law of such a rule prohibiting the same amounts from being taxed again following their transfer
         into capital cannot be considered to cast doubt on taxation which had already occurred, and thereby to have retroactive effect.
      
That rule has, as its sole objective and scope, the prevention of double taxation of the same taxable amount and the rule
         applies, from its entry into force, both to loans already assumed prior to the Republic of Poland’s accession to the European
         Union – and thus prior to the entry into force of that rule within the Polish legal order – and converted into shares subsequent
         to that accession, and to loans agreed after that accession.
      
It follows that the second indent of Article 5(3) of Directive 69/is merely a new rule which applies immediately to transactions
         which are carried out after its entry into force in Poland and which come within it scope. 
      
Consequently, the second indent of Article 5(3) of Directive 69/requires that, in establishing the taxable amount for
         the purposes of capital duty on an increase in a company’s capital arising from the conversion into shares – after the Republic
         of Poland’s accession to the European Union – of loans taken up by that company prior to that accession, account be taken
         of the previous taxation of those loans on the basis of the national law in force at the material time.
      
Contrary to the Republic of Poland’s contentions, such an interpretation of Directive 69/in no way amounts to a retroactive
         application of that directive to facts occurring prior to that Member State’s accession, but simply amounts to applying, from
         the date of its entry into force, the prohibition of double taxation contained therein, which necessarily leads to account
         also being taken of taxation which had already occurred prior to that entry into force.
      
It is, moreover, not appropriate for the Court to ascertain whether, as the Republic of Poland appeared to be claiming at
         the hearing, the components taxed, prior to its accession, on the basis of the national law in force at the material time
         correspond entirely or partially to the components taxed following that accession. That is a matter solely for the national
         court seised of the dispute in the main proceedings. 
      
In those circumstances, the answer to the question referred for a preliminary ruling is that the second indent of Article
         5(3) of Directive 69/requires that, in determining the amount of capital duty chargeable on an increase in a company’s
         capital arising from the conversion into shares – following the Republic of Poland’s accession to the European Union – of
         loans taken up by that company prior to that accession, account be taken of the previous taxation of those loans on the basis
         of the national law in force at the material time.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Sixth Chamber) hereby rules:
The second indent of Article 5(3) of Council Directive 69/335/EEC of July concerning indirect taxes on the raising
            of capital, as amended by the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the
            Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the
            Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European
            Union is founded, requires that, in determining the amount of capital duty chargeable on an increase in a company’s capital
            arising from the conversion into shares – following the Republic of Poland’s accession to the European Union – of loans taken
            up by that company prior to that accession, account be taken of the previous taxation of those loans on the basis of the national
            law in force at the material time.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Polish.
      
Top  
 