
Case C-38/European Commission
v
Portuguese Republic
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Duty-free imports of goods for specifically military use)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Community law – Scope – No inherent general exception excluding all measures taken for reasons of public security
(Arts EC, EC, EC, EC, EC, EC and EC)
2.        Own resources of the European Communities – Establishment and making available by the Member States – Duty-free imports of
            military equipment by a Member State
(Council Regulation No 1552/89, as modified by No 1355/96, Arts and to 11, and No 1150/2000, Arts and to 11)
1.        Although it is for Member States to take the appropriate measures to ensure their internal and external security, it does
         not follow that such measures are entirely outside the scope of European Union law. The only articles in which the Treaty
         expressly provides for derogations applicable in situations which may affect public safety are Articles EC, EC, EC,
         EC, EC, EC and EC, which deal with exceptional and clearly defined cases. It cannot be inferred that the Treaty
         contains an inherent general exception excluding all measures taken for reasons of public security from the scope of European
         Union law. The recognition of the existence of such an exception, regardless of the specific requirements laid down by the
         Treaty, would be liable to impair the binding nature of European Union law and its uniform application.
      
Furthermore, the derogations provided for in Articles EC and EC must, as with derogations from fundamental freedoms,
         be interpreted strictly. As regards, more particularly, Article EC, it must be observed that, although that article refers
         to measures which a Member State may consider necessary for the protection of the essential interests of its security or information
         the disclosure of which it considers contrary to those interests, that article cannot however be read in such a way as to
         confer on Member States a power to depart from the provisions of the Treaty based on no more than reliance on those interests.
         Consequently it is for the Member State which seeks to take advantage of Article EC to prove that it is necessary to have
         recourse to that derogation in order to protect its essential security interests.
      
(see paras 62-64, 66)
2.        A Member State which refuses to calculate and pay to the Commission own resources which were not collected in the period from
         January until December inclusive, in relation to imports of equipment and goods for specifically military use,
         and by refusing to pay default interest arising from the failure to pay those own resources to the Commission, has failed
         to fulfil its obligations, respectively, under Article and Articles to of Regulation No 1552/implementing Decision
         88/on the system of the Communities’ own resources, as amended by Regulation No 1355/96, in so far as the period from
         January to May inclusive is concerned, and under the same articles of Regulation No 1150/implementing
         Decision 94/on the system of the Communities’ own resources, in so far as the period from May to December is concerned.
      
A Member State cannot be allowed to plead the increased cost of military material because of the application of customs duties
         on imports of such material from third countries in order to avoid, at the expense of other Member States who collect and
         pay the customs duties on such imports, the obligations which the principle of joint financing of the European Union budget
         imposes on it.
      
(see paras and 74, operative part 1)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
March (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Duty-free imports of goods for specifically military use)
In Case C‑38/06,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on January 2006,
European Commission, represented by G. Wilms and M. Afonso, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Portuguese Republic, represented by L. Inez Fernandes, Â. Seiça Neves, J. Gomes and C. Guerra Santos, acting as Agents,
      
defendant,
supported by:
Kingdom of Denmark, represented by J. Molde, acting as Agent,
      
Hellenic Republic, represented by E.-M. Mamouna and K. Boskovits, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
Italian Republic, represented by I. Bruni, acting as Agent, assisted by G. De Bellis, avvocato dello Stato, with an address for service in
         Luxembourg,
      
Republic of Finland, represented by A. Guimaraes-Purokoski, acting as Agent,
      
interveners,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of A. Tizzano, President of the Chamber, E. Levits, A. Borg Barthet (Rapporteur), M. Ilešič and M. Safjan, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on January 2010,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities asks the Court to declare that, by refusing to calculate and
         pay to the Commission own resources which were not collected in the period from January until December inclusive,
         in relation to imports of equipment and goods for specifically military use, and by refusing to pay default interest arising
         from the failure to pay those own resources to the Commission, the Portuguese Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under Article and Articles to of Council Regulation (EEC, Euratom) No 1552/of May implementing Decision
         88/376/EEC, Euratom on the system of the Communities’ own resources (OJ L 155, p. 1), as amended by Council Regulation
         (Euratom, EC) No 1355/of July (OJ L 175, p. 3; ‘Regulation No 1552/89’), in so far as the period from January
         to May inclusive is concerned, and, from May 2000, the same articles of Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1150/of May implementing Decision 94/728/EC, Euratom on the system of the Communities’ own resources (OJ L 130, p. 1).
      
 Legal context
Article 2(1) of Council Decision 88/376/EEC, Euratom of June on the system of the Communities’ own resources (OJ L 185, p. 24) and of Council Decision 94/728/EC, Euratom of October on the system of the European Communities’ own
         resources (OJ L 293, p. 9), provides:
      
‘Revenue from the following shall constitute own resources entered in the budget of the Communities:
…
(b)      Common Customs Tariff duties and other duties established or to be established by the institutions of the Communities in respect
         of trade with non-member countries and customs duties on products coming under the Treaty establishing the European Coal and
         Steel Community;
      
…’
Article of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/of October establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L 302,
         p. 1, the ‘Community Customs Code’), provides:
      
‘1.      Duties legally owed where a customs debt is incurred shall be based on the Customs Tariff of the European Communities.
…
3.      The Customs Tariff of the European Communities shall comprise:
(a)      the combined nomenclature of products;
…
(c)      the rates and other items of charge normally applicable to products covered by the combined nomenclature as regards:
–        customs duties
…
(d)      the preferential tariff measures contained in agreements which the Community has concluded with certain countries or groups
         of countries and which provide for the granting of preferential tariff treatment;
      
(e)      preferential tariff measures adopted unilaterally by the Community in respect of certain countries, groups of countries or
         territories;
      
(f)      autonomous suspensive measures providing for a reduction in or relief from import duties chargeable on certain products;
(g)      other tariff measures provided for by other Community legislation.
…’
Article 217(1) of the Community Customs Code states:
      
‘Each and every amount of import duty or export duty resulting from a customs debt, hereinafter called “amount of duty”, shall
         be calculated by the customs authorities as soon as they have the necessary particulars, and entered by those authorities
         in the accounting records or on any other equivalent medium (entry in the accounts).
      
…’
In the context of making available to the Commission the Communities’ own resources, the Council of the European Union adopted
         Regulation No 1552/89, applicable during the period at issue in this case until May 2000. That regulation was replaced
         as from May by Regulation No 1150/which consolidates Regulation No 1552/but does not alter its content.
      
Article of Regulation No 1552/provides:
      
‘1. For the purpose of applying this Regulation, the Community’s entitlement to the own resources referred to in Article 2(1)(a)
         and (b) of Decision 88/376/EEC, Euratom shall be established as soon as the conditions provided for by the customs regulations
         have been met concerning the entry of the entitlement in the accounts and the notification of the debtor.
      
1a. The date of the establishment referred to in paragraph shall be the date of entry in the accounting ledgers provided
         for by the customs regulations.
      
…’
Article 9(1) of that regulation provides:
      
‘In accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 10, each Member State shall credit own resources to the account opened
         in the name of the Commission with its Treasury or the body it has appointed.
      
This account shall be kept free of charge.’
Under Article 10(1) of that regulation:
      
‘After deduction of 10% by way of collection costs in accordance with Article 2(3) of Decision 88/376/EEC, Euratom, entry
         of the own resources referred to in Article 2(1)(a) and (b) of that Decision shall be made at the latest on the first working
         day following the 19th day of the second month following the month during which the entitlement was established in accordance
         with Article of this Regulation.
      
…’
Article of Regulation No 1552/provides:
      
‘Any delay in making the entry in the account referred to in Article 9(1) shall give rise to the payment of interest by the
         Member State concerned at the interest rate applicable on the Member State’s money market on the due date for short-term public
         financing operations, increased by two percentage points. This rate shall be increased by 0.of a percentage point for each
         month of delay. The increased rate shall be applied to the entire period of delay.’
      
Under Article of Regulation No 1150/2000:
      
‘Regulation (EEC, Euratom) No 1552/shall be repealed.
References to the said Regulation shall be construed as references to this Regulation and should be read in accordance with
         the correlation table set out in Part A of the Annex.’
      
Thus, apart from the fact that Regulations Nos 1552/and 1150/contain references to Decision 88/and Decision 94/respectively, Article and Articles to of those two regulations are, in essence, identical.
      
The rate of 10% specified in Article 10(1) of Regulation No 1150/was raised to 25% by Council Decision 2000/597/EC, Euratom
         of September on the system of the European Communities’ own resources (OJ L 253, p. 42).
      
Recital in the preamble of that decision states:
      
‘The European Council meeting in Berlin on and March concluded, inter alia, that the system of the Communities’
         own resources should be equitable, transparent, cost-effective, simple and based on criteria which best express each Member
         State’s ability to contribute.’
      
Council Regulation (EC) No 150/of January suspending import duties on certain weapons and military equipment
         (OJ L 25, p. 1), adopted on the basis of Article EC, states in recital of the preamble:
      
‘In order to take account of the protection of the military confidentiality of the Member States it is necessary to lay down
         specific administrative procedures for the granting of the benefit of the suspension of duties. A declaration by the competent
         authority of the Member State for whose forces the weapons or military equipment are destined, which could also be used as
         a customs declaration as required by the Customs Code, would constitute an appropriate guarantee that these conditions are
         fulfilled. The declaration should be given in the form of a certificate. It is appropriate to specify the form which such
         certificates must take and to allow also the use of means of data processing techniques for the declaration.’
      
Article of that regulation provides:
      
‘This Regulation lays down the conditions for the autonomous suspension of import duties on certain weapons and military equipment
         imported by or on behalf of the authorities in charge of the military defence of the Member States from third countries.’
      
Article 3(2) of that regulation states:
      
‘Notwithstanding paragraph 1, for reasons of military confidentiality, the certificate and the imported products may be submitted
         to other authorities designated by the importing Member State for this purpose. In such cases the competent authority issuing
         the certificate shall send before January and July of each year a summary report to the customs authorities of its Member
         State on such imports. The report shall cover a period of six months immediately preceding the month on which the report has
         to be submitted. It shall contain the number and issuing date of the certificates, the date of imports and the total value
         and gross weight of the products imported with the certificates.’
      
Article of Regulation No 150/states that that regulation is to apply as from January 2003.
      
 Pre-litigation procedure
By letter of formal notice dated December 2001, issued in the framework of infringement procedure No 1990/2039, the Commission
         informed the Portuguese Republic that it had failed to fulfil its obligations by exempting, on the basis of Article EC,
         its imports of products for military use from the customs duties provided for in European Union legislation.
      
By another letter, dated December 2001, the Commission asked the Portuguese Republic to calculate the customs duties which
         it considers to be owed by that Member State in respect of the imports in question and to make them available to it before
         March 2002, the date from which it would apply the default interest provided for in Article of Regulation No 1150/2000.
      
After consideration of the Portuguese Republic’s reply, dated July 2002, stating that the imports in question were exempt
         from customs duty by reason of the fact that they were intended for specifically military purposes and that the exemption
         was necessary for the protection of the essential interests of the security of the Member State concerned in accordance with
         Article EC, the Commission, by letter of March 2003, once again asked the Portuguese Republic to make available to
         it the total amount of the customs duties which it considers to be owed by that Member State in respect of imports of military
         material carried out between and 2002, together with the accounting data necessary to calculate default interest.
      
By letter of formal notice, dated October 2003, the Commission again requested the Portuguese Republic to calculate, as
         speedily as possible, the own resources which had not been paid, to make that amount available to it and to pay default interest
         pursuant to Article of Regulation No 1150/2000.
      
Not being satisfied with the arguments put forward by the Portuguese Republic in its reply of January 2004, the Commission
         sent to that Member State a reasoned opinion calling on it to take the measures necessary to comply therewith within a period
         of two months of its receipt.
      
On October 2004, the Portuguese Republic sent an additional letter of reply to the letter of formal notice of October
         2003.
      
The Portuguese Republic having not replied to the reasoned opinion or made the payment of own resources and default interest
         claimed, the Commission has brought the present action.
      
By order of May the President of the Court allowed the applications to intervene of the Kingdom of Denmark, the Hellenic
         Republic, the Italian Republic and the Republic of Finland in support of the form of order sought by the Portuguese Republic.
      
 The action
 Admissibility
 Arguments of the parties
The Portuguese Republic considers that the present action should be held to be inadmissible. According to that Member State,
         it is clear from the terms of the application that the Commission is seeking to have paid to it amounts of own resources which
         it knows were neither liquidated, nor taken into account, nor notified nor, obviously, collected.
      
Thus, although the Commission is seeking a declaration that the Portuguese Republic has failed to fulfil some of its obligations
         under European Union law, that institution is in fact asking the Court to order the Portuguese Republic to compensate it for
         the damage it claims to have suffered by virtue of the fact that the Portuguese Republic wrongly failed to enforce the customs
         claims referred to in the Commission’s application.
      
That divergence between the subject-matter of the proceedings and the application is, in the Portuguese Republic’s view, contrary
         to the provisions of Article 38(1) of the Rules of Procedure, which presupposes that the subject-matter of the proceedings
         is in accordance with the form of order sought.
      
The Commission considers that the Portuguese Republic’s objection of inadmissibility is wholly unfounded.
      
According to the Commission, first, the amounts which the Portuguese Republic owes to the Community budget are those which
         that Member State should have collected and credited to the Community budget in the performance of its obligations under European
         Union law. The question of assessing the failure to fulfil those obligations is a question of interpretation and application
         of the EC Treaty in regard to which the Court has jurisdiction pursuant to Article EC, for which Article EC lays down
         a specific procedure which the Commission must undertake. According to the Commission, the Court’s jurisdiction is therefore
         undeniable.
      
Secondly, the Commission states that there is no divergence between the subject-matter of the proceedings and the forms of
         order it is seeking. The Commission’s action is brought under Article EC and the subject-matter is a dispute between itself
         and the Portuguese Republic concerning a declaration that the latter has failed to fulfil its obligations under European Union
         law.
      
Thirdly, the Commission considers that the Court should reject the Portuguese Republic’s claim that the action could be regarded
         as inadmissible on the ground that it is impossible, in practical terms, to adopt measures to give effect to the judgment
         which will be handed down. In any event, it is common ground that the practical difficulties, whether material or legal, which
         the Portuguese Republic might encounter when adopting measures to implement that judgment cannot constitute an obstacle to
         the admissibility of the action for failure to fulfil obligations which the Commission has brought against it.
      
 Findings of the Court
It must be observed that the Commission’s objective in the present action is to obtain a declaration of a failure to fulfil
         obligations under Articles and to of Regulations Nos 1552/and 1150/2000.
      
In addition, as is clear from the very wording of the Commission’s application, the latter has restricted itself to seeking
         a declaration that the alleged failure to fulfil obligations has taken place, without asking the Court to impose specific
         measures on the Member State concerned.
      
There is therefore no divergence between the subject-matter of the proceedings and the form of order sought by the Commission.
      
Consequently, the Commission’s action must be declared admissible.
      
 Substance
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission claims that the Portuguese Republic is wrong to rely on Article EC to justify the refusal to pay customs
         duties in respect of the imports concerned, since the collection of such duties does not threaten the essential security interests
         of that Member State.
      
With regard to the interpretation of Article EC, the Commission considers that the Portuguese Republic can exempt imports
         of goods for specifically military use from customs duties only if the conditions for the application of that article are
         satisfied and within the limits of the provisions adopted by the Council concerning exemption from such duties under Article
         EC.
      
Moreover, according to the Commission, Regulation No 150/follows a similar logic since the goods for which the regulation
         provides an exemption from customs duties are exempt only if certain conditions are satisfied.
      
The Commission considers that the judgment in Case C‑414/Commission v Spain [1999] ECR I‑5585, concerning exemptions from value added tax, shows that derogations from the Treaty, provided for, inter
         alia, in Article EC, must be interpreted strictly. According to the Commission, the Member State must prove that the exemption
         of which it claims the benefit does not go beyond the situation provided for in that article and that there are exceptional
         circumstances which justify the need to derogate from the rules of the Common Customs Tariff. Those criteria, developed by
         the Court in regard to value added tax, are, in the Commission’s view, transposable to own resources.
      
In addition, the Commission rejects the Portuguese Republic’s arguments concerning the increased cost of imported military
         material or the optimal use of the financial resources allocated for the upkeep and modernisation of its armed forces. According
         to the Commission, the Portuguese Republic has provided no evidence, backed up by figures, which shows that its defensive
         capacities have been endangered. 
      
The Commission considers that protection of military confidentiality relied on by the Portuguese Republic to justify the exemption
         from customs duties of military material imported from non-Member countries applies only to the arrangements for inspection
         of imported goods and does not call into question the obligation to pay the customs duties laid down in European Union legislation.
      
The Commission thus considers that the Portuguese Republic can adopt measures for the internal organisation of its administration
         which ensure the confidentiality which it is seeking. That approach is moreover supported by Regulation No 150/2003, which
         takes account of the protection of the military confidentiality of the Member States.
      
With regard to the military confidentiality raised by the Portuguese Republic, the Commission has doubts as to the sincerity
         of the ground relied on. A great deal of information concerning imports of goods for military use by the Portuguese Republic,
         going far beyond the amount of detail required for the purposes of paying the customs duties owed to the Community, is contained
         in the United Nations Register of Conventional Weapons, to which the Portuguese Republic provides an annual summary of the
         principal imports of conventional weapons which it undertook and is mentioned in the reports concerning trade in arms and
         other military equipment which are published by the principal exporting States. All that information is easily accessible
         to the public.
      
With regard to the consistency of its conduct in regard to the adoption of Regulation No 150/2003, the Commission rejects
         the Portuguese Republic’s accusations that its conduct is inconsistent with the content of that regulation.
      
The Commission points out that, pursuant to Article EC, its principal mission is to ensure that European Union law is
         applied and that the fact that it takes account of the interests of the Member States and of the Community when it exercises
         its right to propose legislation for the purpose of adopting rules which are better adapted to those interests cannot dispense
         the Member States from their obligations under European Union law in force before the adoption of those new rules, such as,
         in the present case, Regulation No 150/2003, or discharge the Commission from its responsibilities under Article EC.
      
With regard to the principles of the protection of legitimate expectations and legal certainty, the Commission considers that
         it has already taken account of those principles by seeking arrears of customs duties only for the period from January to December 2002, whereas the infringement in fact covers a much longer period.
      
The Portuguese Republic considers that Article EC constitutes a general derogation from all the other provisions of the
         Treaty which is limited, pursuant to the first paragraph of Article EC, only by the list of armaments established by Council
         Decision No 255/of April and by the mechanism, laid down in the second paragraph of Article EC, whereby the
         Commission or any Member State may bring the matter directly before the Court if it considers that there has been what appears
         to be improper use of the derogation provided for in Article EC. 
      
The Portuguese Republic considers that, outside of those conditions, the Member States have a discretion in determining the
         measures which are contrary to the essential interests of its security. That power of the Member States to adopt, unilaterally,
         measures derogating from the provisions of the Treaty is justified by considerations relating to respect for the sovereignty,
         the territorial integrity and the defence of the Member States. Furthermore, the institutional balance of the Community requires
         that each Member State be responsible for defining the measures which it considers necessary for the protection of the essential
         interests of its security.
      
According to the Portuguese Republic, the Court’s approach in Commission v Spain is to be viewed in the perspective of the applicability of the rules laid down in Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes –– Common system of value added
         tax: uniform basis of assessment (OJ L 145, p. 1), in the light of Article EC.
      
The Portuguese Republic bases its argument concerning the interpretation of Article EC on the judgment in Case T‑26/Fiocchi munizioni v Commission [2003] ECR II‑3951, paragraph of which states that Article EC has, for the activities which it covers and on the conditions
         which it sets forth, a general scope, capable of affecting all the ordinary legal provisions of the Treaty. Furthermore, it
         is apparent from that judgment that Article 296(1)(b) EC confers on the Member States a particularly wide discretion in assessing
         the needs receiving such protection.
      
With regard to the consistency of the Commission’s conduct, the Portuguese Republic has once again observed that in 1988,
         the Commission submitted a proposal for legislation which led to the adoption of Regulation No 150/2003. Thus, the subject-matter
         of the present action for failure to fulfil obligations is inconsistent with the Commission’s role in the adoption of that
         regulation, which, moreover, establishes a list of military material exempt from customs duties which is longer that that
         laid down in Decision No 255/58.
      
The Portuguese Republic adds, that, for years, the Commission did not react to the practice it and a large number of other
         Member States adopted of exempting goods for military use from customs duties. Consequently, both the submission by the Commission
         of a proposal for a Council regulation suspending import duties on certain weapons and military equipment in and its
         continued lack of reaction over the years which separate that proposal from the adoption of Regulation No 150/gave
         rise to a legitimate expectation on the part of the Member States which led them to consider that the Commission tacitly accepted
         their practice and considered it to be in accordance with European Union law.
      
According to recital to Regulation No 150/2003, ‘[i]t is in the interests of the Community as a whole that Member States
         are able to procure for their military forces the most technologically advanced and suitable weapons and military equipment.
         In view of the rapid technological developments in this industrial sector worldwide it is normal practice of the Member States’
         authorities in charge of national defence to procure weapons and military materials from producers or other suppliers located
         in third countries. Given the security interest of the Member States it is compatible with the interests of the Community
         that certain of these weapons and equipment may be imported free of import duties.’ The Portuguese Republic considers that
         that Community interest did not come into existence with the publication of Regulation No 150/but was already implicit
         from the list laid down in Decision No 255/and the said proposal submitted in 1988.
      
With regard to the protection of the military confidentiality of the Member States, the Portuguese Republic points to the
         need for information concerning the equipment of the armed forces to be reserved exclusively to the national defence forces,
         which would be endangered if customs duties were levied on goods intended for military use since the levying of such duties
         presupposes that the customs authorities can carry out a physical inspection of the goods. It is not sufficient, as the Commission
         suggests, to restrict inspection of military material to a limited number of ‘trusted officials’.
      
According to the Portuguese Republic, the fact that customs controls on imports of military material could endanger the protection
         of military confidentiality was accepted by the Commission before the entry into force of Regulation No 150/2003, as is clear
         from recital to that regulation, which states that ‘[i]n order to take account of the protection of the military confidentiality
         of the Member States it is necessary to lay down specific administrative procedures for the granting of the benefit of the
         suspension of duties’.
      
With regard to the Commission’s arguments regarding the publication of various pieces of information, very easily accessible
         to the public, concerning imports of military material by the Portuguese Republic, the latter states that information classified
         as ‘secret’ or ‘confidential’ is never revealed and provides several documents so classified in support of its claims.
      
 Findings of the Court
It must be stated at the outset that the Court has ruled in several recent judgments (Case C‑284/Commission v Finland [2009] ECR I‑0000; Case C‑294/Commission v Sweden [2009] ECR I‑0000; Case C‑387/Commission v Italy [2009] ECR I‑0000; Case C‑409/Commission v Greece [2009] ECR I‑0000; Case C‑461/Commission v Denmark [2009] ECR I‑0000; and Case C‑239/Commission v Italy [2009] ECR I‑0000) on questions identical to those raised in the present case. The principles developed in those judgments
         must therefore be applied.
      
That being clear, it must first be recalled that the Community Customs Code provides for the charging of customs duties on
         imports of products for military use, such as those at issue, from third countries. There is no provision of European Union
         customs legislation which, in respect of the period of imports at issue, namely from January to December 2002, provided
         for any specific exemption from customs duties on imports of products of that type. Consequently, in respect of that period,
         there was no express exemption from the obligation to make payment to the competent authorities of the duties which were payable,
         accompanied, as appropriate, by payment of default interest (Commission v Greece, paragraph 47).
      
It can moreover be inferred from the fact that Regulation No 150/provided for the suspension of customs duties on certain
         weapons and military equipment from January that the European Union legislature started from the assumption that an
         obligation to pay those customs duties existed prior to that date (Commission v Greece, paragraph 48).
      
The Portuguese Republic has not at any time denied the existence of the imports at issue during the period under consideration.
         It has confined itself to challenging the Community’s entitlement to own resources while arguing that, pursuant to Article
         EC, the obligation to pay customs duties on armaments imported from third countries would cause serious damage to its
         essential security interests.
      
According to the Court’s settled case-law, although it is for Member States to take the appropriate measures to ensure their
         internal and external security, it does not follow that such measures are entirely outside the scope of European Union law
         (see Commission v Greece, paragraph and the case-law cited). As the Court has already held, the only articles in which the Treaty expressly provides
         for derogations applicable in situations which may affect public safety are Articles EC, EC, EC, EC, EC, EC and EC, which deal with exceptional and clearly defined cases. It cannot be inferred that the Treaty contains an inherent
         general exception excluding all measures taken for reasons of public security from the scope of European Union law. The recognition
         of the existence of such an exception, regardless of the specific requirements laid down by the Treaty, would be liable to
         impair the binding nature of European Union law and its uniform application (Commission v Greece, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Furthermore, the derogations provided for in Articles EC and EC must, in accordance with settled case-law in respect
         of derogations from fundamental freedoms, be interpreted strictly (Commission v Greece, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
As regards, more particularly, Article EC, it must be observed that, although that article refers to measures which a
         Member State may consider necessary for the protection of the essential interests of its security or of information the disclosure
         of which it considers contrary to those interests, that article cannot however be read in such a way as to confer on Member
         States a power to depart from the provisions of the Treaty based on no more than reliance on those interests (Commission v Greece, paragraph 52).
      
Furthermore, in the area of value added tax, the Court declared in Commission v Spain that there had been a failure to fulfil obligations on the ground that the Kingdom of Spain had not shown that the exemption
         from that tax on imports and acquisitions of arms, ammunition and equipment exclusively for military use, an exemption provided
         for by Spanish legislation, was justified, under Article 296(1)(b) EC, by the need to protect the essential interests of the
         security of that Member State (Commission v Greece, paragraph 53).
      
Consequently it is for the Member State which seeks to take advantage of Article EC to prove that it is necessary to have
         recourse to that derogation in order to protect its essential security interests (Commission v Greece, paragraph 54).
      
In the light of those considerations, a Member State cannot be allowed to plead the increased cost of military material because
         of the application of customs duties on imports of such material from third countries in order to avoid, at the expense of
         other Member States who collect and pay the customs duties on such imports, the obligations which the principle of joint financing
         of the European Union budget imposes on it (Commission v Greece, paragraph 55).
      
As regards the argument that European Union customs procedures are not capable of safeguarding the security of the Portuguese
         Republic, in the light of the confidentiality requirements contained in agreements entered into with exporting States, it
         must be stated, as correctly observed by the Commission, that the implementation of the European Union customs system requires
         the active involvement of European Union and national officials, who are bound when necessary by an obligation of confidentiality,
         when dealing with sensitive data, which is capable of protecting the essential security interests of Member States (Commission v Greece, paragraph 56).
      
Furthermore, the level of specificity required in the declarations which Member States must periodically complete and send
         to the Commission is not such as to lead to damage to the interests of those States in respect of either security or confidentiality.
      
In those circumstances, and in accordance with Article EC which obliges Member States to facilitate the achievement of
         the Commission’s task of ensuring compliance with the Treaty, Member States are obliged to make available to the Commission
         the documents necessary to permit inspection to ensure that the transfer of the Community’s own resources is correct. However,
         such an obligation does not mean that Member States may not, on a case-by-case basis and by way of exception, on the basis
         of Article EC, either restrict the information sent to certain parts of a document or withhold it completely (Commission v Greece, paragraph 58).
      
In the light of the foregoing, the Portuguese Republic has not shown that the conditions necessary for the application of
         Article EC are satisfied.
      
Lastly, as regards the Portuguese Republic’s arguments seeking to show that, because of the Commission’s prolonged inaction
         and the adoption of Regulation No 150/2003, that Member State could legitimately consider that the Commission would not bring
         this action since the latter had tacitly accepted the existence of an appropriate derogation, it must be observed that the
         Commission has not at any stage of the proceedings abandoned its position in principle.
      
In the declaration which the Commission made during the negotiations relating to Regulation No 150/2003, it expressed its
         firm intention to maintain its claim to the collection of customs duties which should have been paid for periods prior to
         the entry into force of that regulation and reserved the right to take the appropriate action in that regard.
      
It follows from the foregoing that, by refusing to calculate and pay to the Commission own resources which were not collected
         in the period from January until December inclusive, in relation to imports of equipment and goods for specifically
         military use, and by refusing to pay default interest arising from the failure to pay those own resources to the Commission,
         the Portuguese Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations, respectively, under Article and Articles to of Regulation
         No 1552/89, in so far as the period from January to May inclusive is concerned, and under the same articles
         of Regulation No 1150/2000, in so far as the period from May to December is concerned.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs to be awarded against the Portuguese
         Republic and the latter has been unsuccessful, the Portuguese Republic must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
In accordance with the first paragraph of Article 69(4) of the Rules of Procedure the Kingdom of Denmark, the Hellenic Republic,
         the Italian Republic and the Republic of Finland, which have intervened in the proceedings, are to bear their own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that by refusing to calculate and pay to the Commission of the European Communities own resources which were not
            collected in the period from January until December inclusive, in relation to imports of equipment and goods
            for specifically military use, and by refusing to pay default interest arising from the failure to pay those own resources
            to the Commission of the European Communities, the Portuguese Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations, respectively,
            under Articles and to of Council Regulation (EEC, Euratom) No 1552/of May implementing Decision 88/376/EEC,
            Euratom on the system of the Communities’ own resources, as amended by Council Regulation (Euratom, EC) No 1355/of July
            1996, in so far as the period from January to May inclusive is concerned, and under the same articles of Council
            Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1150/of May implementing Decision 94/728/EC, Euratom on the system of the Communities’
            own resources, in so far as the period from May to December is concerned;
2.      Orders the Portuguese Republic to pay the costs;
3.      Orders the Kingdom of Denmark, the Hellenic Republic, the Italian Republic and the Republic of Finland to bear their own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Portuguese.
      
Top  
 