
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-408/Adidas-Salomon AG, formerly Adidas AGandAdidas Benelux BVvFitnessworld Trading Ltd(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden)
         
«(Directive 89/104/EEC – Article 5(2) – Trade marks with a reputation – Protection against use of a sign in relation to identical or similar goods or services – Degree of similarity between the mark and the sign – Effect on the public – Sign viewed as an embellishment)»
Opinion of Advocate General Jacobs delivered on July I - Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), October I - Summary of the Judgment
1..
Approximation of laws – Trade marks – Directive 89/– Trade mark with a reputation – Option of providing protection for extending to non-similar goods or services (Article 5(2) of the directive) – Obligation on Member States exercising this option to also provide that protection in case of use of a sign for goods or services
                     which are identical or similar  
                  (Council Directive 89/104, Art. 5(2)) 
2..
Approximation of laws – Trade marks – Directive 89/– Trade mark with a reputation – Protection of the trade mark extended to non-similar goods or services (Article 5(2) of the directive) – Degree of similarity between the mark and the later sign  (Council Directive 89/104, Art. 5(2)) 
3..
Approximation of laws – Trade marks – Directive 89/– Trade mark with a reputation – Protection of the trade mark extended to non-similar goods or services (Article 5(2) of the directive) – Perception of the later sign by the relevant section of the public as an embellishment – Effect  (Council Directive 89/104, Art. 5(2)) 
1.
 A Member State, where it exercises the option provided by Article 5(2) of First Directive 89/relating to trade marks,
         consisting of providing specific protection for trade marks with a reputation, is bound to grant that protection in cases
         of use by a third party of a later mark or sign which is identical with or similar to the registered mark with a reputation,
         both in relation to goods or services which are not similar and in relation to goods or services which are identical with
         or similar to those covered by that mark. see para. 22, operative part 2.
 The specific protection conferred by Article 5(2) of First Directive 89/relating to trade marks on trade marks with a
         reputation is not conditional on a finding of a degree of similarity between the mark with a reputation and the later sign
         such that there exists a likelihood of confusion between them on the part of the relevant section of the public. It is sufficient
         for the degree of similarity between the mark with a reputation and the sign to have the effect that the relevant section
         of the public establishes a link between the sign and the mark. see para. 31, operative part 3.
 The fact that a sign is viewed as an embellishment by the relevant section of the public is not in itself an obstacle to the
         specific protection conferred by Article 5(2) of First Directive 89/relating to trade marks on trade marks with a reputation,
         where the degree of similarity between the trade mark with a reputation and the later sign is none the less such that the
         relevant section of the public establishes a link between the sign and the mark. By contrast, where, according to a finding
         of fact by the national court, the relevant section of the public views the sign purely as an embellishment, it does not necessarily
         establish any link with a registered mark, with the result that one of the conditions of the protection conferred by Article
         5(2) of Directive 89/is then not satisfied. see para. 41, operative part JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)October (1)
((Directive 89/104/EEC – Article 5(2) – Trade marks with a reputation – Protection against use of a sign in relation to identical or similar goods or services – Degree of similarity between the mark and the sign – Effect on the public – Sign viewed as an embellishment))
In Case C-408/01, 
            REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden (Netherlands) for a preliminary ruling in the
            proceedings pending before that court between
            
 Adidas-Salomon AG,   formerly Adidas AG, Adidas Benelux BV
and
 Fitnessworld Trading Ltd,
on the interpretation of Article 5(2) of First Council Directive 89/104/EEC of December approximating the laws of
            the Member States relating to trade marks (OJ L 40, p. 1),
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
composed of: J.-P. Puissochet, President of the Chamber, C. Gulmann (Rapporteur), F. Macken, N. Colneric and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs, Registrar: M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
Adidas Salomon AG and Adidas Benelux BV, by C. Gielen, advocaat, 
               
─
Fitnessworld Trading Ltd, by J.J. Brinkhof and D.J.G. Visser, advocaten, 
               
─
the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster, acting as Agent, 
               
─
the United Kingdom Government, by G.J.A. Amodeo, acting as Agent, and M. Tappin, barrister, 
               
─
the Commission of the European Communities, by H.M.H. Speyart and N.B. Rasmussen, acting as Agents, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of Adidas Salomon AG and Adidas Benelux BV, represented by C. Gielen; Fitnessworld Trading
               Ltd, represented by D.J.G. Visser; the United Kingdom Government, represented by K. Manji, acting as Agent, and M. Tappin,
               and the Commission, represented by N.B. Rasmussen and F. Tuytschaever, advocaat, at the hearing on April 2003,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on July 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
By judgment of October 2001, received at the Court on October 2001, the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden (Supreme Court of
         the Netherlands) referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC two questions on the interpretation of
         Article 5(2) of First Council Directive 89/104/EEC of December approximating the laws of the Member States relating
         to trade marks (OJ L 40, p. 1) (
         the Directive). 
         
            
Those questions have been raised in proceedings between Adidas-Salomon AG and Adidas Benelux BV, on the one hand, and Fitnessworld
         Trading Ltd (
         Fitnessworld), on the other, in connection with the marketing by Fitnessworld of sports clothing. 
         
The legal background
            
Article 5(1) and (2) of the Directive provide: 
         
1.
 The registered trade mark shall confer on the proprietor exclusive rights therein. The proprietor shall be entitled to prevent
         all third parties not having his consent from using in the course of trade:
         
(a)
any sign which is identical with the trade mark in relation to goods or services which are identical with those for which
         the trade mark is registered; 
         
(b)
any sign where, because of its identity with, or similarity to, the trade mark and the identity or similarity of the goods
         or services covered by the trade mark and the sign, there exists a likelihood of confusion on the part of the public, which
         includes the likelihood of association between the sign and the trade mark. 
         
2.
 Any Member State may also provide that the proprietor shall be entitled to prevent all third parties not having his consent
         from using in the course of trade any sign which is identical with, or similar to, the trade mark in relation to goods or
         services which are not similar to those for which the trade mark is registered, where the latter has a reputation in the Member
         State and where use of that sign without due cause takes unfair advantage of, or is detrimental to, the distinctive character
         or the repute of the trade mark.
         
            
Article 13(A)(1)(b) and (c) of the Uniform Benelux Law on Trade Marks, whose object is to transpose into Benelux law Article
         5(1) and (2) of the Directive, provides: Without prejudice to any application of the ordinary law governing civil liability, the exclusive rights in a trade mark shall
         entitle the proprietor to oppose:...
         
(b)
any use, in the course of trade, of the mark or a similar sign in respect of the goods for which the mark is registered or
         similar goods where there exists a risk of association on the part of the public between the sign and the mark;
         
(c)
any use, in the course of trade and without due cause, of a trade mark which has a reputation in the Benelux countries or
         of a similar sign for goods which are not similar to those for which the trade mark is registered, where use of that sign
         would take unfair advantage of, or would be detrimental to, the distinctive character or the repute of the trade mark.
         
The main proceedings
            
Adidas-Salomon AG, a company established in Germany, is the proprietor of a figurative trade mark registered at the Benelux
         Trade Mark Office for a number of types of clothing. That mark is formed by a motif consisting of three very striking vertical
         stripes of equal width, running parallel, which appear on the side and down the whole length of the article of clothing. The
         motif may be executed in different sizes and different colour combinations, provided that it always contrasts with the basic
         colour of the article of clothing. 
         
            
The mark is the subject of an exclusive licence granted in respect of the Benelux to Adidas Benelux BV, a company established
         in the Netherlands. 
         
            
Fitnessworld, a company established in the United Kingdom, markets fitness clothing under the name Perfetto. A number of those
         articles of clothing bear a motif of two parallel stripes of equal width which contrast with the main colour and are applied
         to the side seams of the clothing. 
         
            
Proceedings are pending before the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden between Adidas-Salomon AG and Adidas Benelux BV (
         Adidas), on the one hand, and Fitnessworld in connection with the marketing by Fitnessworld in the Netherlands of Perfetto clothing.
         
         
            
Adidas claims that that marketing of clothing with two stripes creates a likelihood of confusion on the part of the public,
         since the public might associate that clothing with Adidas' sports and leisure clothing which bears three stripes, and Fitnessworld
         thus takes advantage of the repute of the Adidas mark. The exclusivity of that mark could thereby be impaired. 
         
            
The Hoge Raad takes the view that it is necessary to determine whether the reference to non-similar goods or services in Article
         5(2) of the Directive and in Article 13(A)(1)(c) of the Uniform Benelux Law on Trade Marks must be interpreted as a restriction,
         that is to say, in the sense that the rules concerned do not apply where a sign is used in relation to similar goods or services,
         or whether that reference is intended merely to emphasise that those rules apply also if the goods or services are not similar,
         so that those rules are not restricted to cases where the sign is used for similar goods. 
         
            
If Article 5(2) of the Directive applies to the use of a sign in relation to similar goods, the national court seeks to ascertain,
         first, whether the criterion to be applied is a criterion other than confusion as to origin and, second, whether the fact
         that the sign is viewed purely as an embellishment by the relevant section of the public is important to the assessment of
         the situation. 
         
            
In that context, the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court
         for a preliminary ruling: 
         
1.
(a)
Must Article 5(2) of the Directive be interpreted as meaning that, under a national law implementing that provision, the proprietor
         of a trade mark which has a reputation in the Member State concerned may also oppose the use of the trade mark or a sign similar
         to it, in the manner and circumstances referred to therein, in relation to goods or services which are identical with or similar
         to those for which the trade mark is registered? 
         
(b)
If the answer to Question 1(a) is in the negative: where Article 5(2) of the Directive is implemented in a national law, must
         the concept of  
         likelihood of confusion referred to in Article 5(1)(b) of the Directive be interpreted as meaning that there exists such a likelihood if a person
         other than the proprietor of the trade mark uses a trade mark with a reputation or a sign similar to it, in the manner and
         circumstances referred to in Article 5(2) of the Directive, in relation to goods or services which are identical with or similar
         to those for which the trade mark is registered? 
         
2.
 If the answer to Question 1(a) is in the affirmative:
         
(a)
Must the question concerning the similarity between the trade mark and the sign in such a case be assessed on the basis of
         a criterion other than that of (direct or indirect) confusion as to origin, and if so, according to what criterion? 
         
(b)
If the sign alleged to be an infringement in such a case is viewed purely as an embellishment by the relevant section of the
         public, what importance must be attached to that circumstance in connection with the question concerning the similarity between
         the trade mark and the sign?
         
Question Question 1(a)
            
Question 1(a) contains the question whether, notwithstanding the fact that Article 5(2) of the Directive refers expressly
         only to use of a sign by a third party in relation to goods or services which are not similar, that provision is to be interpreted
         as entitling the Member States to provide specific protection for a registered trade mark with a reputation in cases where
         the later mark or sign, which is identical with or similar to the registered mark, is intended to be used or is used in relation
         to goods or services identical with or similar to those covered by that mark. 
         
            
Since the decision making the reference was registered, the Court has answered that question in the affirmative in Case C-292/Davidoff  [2003] ECR I-389. 
         
            
Having regard to that interpretation and for the purposes of an answer which will be helpful in resolving the dispute in the
         main proceedings, Question 1(a) must be understood as also seeking to ascertain whether a Member State, where it exercises
         the option provided by Article 5(2) of the Directive, is bound to grant the specific protection in question in cases of use
         by a third party of a later mark or sign which is identical with or similar to the registered mark with a reputation, both
         in relation to goods or services which are not similar and in relation to goods or services which are identical with or similar
         to those covered by that mark. 
         
            
Adidas and the Commission contend that, on that point, an affirmative answer must be given. The Commission takes the view
         that such an answer is necessarily inferred from paragraph of  
          Davidoff . 
         
            
The United Kingdom Government, by contrast, proposes a negative answer. A Member State is free to adopt provisions restricted
         to the express wording of Article 5(2) of the Directive, that is to say to goods or services which are not similar. It is
         not bound to grant the same protection also in relation to goods or services which are identical or similar. The United Kingdom
         Government contends, in any event, that it is for the national courts to interpret a provision transposing Article 5(2) of
         the Directive in relation to the question of what protection a Member State intended to confer on proprietors of marks with
         a reputation. 
         
            
In that regard, it should be noted that where a Member State exercises the option provided by Article 5(2) of the Directive,
         it must grant to the proprietors of marks with a reputation a form of protection in accordance with that provision. 
         
            
In  
          Davidoff  (paragraphs and 25), the Court observed in support of its interpretation that, in the light of the overall scheme and
         objectives of the system of which Article 5(2) of the Directive is part, that article cannot be given an interpretation which
         would lead to marks with a reputation having less protection where a sign is used for identical or similar goods or services
         than where a sign is used for non-similar goods or services. It went on to hold, in other words, that where the sign is used
         for identical or similar goods or services, a mark with a reputation must enjoy protection which is at least as extensive
         as where a sign is used for non-similar goods or services (
          Davidoff , paragraph 26). 
         
            
In the light of those findings, the Member State, if it transposes Article 5(2) of the Directive, must therefore grant protection
         which is at least as extensive for identical or similar goods or services as for non-similar goods or services. The Member
         State's option thus relates to the principle itself of granting greater protection to marks with a reputation, but not to
         the situations covered by that protection when the Member State grants it. 
         
            
It has been consistently held that, in applying national law, in particular national legislative provisions which were specially
         introduced in order to transpose a directive, the national court is required to interpret its national law, so far as possible,
         in the light of the wording and the purpose of the directive (see, in particular, Case 14/Von Colson and Kamann  [1984] ECR 1891, paragraph 26; Case 79/Harz  [1984] ECR 1921, paragraph 26, and Case C-185/Coote  [1998] ECR I-5199, paragraph 18). 
         
            
The answer to Question 1(a) must therefore be that a Member State, where it exercises the option provided by Article 5(2)
         of the Directive, is bound to grant the specific protection in question in cases of use by a third party of a later mark or
         sign which is identical with or similar to the registered mark with a reputation, both in relation to goods or services which
         are not similar and in relation to goods or services which are identical with or similar to those covered by that mark.  Question 1(b)
            
Since Question 1(b) was posed only in the event of a negative answer to Question 1(a), it does not require an answer. 
         Question Question 2(a)
            
By Question 2(a) the national court seeks essentially to ascertain whether the protection conferred by Article 5(2) of the
         Directive is conditional on a finding of a degree of similarity between the mark with a reputation and the sign such that
         there exists a likelihood of confusion between them on the part of the relevant section of the public. 
         
            
Adidas submits that a finding of a likelihood of confusion is not necessary. It is sufficient for the national court to find
         a likelihood of association on the basis of a visual, aural or conceptual similarity between the mark with a reputation and
         the sign. The Commission also submits that a likelihood of association is sufficient. 
         
            
Fitnessworld submits, by contrast, that the similarity between the mark and the sign must be such that it can create confusion
         on the part of the relevant section of the public, having regard to the visual, aural and conceptual similarities. 
         
            
In that regard, it must be noted at the outset that, unlike Article 5(1)(b) of the Directive, which is designed to apply only
         if there exists a likelihood of confusion on the part of the public, Article 5(2) of the Directive establishes, for the benefit
         of trade marks with a reputation, a form of protection whose implementation does not require the existence of such a likelihood.
         Article 5(2) applies to situations in which the specific condition of the protection consists of a use of the sign in question
         without due cause which takes unfair advantage of, or is detrimental to, the distinctive character or the repute of the trade
         mark (see Case C-425/Marca Mode  [2000] ECR I-4861, paragraphs and 36). 
         
            
The condition of similarity between the mark and the sign, referred to in Article 5(2) of the Directive, requires the existence,
         in particular, of elements of visual, aural or conceptual similarity (see, in respect of Article 5(1)(b) of the Directive,
         Case C-251/SABEL  [1997] ECR I-6191, paragraph in fine, and Case C-342/Lloyd Schuhfabrik Meyer  [1999] ECR I-3819, paragraphs and in fine). 
         
            
The infringements referred to in Article 5(2) of the Directive, where they occur, are the consequence of a certain degree
         of similarity between the mark and the sign, by virtue of which the relevant section of the public makes a connection between
         the sign and the mark, that is to say, establishes a link between them even though it does not confuse them (see, to that
         effect, Case C-375/General Motors  [1999] ECR I-5421, paragraph 23). 
         
            
The existence of such a link must, just like a likelihood of confusion in the context of Article 5(1)(b) of the Directive,
         be appreciated globally, taking into account all factors relevant to the circumstances of the case (see, in respect of the
         likelihood of confusion,  
          SABEL , paragraph 22, and  
          Marca Mode , paragraph 40). 
         
            
The answer to Question 2(a) must therefore be that the protection conferred by Article 5(2) of the Directive is not conditional
         on a finding of a degree of similarity between the mark with a reputation and the sign such that there exists a likelihood
         of confusion between them on the part of the relevant section of the public. It is sufficient for the degree of similarity
         between the mark with a reputation and the sign to have the effect that the relevant section of the public establishes a link
         between the sign and the mark.  Question 2(b)
            
By Question 2(b), the national court seeks essentially to ascertain, in connection with the question concerning the similarity
         between the mark with a reputation and the sign, what importance must be attached to a finding of fact by the national court
         to the effect that the sign in question is viewed purely as an embellishment by the relevant section of the public. Observations submitted to the Court
         
            
Adidas submits that the fact that a sign is used or viewed as an embellishment is of no importance to the applicability of
         Article 5(2) of the Directive in situations such as those described by the national court. Since that provision entitles the
         proprietor of a mark with a reputation to oppose the use of any sign similar to his mark, there is no requirement that the
         sign be distinctive. It could be any other sign, such as an embellishment. 
         
            
Fitnessworld proposes that the question be answered to the effect that, if a sign is viewed purely as an embellishment by
         the relevant section of the public, there cannot in any event be an infringement to the mark. 
         
            
The Netherlands Government considers that even the decorative use of a sign can dilute a mark with a reputation, in particular
         where it is a figurative mark. 
         
            
The United Kingdom Government confines itself to contending that the fact that a sign is viewed as a mere embellishment is
         not relevant to the question whether that sign is similar to the mark with a reputation. 
         
            
According to the Commission, Article 5(2) of the Directive concerns protection against the use of a sign which is similar
         to the mark with a reputation to such an extent that the use in question involves a likelihood of dilution of or detriment
         to the mark's reputation. It is in fact difficult to imagine that a sign bearing such a similarity to a mark with a reputation
         can be regarded as a mere embellishment. Conversely, by definition, a mere embellishment cannot be similar, within the meaning
         of Article 5(2) of the Directive, to a mark with a reputation. Reply of the Court
         
            
The answer to Question 2(a) shows that one of the conditions of the protection conferred by Article 5(2) of the Directive
         is that the degree of similarity between the mark with a reputation and the sign must have the effect that the relevant section
         of the public establishes a link between the sign and the mark. 
         
            
The fact that a sign is viewed as an embellishment by the relevant section of the public is not, in itself, an obstacle to
         the protection conferred by Article 5(2) of the Directive where the degree of similarity is none the less such that the relevant
         section of the public establishes a link between the sign and the mark. 
         
            
By contrast, where, according to a finding of fact by the national court, the relevant section of the public views the sign
         purely as an embellishment, it necessarily does not establish any link with a registered mark. That therefore means that the
         degree of similarity between the sign and the mark is not sufficient for such a link to be established. 
         
            
The answer to Question 2(b) must therefore be that the fact that a sign is viewed as an embellishment by the relevant section
         of the public is not, in itself, an obstacle to the protection conferred by Article 5(2) of the Directive where the degree
         of similarity is none the less such that the relevant section of the public establishes a link between the sign and the mark.
         By contrast, where, according to a finding of fact by the national court, the relevant section of the public views the sign
         purely as an embellishment, it necessarily does not establish any link with a registered mark, with the result that one of
         the conditions of the protection conferred by Article 5(2) of the Directive is then not satisfied. 
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the Netherlands and United Kingdom Governments and by the Commission, which have submitted observations
         to the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action
         pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
in answer to the questions referred to it by the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden by judgment of October 2001, hereby rules: 
         
1.
 A Member State, where it exercises the option provided by Article 5(2) of First Council Directive 89/104/EEC of December
            to approximate the laws of the Member States relating to trade marks, is bound to grant the specific protection in question
            in cases of use by a third party of a later mark or sign which is identical with or similar to the registered mark with a
            reputation, both in relation to goods or services which are not similar and in relation to goods or services which are identical
            with or similar to those covered by that mark. 
            
2.
 The protection conferred by Article 5(2) of Directive 89/is not conditional on a finding of a degree of similarity between
            the mark with a reputation and the sign such that there exists a likelihood of confusion between them on the part of the relevant
            section of the public. It is sufficient for the degree of similarity between the mark with a reputation and the sign to have
            the effect that the relevant section of the public establishes a link between the sign and the mark. 
            
3.
 The fact that a sign is viewed as an embellishment by the relevant section of the public is not, in itself, an obstacle to
            the protection conferred by Article 5(2) of Directive 89/where the degree of similarity is none the less such that the
            relevant section of the public establishes a link between the sign and the mark. By contrast, where, according to a finding
            of fact by the national court, the relevant section of the public views the sign purely as an embellishment, it necessarily
            does not establish any link with a registered mark, with the result that one of the conditions of the protection conferred
            by Article 5(2) of Directive 89/is then not satisfied. 
            
Puissochet
Gulmann 
Macken 
Colneric
Cunha Rodrigues 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on October 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
V. Skouris  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: Dutch.
Top  
 