
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-122/Commission of the European CommunitiesvKingdom of Belgium
«(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Failure to transpose Directive 98/83/EC)»
Opinion of Advocate General Geelhoed delivered on October I - Judgment of the Court (First Chamber), January I - Summary of the Judgment
Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Examination of merits by the Court – Situation to be taken into consideration – Situation at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion(Art. EC)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)January (1)
((Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations – Failure to transpose Directive 98/83/EC))
In Case C-122/02, 
            
 Commission of the European Communities ,   represented by G. Valero Jordana and J. Adda, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, 
v
 Kingdom of Belgium,  represented by A. Snoecx, acting as Agent,
            
defendant, 
APPLICATION for a declaration that, by failing to adopt all the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary
            to comply fully with Council Directive 98/83/EC of November on the quality of water intended for human consumption
            (OJ L 330, p. 32) or, at any rate, by failing fully to inform the Commission thereof, the Kingdom of Belgium has failed
            to fulfil its obligations under that directive,
            
THE COURT (First Chamber),,
composed of: M. Wathelet, President of the Chamber, P. Jann and A. Rosas (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on October 2002, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on April 2002, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         under Article EC for a declaration that, by failing to adopt all the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary
         to comply fully with Council Directive 98/83/EC of November on the quality of water intended for human consumption
         (OJ L 330, p. 32;  
         the Directive) or, at any rate, by failing fully to inform the Commission thereof, the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under that directive. 
         
Legal context
            
Article of the Directive provides that Member States are to bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions
         necessary to comply with the Directive within two years of its entry into force and that they are forthwith to inform the
         Commission thereof. 
         
            
Article states that the Directive  
         shall enter into force on the 20th day following its publication in the  
          Official Journal of the European Communities . Since the Directive was published on December 1998, it entered into force on December and the period for transposition
         expired on December 2000. 
         Pre-litigation procedure
            
Taking the view that the Directive had not been transposed within the period prescribed, the Commission initiated the procedure
         provided for in Article EC. On July 2001, having given the Kingdom of Belgium formal notice to submit its observations,
         the Commission issued a reasoned opinion calling on that Member State to take the necessary measures to comply with the reasoned
         opinion within two months of its notification. 
         
            
By letters of October and February 2002, the Belgian Permanent Representation to the European Union forwarded to
         the Commission the following legislation transposing, or intended to transpose, the Directive: 
         
─
the Royal Decree of January on the quality of water intended for human consumption which is packaged or which is used
            in food processing establishments in the manufacture and/or commercial preparation of food products; 
         
─
the Order of the Government of the Region of Metropolitan Brussels of January relating to the quality of water distributed
            through a supply network, published in the  
            Moniteur belge of February 2002; 
         
─
a preliminary draft of the decree of the Flemish Region relating to water intended for human consumption, which was in the
            process of being adopted; 
         
─
a preliminary draft of the decree of the Walloon Region relating to the quality of water intended for human consumption, which
            was in the process of being adopted. 
         
            
Taking the view that Belgium had not taken all the measures necessary to transpose the Directive, the Commission brought the
         present action. 
         The failure to fulfil obligations
            
The Commission states that the documents forwarded for the Flemish and Walloon Regions are merely preliminary drafts. It concludes
         that the Kingdom of Belgium has not yet adopted the necessary provisions to transpose the Directive. 
         
            
The Kingdom of Belgium explains that, as regards transposition of the Directive at the level of the Federal Belgian Government,
         the Royal Decree of January was published in the  
          Moniteur belge  of March 2002. 
         
            
As regards transposition at the level of the Flemish and Walloon Regions, the Kingdom of Belgium sets out the situation in
         respect of adoption of the measures to transpose the Directive: 
         
─
as regards the Walloon Region, the Council of State has given an opinion on the draft transposing decree, which will shortly
            be submitted to the Walloon Government for approval; 
         
─
as regards the Flemish Region, the measures to transpose the Directive consist of: 
         
─
a decree on water intended for human consumption, adopted on May by the Flemish Parliament and decreed and promulgated
         on May by the Flemish Government; the legislative text has been sent to the  
         Moniteur belge for publication in the very near future; 
         
─
a draft order of the Flemish Government regulating the quality of water intended for human consumption; the legislative text
         has been agreed to in principle by the Flemish Government and is expected to receive its final approval in the very near future.
         
         
            
The Kingdom of Belgium does not dispute that not all the measures necessary to transpose the Directive have been taken, and
         states that the Commission and the Court will be informed of the progress made in the transposition of the Directive. 
         
            
It is settled case-law that the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations must be determined by
         reference to the situation prevailing in the Member State at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion, and
         that the Court cannot take account of any subsequent changes (see,  
          inter alia , Case C-133/Commission  v  
          Belgium  [1996] ECR I-2323, paragraph 17). 
         
            
In the present case, no legislation transposing the Directive into the Belgian legal system had been adopted on the expiry
         of the period prescribed in the reasoned opinion. 
         
            
Since the Directive was not fully transposed within the prescribed period, the Commission's action must be considered well
         founded. 
         
            
It must therefore be held that, by failing to adopt all the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply
         fully with the Directive, the Kingdom of Belgium has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive. 
         
Costs
            
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party's pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Kingdom of Belgium has
         been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (First Chamber),
hereby:  
         
1.
 Declares that, by failing to adopt all the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply fully with
            Council Directive 98/83/EC of November on the quality of water intended for human consumption, the Kingdom of Belgium
            has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive; 
            
2.
 Orders the Kingdom of Belgium to pay the costs.
            
Wathelet
Jann 
Rosas 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on January 2003. 
         
 R. Grass 
M. Wathelet  
Registrar
President of the First Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: French.
Top  
 