
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-500/Commission of the European CommunitiesvKingdom of Spain
«(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Market for telecommunications services – Tariff rebalancing – Access to the local loop – Directive 90/388/EEC – Article 4c)»
Opinion of Advocate General Léger delivered on July Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber), January Summary of the Judgment
Competition – Public undertakings and undertakings to which Member States grant special or exclusive rights – Telecommunications sector – Directives 90/and 96/– Tariff rebalancing by traditional telecommunications organisations – Obligation of Member States to remove obstacles to rebalancing – National rules fixing or limiting variation in tariffs – Not permissible  (Commission Directives 90/388, Art. 4c, and 96/19, Art. 1(6)) Although Article 4c of Directive 90/on competition in the markets for telecommunications does not lay down a period within
         which the obligation to rebalance tariffs must be carried out by the telecommunications organisations, the fact remains that
         several elements of Directive 96/19, amending Directive 90/388, state that the rebalancing of tariffs must be carried out
         at a sustained rate in order to facilitate the opening of the telecommunications market to competition. Thus, it is clear
         from reading the 20th and 5th recitals in the preamble to Directive 96/together with Article 4c of Directive 90/that
         the Member States were bound to phase out the restrictions on tariff rebalancing as soon as possible after the entry into
         force of Directive 96/and at the latest by January 1998.Therefore, a Member State fails to fulfil that obligation to remove obstacles to tariff rebalancing where the tariff imbalances
         persisting for several years after the expiry of that period cannot be attributed exclusively to the traditional telecommunications
         organisation, but also to the national authorities.  Such is the case both where that organisation has no discretion in fixing
         tariffs and where its power to fix tariffs is limited by a regulatory ceiling on price variations for telecommunications services
         detrimental to the development of competition with regard to the traditional operator and, therefore, contrary to the objectives
         of Directive 90/388.see paras 32, 36-37, operative part JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)January (1)
((Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations – Market for telecommunications services – Tariff rebalancing – Access to the local loop – Directive 90/388/EEC – Article 4(c)))
 In Case C-500/01, 
            
Commission of the European Communities, represented by S. Rating, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, 
v
Kingdom of Spain, represented by S. Ortiz Vaamonde, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
defendant, 
 APPLICATION for a declaration that, by failing to adopt the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply
            with Article 4(c) of Commission Directive 90/388/EEC of June on competition in the markets for telecommunications
            services (OJ L 192, p. 10) as amended by Commission Directive 96/19/EC of March (OJ L 74, p. 13), the Kingdom
            of Spain has failed to fulfil its obligations under those directives and the EC Treaty,
            
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),,
 composed of: P. Jann, acting for the President of the Fifth Chamber, D.A.O. Edward (Rapporteur) and A. La Pergola, Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: P. Léger, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on July 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By application lodged at the Court Registry on December 2001, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         under Article EC for a declaration that, by failing to adopt the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary
         to comply with Article 4(c) of Commission Directive 90/388/EEC of June on competition in the markets for telecommunications
         services (OJ L 192, p. 10) as amended by Commission Directive 96/19/EC of March (OJ L 74, p. 13) (
         Directive 90/388), the Kingdom of Spain has failed to fulfil its obligations under those directives and the EC Treaty. 
         
Legal background
 Community legislation
         
            
 The fifth recital in the preamble to Directive 96/states: ... In order to allow telecommunications organisations to complete their preparation for competition and in particular to
         pursue the necessary rebalancing of tariffs, Member States may continue the current special and exclusive rights regarding
         the provision of voice telephony until January 1998. Member States with less developed networks or with very small networks
         must be eligible for a temporary exception where this is warranted by the need to carry out structural adjustments and strictly
         only to the extent necessary for those adjustments. Such Member States should be granted, upon request, an additional transitional
         period respectively of up to five and of up to two years, provided it is necessary to complete the necessary structural adjustments.
         The Member States which may request such an exception are Spain, Ireland, Greece and Portugal with regard to less developed
         networks and Luxembourg with regard to very small networks ...
         
            
 According to the 20th recital in the preamble to Directive 96/19: ... Member States should phase out as rapidly as possible all unjustified restrictions on tariff rebalancing by the telecommunications
         organisations and in particular those preventing the adaptation of rates which are not in line with costs and increase the
         burden of universal service provision.
         
            
 Article 4(c) of Directive 90/388, introduced by Article 1(6) of Directive 96/provides: Without prejudice to the harmonisation by the European Parliament and the Council in the framework of ONP, any national scheme
         which is necessary to share the net cost of the provision of universal service obligations entrusted to the telecommunications
         organisations, with other organisations whether it consists of a system of supplementary charges or a universal service fund,
         shall:
         
(a)
 apply only to undertakings providing public telecommunications networks; 
         
(b)
 allocate the respective burden to each undertaking according to objective and non-discriminatory criteria and in accordance
         with the principle of proportionality. 
          Member States shall communicate any such scheme to the Commission so that it can verify the scheme's compatibility with the
         Treaty.Member States shall allow their telecommunications organisations to rebalance tariffs taking account of specific market conditions
         and of the need to ensure the affordability of a universal service, and, in particular, Member States shall allow them to
         adapt current rates which are not in line with costs and which increase the burden of universal service provision, in order
         to achieve tariffs based on real costs. Where such rebalancing cannot be completed before January the Member States
         concerned shall report to the Commission on the future phasing out of the remaining tariff imbalances. This shall include
         a detailed timetable for implementation.In any case, within three months after the European Parliament and the Council adopt a Directive harmonising interconnection
         conditions, the Commission will assess whether further initiatives are necessary to ensure the consistency of both Directives
         and take the appropriate measures.In addition, the Commission shall, no later than January 2003, review the situation in the Member States and assess in particular
         whether the financing schemes in place do not limit access to the relevant markets. In this case, the Commission will examine
         whether there are other methods and make any appropriate proposals.
         
            
 On June 1997, the Commission adopted Commission Decision 97/603/EC concerning the granting of additional implementation
         periods to Spain for the implementation of Directive 90/388/EEC as regards full competition in the telecommunications markets
         (OJ L 243, p. 48). Article of that decision authorises the Kingdom of Spain to postpone until December the effective
         granting of further licences for the provision of voice telephony and public telecommunications networks. 
         
            
 Regulation (EC) No 2887/of the European Parliament and of the Council of December on unbundled access to the
         local loop (OJ L 336, p. 4) should, according to its second recital, complement the existing provisions of Community
         law guaranteeing universal service and affordable access for all citizens of the European Union by enhancing competition,
         ensuring economic efficiency and bringing maximum benefit to users. 
         
            
 According to the seventh recital in the preamble to that regulation, unbundled access to the local loop allows new entrants
         to compete with notified operators in offering high bit-rate data transmission services for continuous internet access and
         for multimedia applications based on digital subscriber line (DSL) technology as well as voice telephony services. 
         
            
 Article 3(3) of Regulation No 2887/provides: ... notified operators shall charge prices for unbundled access to the local loop and related facilities set on the basis
         of cost-orientation.
          National legislation
         
            
 The Spanish authorities adopted the Orden por la que se determinan las tarifas y condiciones de interconexión a la red adscrita
         al servicio público de telefonía básica que explota el operador dominante para la prestación del servicio final de telefonía
         básica y el servicio portador soporte del mismo (Order fixing tariffs and interconnection conditions to the public network
         of voice telephony exploited by the dominant operator) of March (BOE No of March 1997, p. 10079). That measure
         increased the price of the monthly subscription charge by 16% and the price of local calls by 13%, and reduced the price of
         provincial calls by 5%, interprovincial calls by 15% and international calls by 12%. 
         
            
 The Orden sobre reequilibrio tarifario de servicios prestados por  
         Telefónica Sociedad Anónima (Order rebalancing the tariffs of services offered by Telefónica SA) of July (BOE No 188, of August 1998, p. 26858),
         set the monthly telephone line rental charge at ESP for  
         residential lines and ESP for  
         trunk lines. 
         
            
 Real Decreto-Ley 16/por el que se adoptan medidas para combatir la inflación y facilitar un mayor grado de competencia
         en las telecomunicaciones (Royal Decree-Law adopting measures to counter inflation and increase competition on the telecommunications
         market) of October (BOE No of October 1999, p. 36561) provided for new increases of telephone subscription
         charges. According to the timetable envisaged, the charge had to increase ESP three times: on August 2000, March and August 2001. 
         
            
 By the Orden por la que se dispone la publicación del Acuerdo de la Comisión Delegada del Gobierno para Asuntos Económicos
         de julio de 2000, por el que se establece un nuevo marco regulatorio de precios para los servicios prestados por  
         Telefónica de España, Sociedad Anónima Unipersonal (Order for the publication of the agreement of the Government Representative for Economic Affairs of July establishing
         a new price mechanism for the services offered by Telefónica SA) of July (BOE No 183, of August 2000, p. 27564)
         a new  
         price cap pricing system, based on a capping mechanism, was introduced for the period 2001-2002. It is based on calculation formulae
         involving Spanish Government forecasts of changes in the retail price index (
         RPI) and adjustment factors. 
         
            
 The price cap system was maintained in force for by the Orden por la que se dispone la publicación del Acuerdo de la
         Comisión Delegada del Gobierno para Asuntos Económicos del Acuerdo por el que se modifica el Acuerdo de de julio de 2000,
         por el que se establece un nuevo marco regulatorio de precios para los servicios prestados por  
         Telefónica de España, Sociedad Anónima Unipersonal) (Order for the publication of the decision of the Government Commission on Economic Affairs amending the decision of that
         commission of July establishing a new pricing mechanism for the services offered by Telefónica SA) of May (BOE No 118, of May 2001, p. 17456). Under that pricing system: 
         
─
 all fixed telephony and fixed calls to mobile telephony shall be subject to a regulated charge equivalent to the annual variation
            in the forecast RPI - 9% in 2001, the annual variation in the forecast RPI - 8% in and to the annual variation in the
            forecast RPI - 4% in 2003; 
          all fixed telephony and fixed calls to mobile telephony shall be subject to a regulated charge equivalent to the annual variation
         in the forecast RPI - 9% in 2001, the annual variation in the forecast RPI - 8% in and to the annual variation in the
         forecast RPI - 4% in 2003; 
         
─
 the subscription charges may not rise in 2001, but may be increased by a maximum of the annual variation in the forecast RPI
            + 9.4% in and by the annual variation in the forecast RPI + 6% in 2003; 
          the subscription charges may not rise in 2001, but may be increased by a maximum of the annual variation in the forecast RPI
         + 9.4% in and by the annual variation in the forecast RPI + 6% in 2003; 
         
─
 connection charges may rise by a maximum of the annual variation in the forecast RPI - 16.5% in and and by the annual
            variation in the forecast RPI - 2% in 2003. 
          connection charges may rise by a maximum of the annual variation in the forecast RPI - 16.5% in and and by the annual
         variation in the forecast RPI - 2% in 2003. 
         
            
 Real Decreto-Ley 7/de Medidas Urgentes en el Sector de las Telecomunicaciones (Royal Decree-Law on urgent measures in
         the telecommunications sector) of June (BOE No 151, of June 2000, p. 22458) imposed a duty to provide full unbundled
         access and shared access to the local loop. That measure was supplemented by Real Decreto 3456/por el que se aprueba
         el Reglamento que establece las condiciones para el acceso al bucle de abonado de la red pública telefónica fija de los operadores
         dominantes (Royal Decree approving the rules establishing the terms of access to the loop for subscribers to the fixed public
         telephony network of the dominant operators) of December (BOE No 307, of December 2000, p. 45567). Article 5(1)
         of the latter royal decree provides that the rates for access to the local loop must be set on the basis of cost orientation.
         
         
            
 The Orden por la que se dispone la publicación del Acuerdo de la Comisión Delegada del Gobierno para Asuntos Económicos, por
         el que se establecen los precios de la primera oferta de acceso al bucle de abonado en las modalidades de acceso completamente
         desagregado, de acceso compartido y de acceso indirecto, a la red pública telefónica fija de  
         Telefónica de España, Sociedad Anónima Unipersonal (Order for the publication of the agreement of the Government Representative for Economic Affairs setting the prices of first
         offering of access by subscribers to the loop and the full unbundled access, shared access and indirect access to the Telefónica
         fixed public telephony network) of December (BOE No 131, of December 2000, p. 49758), sets the monthly rates for
         unbundled access to the local loop. Those are ESP in 2001, ESP in and ESP in 2003. 
         Pre-litigation procedure
            
 The pre-litigation procedure consisted of two successive stages. 
         
            
 In the first stage the Commission sent a letter of formal notice to the Kingdom of Spain on December reminding it
         that it had not yet notified the Commission of a detailed timetable for the phasing out of restrictions on tariff rebalancing
         in accordance with Article 4(c) of Directive 90/388. 
         
            
 On February the Spanish authorities replied that the Orden of July effected the tariff rebalancing and that the
         timetable could be spread over the period to December 2000. 
         
            
 Taking the view that the measures adopted by the Spanish authorities were inadequate, and that the latter acknowledged that
         they had not drawn up a detailed timetable for the implementation of those measures, the Commission issued a reasoned opinion
         on May 1999. 
         
            
 By letter of April 1999, the Spanish authorities notified the Commission of the new measures for the reduction of the provincial,
         interprovincial and international call rates. 
         
            
 In order to take account of those measures the Commission informed the Kingdom of Spain, by letter of May 1999, that the
         reasoned opinion of May had been superseded. 
         
            
 In the second stage of the pre-litigation procedure the Commission continued its inquiry into the case in the light of a complaint
         lodged on November by the traditional operator Telefónica de España SA (
         Telefónica). On November the Commission requested certain information from the Spanish Government concerning that complaint.
         By letter of January the Spanish authorities replied that it was impossible for them to ascertain the existence of
         the access deficit alleged by Telefónica. Moreover, they informed the Commission of their intention to implement the price
         cap system.  
         
            
 On May 2000, the Commission sent a new letter of formal notice to the Kingdom of Spain. It complained that Spain had not
         allowed Telefónica sufficient flexibility to enable it to effect the tariff rebalancing required under Article 4(c) of Directive
         90/388. 
         
            
 Since it was not satisfied by the reply given by the Spanish authorities to that letter, the Commission issued a new reasoned
         opinion on January 2001. In that opinion it pointed out that the process of tariff rebalancing had not been completed in
         and that it would also probably not be completed in either. The Commission further stated that Telefónica's access
         deficit in was ESP billion, and it called on the Kingdom of Spain to take the measures necessary to comply with the
         reasoned opinion within a period of two months from its notification. 
         
            
 In their reply of March 2001, the Spanish authorities disputed the Commission's assessment. They submitted that Telefónica's
         alleged access deficit in was ESP billion, ESP million less than the figure put forward by the Commission.
         Moreover, the Spanish authorities announced a series of amendments to the price cap system. 
         
            
 On April Telefónica stated that as a result of the measures announced by the Spanish Government it was withdrawing
         its complaint. 
         
            
 On July 2001, the Commission sent a supplementary reasoned opinion to the Kingdom of Spain to take account of the adoption
         of certain provisions requiring Telefónica to offer unbundled access to the local loop, amendments to the price cap system
         adopted in May and the exact assessment by the Spanish Government of Telefónica's access deficit for 1999. 
         
            
 The Spanish authorities replied to the supplementary reasoned opinion by letter of October 2001. Not satisfied with that
         reply, the Commission brought the present action. 
         The infringement Arguments of the parties
         
            
 The Commission complains that the Kingdom of Spain has not applied  correctly the Community rules on tariff rebalancing. It
         argues that the Spanish authorities should have authorised Telefónica to rebalance its tariffs as laid down by Directive 90/388.
         By requiring Telefónica to maintain a tariff structure which harmed its competitors, distorting their financial calculations
         and maintaining over a long period tariffs which were inconsistent with the underlying costs, the Spanish authorities created
         a situation detrimental to the development of competition, specifically in the context of unbundled access to the local loop.
         
         
            
 The Commission argues that by taking account of the constraints imposed by the price cap system, the monthly subscription
         charges cannot be based on the real costs before the beginning of 2003. In that regard, it points out that the productivity
         gains of 6% per year claimed by the Spanish authorities, to eliminate the access deficit, are improbable, inasmuch as the
         infrastructure efficiency gains are modest. 
         
            
 The Spanish Government submits that Article 4(c) of Directive 90/does not mean that it must impose on Telefónica tariffs
         based on real costs:  neither does it impose a precise period in which to fulfil the obligation to phase out restraints to
         tariff rebalancing. That provision merely requires it to phase out the restraints preventing Telefónica from aligning its
         tariffs with real costs. In the absence of a period prescribed in Article 4(c), the question whether a Member State has failed
         to fulfil its obligations must therefore be assessed according to the circumstances prevailing in the Member State at the
         end of the period laid down by the reasoned opinion of January 2001. Since Telefónica did not report any deficit in and which is, moreover, borne out by the fact that it has withdrawn its complaint, the Spanish authorities cannot be
         criticised for any failure to fulfil obligations. 
          Findings of the Court
         
            
 Although Article 4(c) of Directive 90/does not lay down a period within which the obligation to rebalance tariffs must
         be fulfilled, the fact remains that several elements of Directive 96/state that the rebalancing of tariffs must be carried
         out at a sustained rate in order to facilitate the opening of the telecommunications market to competition. Thus, as the Advocate
         General stated in paragraphs to of his Opinion, it is clear from reading the 20th and 5th recitals in the preamble to
         Directive 96/together with Article 4(c) of Directive 90/that the Member States were bound to phase out the restrictions
         on tariff rebalancing as soon as possible after the entry into force of Directive 96/and at the latest by January 1998.
         The Member States with less developed networks or with very small networks were to adopt a detailed timetable for the implementation
         of their obligation. 
         
            
 However, the Spanish Government has not shown that it had adopted, in accordance with Article 4(c) of Directive 90/388, such
         a timetable within the prescribed period and that it had been approved by the Commission. 
         
            
 As for Decision 97/603, it does not authorise the Kingdom of Spain to postpone the implementation of its obligation to phase
         out the restrictions on tariff rebalancing before January 1998. It only permits the Kingdom of Spain to postpone until December the effective grant of new licences for the supply of vocal telephony and public telecommunications networks,
         the notification to the Commission, the publication of all the licensing and declaration procedures for the provision of voice
         telephony and the establishment of public telecommunications networks, and of the details of the national scheme envisaged
         to share the net cost of the provision of the universal service obligation. 
         
            
 In its defence, the Spanish Government expressly acknowledged that Telefónica had experienced an access deficit of ESP billion in 1999, and that that access deficit was absorbed, according to the most optimistic estimates of the annual gains
         in productivity, only during 2002. It also acknowledged the existence of a difference between the monthly subscription charge
         and the charge for access to the local loop. 
         
            
 As regards the question whether the Spanish authorities can be held responsible for the deficit, it must be recalled that
         until the entry into force of the price cap system in they themselves carried out the various increases and reductions
         in the charges for the components of the voice telephony services, so that the traditional operator had no discretion in setting
         the charges. As the Advocate General stated in paragraphs and of his Opinion, the absence of tariff rebalancing for
         and is exclusively attributable to the Spanish authorities. 
         
            
 It is true that after the introduction of the price cap system in Telefónica was authorised to increase or reduce its
         prices each year. However, the tariff imbalances recorded for and cannot be entirely attributed to it; a part of
         those tariff imbalances must be attributed to the Spanish authorities. Telefónica's freedom to set charges was limited by
         the existence of a ceiling or maximum price imposed by the Spanish authorities. That restriction was detrimental to the development
         of competition with regard to the traditional operator and is contrary to the aim of Directive 90/388. 
         
            
 Since the tariff rebalancing required by Article 4(c) of Directive 90/can be carried out by the traditional Spanish operator
         only for the beginning of 2003, that is with a five year delay with respect to the requirement of Directive 90/388, both the
         tariff imbalance and the situation detrimental to the development of competition arising from it are attributable to the Spanish
         authorities. 
         
            
 It must therefore be held that by failing to adopt the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply
         with Article 4(c) of Directive 90/388, the Kingdom of Spain has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive. 
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party's pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Kingdom of Spain has been
         unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs of the proceedings. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
 hereby: 
         
1.
 Declares that, by failing to adopt the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Article 4(c)
            of Commission Directive 90/388/EEC of June on competition in the markets for telecommunications services, as amended
            by Commission Directive 96/19/EC of March 1996, the Kingdom of Spain has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive;
            
            
2.
 Orders the Kingdom of Spain to pay the costs.
Jann
Edward 
La Pergola 
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on January 2004. 
         
R. Grass 
V. Skouris  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: Spanish.
Top  
 