
ORDER OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE COURT
April (*)
      
(Application for interim measures – Conservation of wild birds – Directive 79/409/EEC – Spring hunting – Prohibition – Derogations from the system of protection – Condition that there be no ‘other satisfactory solution’ – Urgency)
In Case C-76/R,
APPLICATION for interim measures under Article EC, made on February 2008,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by D. Recchia and D. Lawunmi, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Republic of Malta, represented by S. Camilleri, acting as Agent,
      
defendant,
THE PRESIDENT OF THE COURT,
after hearing the Advocate General, M. Poiares Maduro,
makes the following
Order
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities requests the Court to order the Republic of Malta to refrain
         from adopting any measures to apply the derogation in Article of Council Directive 79/409/EEC of April on the conservation
         of wild birds (OJ L 103, p. 1), as amended by Council Directive 2006/105/EC of November adapting Directives 73/239/EEC,
         74/557/EEC and 2002/83/EC in the field of environment, by reason of the accession of Bulgaria and Romania (OJ L 363,
         p. 368) (‘Directive 79/409’), for the hunting of quails (Coturnix coturnix) and turtle doves (Streptopelia turtur) on spring migration.
      
The Commission also requested, in accordance with Article 84(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the provisional grant of the application
         even before the observations of the opposing party had been submitted.
      
Those requests were made in the context of infringement proceedings under Article EC brought by the Commission on February
         2008, in which it seeks a declaration that, by failing to meet the conditions set out in Article of Directive 79/409, the
         Republic of Malta has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of that directive for the hunting of quails and turtle
         doves on spring migration.
      
 Procedure before the Court
Having being invited to submit its observations on the application for interim measures and to inform the Court whether it
         had already adopted or had the intention of adopting measures permitting spring hunting of the quail and the turtle dove for
         the current year, on March the Republic of Malta, when submitting its observations, indicated to the Court that no
         measure had yet been adopted to allow such hunting for 2008.
      
The Maltese authorities also informed the Court that any ministerial decision permitting spring hunting of those two species
         for could be taken only after submission of a recommendation by a national committee (the Ornis Committee), the recommendation
         having to be submitted at least four weeks before the date envisaged by the committee for the start of the hunting season.
         Although the committee had met a number of times for this purpose, it had not yet submitted a recommendation.
      
The parties presented oral argument on April 2008. At that hearing the Commission specified that its application for interim
         measures relates to and 2009.
      
By letter of April 2008, the Maltese authorities confirmed that no ministerial decision permitting spring hunting of the
         quail and the turtle dove for would be taken before the Court had given its decision in these proceedings for interim
         measures.
      
 Legal context
Directive 79/is designed to ensure the protection, management and control of all species of birds naturally occurring
         in the wild in the European territory of the Member States to which the EC Treaty applies. For this purpose, it requires the
         Member States to establish a general system of protection which, in particular, prohibits the killing, capture or disturbance
         of birds referred to in Article and the destruction of nests.
      
Article of Directive 79/states:
      
‘1.      Owing to their population level, geographical distribution and reproductive rate throughout the Community, the species listed
         in Annex II may be hunted under national legislation. Member States shall ensure that the hunting of these species does not
         jeopardise conservation efforts in their distribution area.
      
2.      The species referred to in Annex II/may be hunted in the geographical sea and land area where this Directive applies.
3.      The species referred to in Annex II/may be hunted only in the Member States in respect of which they are indicated.
4.      Member States shall ensure that the practice of hunting, including falconry if practised, as carried on in accordance with
         the national measures in force, complies with the principles of wise use and ecologically balanced control of the species
         of birds concerned and that this practice is compatible as regards the population of these species, in particular migratory
         species, with the measures resulting from Article 2. They shall see in particular that the species to which hunting laws apply
         are not hunted during the rearing season nor during the various stages of reproduction. In the case of migratory species,
         they shall see in particular that the species to which hunting regulations apply are not hunted during their period of reproduction
         or during their return to their rearing grounds. Member States shall send the Commission all relevant information on the practical
         application of their hunting regulations.’
      
Article of Directive 79/provides:
      
‘1.      Member States may derogate from the provisions of Articles 5, 6, and 8, where there is no other satisfactory solution, for
         the following reasons:
      
(a)      –       in the interests of public health and safety,
–      in the interests of air safety,
–      to prevent serious damage to crops, livestock, forests, fisheries and water,
–      for the protection of flora and fauna;
(b)      for the purposes of research and teaching, of re-population, of re-introduction and for the breeding necessary for these purposes;
(c)      to permit, under strictly supervised conditions and on a selective basis, the capture, keeping or other judicious use of certain
         birds in small numbers.
      
2.      The derogations must specify:
–      the species which are subject to the derogations,
–      the means, arrangements or methods authorised for capture or killing,
–      the conditions of risk and the circumstances of time and place under which such derogations may be granted,
–      the authority empowered to declare that the required conditions obtain and to decide what means, arrangements or methods may
         be used, within what limits and by whom,
      
–      the controls which will be carried out.
3.      Each year the Member States shall send a report to the Commission on the implementation of this Article.
4.      On the basis of the information available to it, and in particular the information communicated to it pursuant to paragraph
         3, the Commission shall at all times ensure that the consequences of these derogations are not incompatible with this Directive.
         It shall take appropriate steps to this end.’
      
Since the quail and the turtle dove appear in Annex II/to Directive 79/409, they may, as provided by Article 7(3) of that
         directive, be hunted only in the Member States in respect of which they are indicated. As they are indicated in the case of
         the Republic of Malta, those species may in principle be hunted on the territory of that Member State, provided that the requirements
         imposed by Directive 79/are met.
      
In that regard, it is not in dispute that the quail and the turtle dove are migratory species and that the spring hunting
         occurs during their return to their rearing grounds. In accordance with Article 7(4) of Directive 79/409, the spring hunting
         of those species on Maltese territory must therefore, if it is to be lawful, be by way of a derogation pursuant to Article
         of the directive.
      
 Admissibility
The Maltese Government calls the admissibility of the application for interim measures into question.
      
First, it contends that the application is inadmissible because it goes beyond the subject-matter of the main action brought
         under the second paragraph of Article EC. In its submission, the fact that the Member States must, by virtue of Article
         9(3) of Directive 79/409, send a report on the implementation of Article of the directive to the Commission each year and
         that, by virtue of Article 9(4), the Commission is required to take account of the information in the report in order to determine
         whether the consequences of the derogations authorised are compatible with the directive implies that the Commission cannot
         declare those derogations to be incompatible with the directive without first having received the report relating to the year
         in question. For this reason, the subject-matter of the main action cannot go beyond those years for which the Republic of
         Malta has submitted its report, that is to say, 2004, and possibly 2006, and cannot therefore cover 2007, the report
         for which is not due until the end of 2008. That is all the more so as regards 2008, in respect of which not only the report
         cannot yet be lodged but also there has not even yet been a decision by the Maltese authorities to rely on the derogation.
         
      
In that regard, it need merely be stated that the application for interim measures, in that it relates to the next two spring
         hunting seasons for the quail and the turtle dove, does not go beyond the framework of the dispute as determined by the Commission’s
         main action, since that action concerns the very principle of such hunting. If the Maltese Government calls the admissibility
         of the main action into question, it is to be pointed out that in principle this issue should not, save in exceptional circumstances
         whose existence has not, however, been established in the present case, be examined in proceedings relating to an application
         for interim measures, so as not to prejudge the substance of the case (see, to this effect, the order in Case 376/R Distrivet v Council [1988] ECR 209, paragraph 21).
      
Next, the Maltese Government submits that the present application for interim measures is inadmissible inasmuch as it seeks
         in actual fact to anticipate the decision of the Court on the merits in the main action.
      
While it is true that the measures applied for must be provisional in the sense that they do not prejudge the points of law
         or fact in issue or neutralise in advance the effects of the decision subsequently to be given in the main action (order in
         Case C-393/P(R) Antonissen v Counciland Commission [1997] ECR I-441, paragraph 27), it is to be observed that, in the present case, the measures applied for do no more than
         guard against a deterioration in the conservation status of the quail and the turtle dove during two spring hunting seasons.
      
Finally, the Maltese Government asserts that, through the application for interim measures, the Commission seeks to usurp
         the powers conferred by law on the Maltese authorities by evaluating and deciding itself whether or not recourse to a derogation
         permitting spring hunting is in conformity with Directive 79/409. Such a course of action is all the more improper because,
         in the absence, on the date of the application for interim measures, of any decision of the Maltese authorities permitting
         spring hunting for 2008, there is no national measure capable of being suspended and therefore the application for interim
         measures is manifestly premature.
      
In that regard, it is to be pointed out that, under the system of legal remedies which is established by the Treaty, a party
         may not only request, in accordance with Article EC, that application of the act contested in the main action be suspended
         but also rely on Article EC in order to seek the grant of interim measures. Under the latter provision, the judge hearing
         an application for interim measures may in particular issue, on a provisional basis, appropriate directions to the other party
         (see, to this effect, the order in Case 118/R CMC and Others v Commission [1983] ECR 2583, paragraph 53).
      
It follows that the application for interim measures is admissible.
      
 Substance
It is settled case-law that the judge hearing an application for interim measures may order interim relief only if it is established
         that such an order is justified, prima facie, in fact and in law and that it is urgent in so far as, in order to avoid serious
         and irreparable harm to the applicant’s interests, it must be made and produce its effects before a decision is reached in
         the main action. Where appropriate, the judge hearing such an application must also weigh up the interests involved (see,
         inter alia, the order in Case C‑404/P-R Technische Glaswerke Ilmenau v Commission [2005] ECR I‑3539, paragraph 10, and the case cited).
      
The conditions thus imposed are cumulative, so that an application for interim measures must be dismissed if one of them is
         not met (see, inter alia, Technische Glaswerke Ilmenau v Commission, paragraph 11, and the case cited).
      
 Prima facie case
The Commission states that the Maltese authorities have adopted measures to apply the derogation provided for in Article 9(1)
         of Directive 79/in order to permit spring hunting of the quail and the turtle dove in to and that there is nothing
         to indicate that a measure of that type will not be adopted before long in respect of 2008.
      
The Commission submits that those measures fall outside the scope of the derogation in Article 9(1) of Directive 79/because
         the Maltese authorities have failed to show that there is no satisfactory solution other than spring hunting of the species
         concerned. The Commission indicated at the hearing that it was not pursuing the additional argument set out in its pleadings
         that those measures are not justified on any of the grounds set out in Article 9(1)(a) to (c) of the directive.
      
According to the Maltese Government, while hunting of the species concerned is possible in autumn, the birds would nevertheless
         appear not to be present then in sufficient numbers.
      
In support of its line of argument, it also states that in only 11% of the turtle doves (namely birds out of a
         total of 347) and 24.6% of the quails (namely birds out of a total of 052) were taken in the autumn.
      
The Maltese Government adds that in 2005, when there were licensed hunters, quails were taken in the spring,
         representing 1.quails per hunter, as against only in the autumn, representing 0.quails per hunter. As regards turtle
         doves, were taken in the spring, representing 2.turtle doves per hunter, as against only in the autumn, representing
         0.turtle doves per hunter.
      
The Court has held that the fact that hunting conditions during the autumn and winter are less favourable than at other times
         of the year is irrelevant having regard to the protective legal framework established by Directive 79/(see Case C-507/Commission v Austria [2007] ECR I-5939, paragraph 203).
      
In the present case, it is common ground that hunting of the species concerned is possible in autumn, even though the number
         of birds taken is lower then. Furthermore, the Maltese Government did not explain clearly, either in its written observations
         or at the hearing, why and with regard to what needs the numbers taken during autumn hunting had to be considered insufficient.
         It should, moreover, be pointed out that the objective of Directive 79/is not to guarantee hunting communities a minimum
         number of birds to be taken per hunter.
      
Accordingly, it cannot be ruled out from the outset that the main action is well founded even though, on the other hand, the
         arguments relied upon by the Republic of Malta in defending itself cannot be disregarded.
      
 Urgency
As regards the condition relating to urgency, it is to be remembered that the purpose of the procedure for interim relief
         is to guarantee the full effectiveness of the definitive future decision, in order to ensure that there is no lacuna in the
         legal protection provided by the Court. For the purpose of attaining that objective, urgency must be assessed in the light
         of the need for an interlocutory order in order to avoid serious and irreparable damage to the party seeking the interim relief
         (order in Case C-7/P(R) Commission v Akzo and Akcros [2004] ECR I‑8739, paragraph 36, and the case cited).
      
It is for the party claiming such damage to establish its existence. While it is not necessary for it to be absolutely certain
         that the damage will occur, a sufficient degree of probability being enough, the applicant is none the less required to prove
         the facts which are considered to found the prospect of such damage (see the order in Case C-156/P-R Commission v Laboratoires Servier [2003] ECR I‑6575, paragraph 36).
      
The Commission, invoking damage to the common heritage of the Member States that would result if Malta again permitted spring
         hunting of the quail and the turtle dove, contends that continuance of the practice of systematically granting a derogation
         permitting hunting during the spring migration would have a devastating impact on the population of those species, which in
         any event do not have a favourable conservation status. It observes that spring hunting affects mature adults in particular,
         that is to say, those of the birds that are necessary to procreate in order to maintain the species. At the hearing, it stated
         that the fact that spring hunting will result in the death of certain number of those birds is sufficient in itself to establish
         irreparable damage.
      
The Maltese Government submits that the Commission’s assertions remain vague and general. The Commission does not provide
         actual justification to back up its contentions and gets lost in contradictions. Thus, in its application for interim measures
         it observes at footnote that it ‘is difficult to demonstrate that hunting [the species concerned] in Malta itself is having
         a devastating impact on these bird populations in Europe’, a statement which is in complete contradiction to the devastating
         impact of hunting on those species that it constantly raises in the same application. According to the Maltese Government,
         in the absence of a devastating impact of that kind, serious and irreparable damage cannot be considered to be established.
      
In this regard, it must be stated, first of all, that the effect of applying the criterion as to urgency adopted by the Commission
         at the hearing would be that, in practice, urgency would always be considered to be established. On the other hand, on the
         basis of the criterion argued for by the Maltese Government, it would be necessary to demonstrate that spring hunting for
         and/or would in itself have a devastating impact on the species concerned, which appears very difficult, if not
         in practice impossible.
      
The interim relief procedure is not designed to establish the truth of complex and much debated facts. The judge hearing an
         application for interim measures does not have the means necessary in order to carry out such examinations and in numerous
         instances he would be able to manage to do so in sufficient time only with difficulty.
      
In addition, Community legislation on the conservation of wild birds must be interpreted in the light of the precautionary
         principle, which is one of the foundations of the high level of protection pursued by Community policy on the environment,
         in accordance with the first subparagraph of Article 174(2) EC (see, by analogy, inter alia Case C-127/Waddenvereniging and Vogelbeschermingsvereniging [2004] ECR I‑7405, paragraph 44).
      
Therefore, when assessing urgency, it should be recalled, first of all, that the protection of birds covered by Directive
         79/is regarded as being a matter where management of the common heritage is entrusted to the Member States in relation
         to their respective territories (see Case C-60/WWF Italia and Others [2006] ECR I‑5083, paragraph 24). As the Court has held, any hunting activity is liable to disturb wild fauna and it may
         in many cases affect the conservation status of the species concerned, irrespective of the extent to which it depletes numbers.
         The regular elimination of individual animals keeps the hunted populations in a permanent state of alert which has harmful
         consequences for numerous aspects of their living conditions (Case C-435/Association pour la protection des animaux sauvages and Others [1994] ECR I‑67, paragraph 16, and order of the President of the Court of December in Case C‑503/R Commission v Italy, paragraph 17, not published in the ECR).
      
Next, as is stated in the abovementioned footnote in the Commission’s application for interim measures and has not been contested
         by the Maltese Government, ‘the two species are considered to be in an unfavourable conservation status (cf. Birds in Europe,
         BirdLife Conservation Series No 12, BirdLife International, which mentions that the turtle dove is in moderate continuing
         decline in Europe and quail has a large historic decline in Europe)’.
      
Finally, the question of urgency cannot be separated from the present case’s broader context, which is marked by the fact
         that the Commission complains in the main action about the very principle of spring hunting of the quail and the turtle dove
         in Malta, whereas the Maltese Government considers that such hunting is consistent with the requirements of Directive 79/and that it is open to it to permit such hunting in the future too.
      
Account should therefore be taken of the cumulative effect of spring hunting of the quail and the turtle dove in recent years
         in order to assess whether the continuance of such hunting in and warrants grant of the interim measures applied
         for.
      
Moreover, the national Ornis Committee, which has the task of submitting a recommendation to the Maltese Government following
         which the latter may take a decision permitting spring hunting of those species, is already dealing with the matter and has
         decided, according to the explanation given by the Maltese Government, to suspend deliberation pending a decision by the Court.
      
On the basis of the foregoing, it is apparent that the Commission’s application for interim measures cannot be dismissed for
         lack of urgency so far as concerns the current year. With regard to 2009, on the other hand, urgency is not made out in the
         present application for interim measures.
      
 Balance of interests
It remains to be determined whether the balance of interests favours one or other of the parties with regard to the interim
         relief requested for 2008.
      
The Commission submits that the interest in protecting the common heritage of the Community outweighs the possible adverse
         effects, for the Maltese authorities or any third parties, such as the hunting fraternity in Malta, of the interim relief
         applied for.
      
The Maltese Government contends that its interests in the main action would be definitively and irrevocably prejudiced if
         the relief requested were granted, a situation which is all the more serious in light of the absence of serious and irreparable
         damage.
      
As regards any repercussions of the application for interim measures on the main action, reference should be made to paragraph
         of the present order. As to the remainder, it appears that a comparison should be made of, on the one hand, the interest
         relied upon by the Commission consisting in observance of Directive 79/and, on the other, the interest of the Republic
         of Malta consisting in being able, if it so wishes, to permit spring hunting of the quail and the turtle dove.
      
While, on the basis of the case-law cited earlier, the interest, founded on ecological justifications, in protecting the common
         heritage of the Community is considerable in itself, the interest of hunters does not appear to have a value superior thereto.
         According to the information available in these proceedings for interim measures, any prohibition of spring hunting of the
         quail and the turtle dove in would, moreover, not run up against either acquired rights of hunters or even, in the light
         of the background to these proceedings, a legitimate expectation on their part of engaging, in the spring of 2008, in an activity
         which falls more within leisure pursuits than within any other type of occupation.
      
Accordingly, it appears necessary to order the Republic of Malta to refrain from adopting any measures applying the derogation
         in Article of Directive 79/for the hunting of quails and turtle doves on the spring migration.
      
On those grounds, the President of the Court hereby orders:
1.      The Republic of Malta shall refrain from adopting any measures applying the derogation in Article of Council Directive 79/409/EEC
            of April on the conservation of wild birds – as amended by Council Directive 2006/105/EC of November adapting
            Directives 73/239/EEC, 74/557/EEC and 2002/83/EC in the field of environment, by reason of the accession of Bulgaria and Romania
            – for the hunting of quails (Coturnix coturnix) and turtle doves (Streptopelia turtur) on the spring migration.
2.      The application for interim measures is dismissed as to the remainder.
3.      Costs are reserved.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 