
Case C-6/Deponiezweckverband Eiterköpfe
v
Land Rheinland-Pfalz
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Verwaltungsgericht Koblenz)
(Environment – Landfill of waste – Directive 1999/31/EC – Domestic legislation laying down more stringent rules – Compatibility)
Opinion of Advocate General Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer delivered on November Judgment of the Court (First Chamber), April 2005. 
Summary of the Judgment
1.     Environment – Waste – Directive 1999/– Landfill of waste – Domestic legislation laying down more stringent rules – Whether
            compatible
(Art. EC; Council Directive 1999/31, Art. 5(1) and (2))
2.     Environment – More stringent protective measures – Whether compatible with the Treaty – Condition – Observance of the principle
            of proportionality – Excluded 
(Art. EC; Council Directive 1999/31)
1.     It is not contrary to Article 5(1) and (2) of Directive 1999/on the landfill of waste that a measure of domestic law should:
- fix limits in respect of the acceptance of biodegradable waste for landfill lower than those fixed by the directive, even
         if those limits are so low that they call for treatment by mechanical and biological processes or the incineration of such
         waste before it is landfilled,
      
- fix earlier time-limits than those under the directive in order to reduce the amount of waste going to landfill,
- apply not only to biodegradable waste but also to non-biodegradable organic substances, and 
- apply not only to municipal waste but also to waste that may be disposed of as municipal waste.
(see paras 43-44, 49, 52, 55-56, operative part 1)
2.     In connection with the Community’s environmental policy, to the extent that a measure of domestic law pursues the same objectives
         as a directive, Article EC makes provision for and authorises the minimum requirements laid down by that directive to
         be exceeded, in the conditions set by that article.  As a result, the Community-law principle of proportionality is not applicable
         so far as concerns more stringent protective measures of domestic law adopted by virtue of Article EC and going beyond
         the minimum requirements laid down by a Community directive in the sphere of the environment, inasmuch as other provisions
         of the Treaty are not involved.
      
(see paras 58, 64, operative part 2)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Environment – Landfill of waste – Directive 1999/– Domestic legislation laying down more stringent rules – Compatibility)
In Case C-6/03,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Verwaltungsgericht Koblenz (Germany), made by decision of
         December 2002, registered at the Court on January 2003, in the proceedings
      
Deponiezweckverband Eiterköpfe
v
Land Rheinland-Pfalz,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann, President of the Chamber, N. Colneric, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur), M. Ilešič and E. Levits, Judges,
Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,
Registrar: K. Sztranc, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2004, 
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Deponiezweckverband Eiterköpfe, by W. Klett, G. Moesta and H. Oexle, Rechtsanwälte,
–       the Land Rheinland-Pfalz, by P. Delorme, acting as Agent, and D. Sellner, Rechtsanwalt,
–       the German Government, by W.‑D. Plessing, M. Lumma and A. Tiemann, acting as Agents,
–       the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster, acting as Agent,
–       the Austrian Government, by E. Riedl and M. Hauer, acting as Agents,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by U. Wölker and M. Konstantinidis, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on November 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article of Council Directive 1999/31/EC of April
         on the landfill of waste (OJ L 182, p. 1, ‘the Directive’), and of Article EC and of the principle of proportionality.
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings brought before the Verwaltungsgericht Koblenz (Administrative Court, Koblenz)
         by the association Deponiezweckverband Eiterköpfe (‘Deponiezweckverband’) against Land Rheinland-Pfalz (the Land of Rhineland-Palatinate)
         concerning authorisation to operate a landfill site.
      
 Legal background
 Relevant provisions of Community law
In connection with the Community’s policy in the sphere of the environment, Article EC provides:
‘The protective measures adopted pursuant to Article shall not prevent any Member State from maintaining or introducing
         more stringent protective measures. Such measures must be compatible with this Treaty. They shall be notified to the Commission.’
      
The Directive was adopted on the basis of Article 130s(1) of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article 175(1) EC).
Article 1(1) of the Directive provides:
‘With a view to meeting the requirements of Directive 75/442/EEC, and in particular Articles and thereof, the aim of this
         Directive is, by way of stringent operational and technical requirements on the waste and landfills, to provide for measures,
         procedures and guidance to prevent or reduce as far as possible negative effects on the environment, in particular the pollution
         of surface water, groundwater, soil and air, and on the global environment, including the greenhouse effect, as well as any
         resulting risk to human health, from landfilling of waste, during the whole life-cycle of the landfill.’
      
Article 2(a) of the Directive defines ‘waste’ as any substance or object which is covered by Council Directive 75/442/EC on
         waste (OJ L 194, p. 39). Article 1(a) of the latter defines ‘waste’ as ‘any substance or object which the holder disposes
         of or is required to dispose of pursuant to the provisions of national law in force’.
      
‘Municipal waste’ is defined in Article 2(a) of the Directive as ‘waste from households, as well as other waste which, because
         of its nature or composition, is similar to waste from households’.
      
Under Article 2(m) of the Directive, ‘biodegradable waste’ means ‘any waste that is capable of undergoing anaerobic or aerobic
         decomposition, such as food and garden waste, and paper and paperboard’.
      
Article 3(1) of the Directive provides:
‘Member States shall apply this Directive to any landfill as defined in Article 2(g).’
According to Article 5(1) and (2) of the Directive:
‘(1)      Member States shall set up a national strategy for the implementation of the reduction of biodegradable waste going to landfills,
         not later than two years after the date laid down in Article 18(1) and notify the Commission of this strategy. This strategy
         should include measures to achieve the targets set out in paragraph by means of in particular, recycling, composting, biogas
         production or materials/energy recovery … 
      
(2)      This strategy shall ensure that:
(a)      not later than five years after the date laid down in Article 18(1), biodegradable municipal waste going to landfills must
         be reduced to 75% of the total amount (by weight) of biodegradable municipal waste produced in or the latest year before
         for which standardised Eurostat data are available;
      
(b)      not later than eight years after the date laid down in Article 18(1), biodegradable municipal waste going to landfills must
         be reduced to 50% of the total amount (by weight) of biodegradable municipal waste produced in or the latest year before
         for which standardised Eurostat data are available;
      
(c)      not later than years after the date laid down in Article 18(1), biodegradable municipal waste going to landfills must be
         reduced to 35% of the total amount (by weight) of biodegradable municipal waste produced in or the latest year before
         for which standardised Eurostat data are available.
      
…’.
Article 6(a) of the Directive states that:
‘Member States shall take measures in order that:
(a)      only waste that has been subject to treatment is landfilled. This provision may not apply to inert waste for which treatment
         is not technically feasible, nor to any other waste for which such treatment does not contribute to the objectives of this
         Directive, as set out in Article 1, by reducing the quantity of the waste or the hazards to human health or the environment’.
      
The date fixed by Article 18(1) of the Directive, and mentioned in Article thereof, is July 2001. That is the date by
         which, at the latest, the Member States were required to have transposed the Directive into their domestic law.
      
 Relevant provisions of domestic law
The Regulation on the environmentally sound deposit of municipal waste (Verordnung über die umweltverträgliche Ablagerung
         von Siedlungsabfällen) of February (BGBl. I, p. 305, ‘the regulation of 2001’) was adopted for the purpose of
         transposing the Directive into domestic German law.
      
‘Municipal waste’ is defined in Paragraph 2(1) of the regulation of as ‘household waste, and also other waste that, by
         its nature or composition, is similar to household waste’.
      
‘Waste that may be disposed of as municipal waste’ is defined in Paragraph 2(2) of the national regulation as ‘waste that,
         by its nature or composition, may be disposed of with or as municipal waste, in particular, residual sludge from urban waste-water-treatment
         plants or from waste waters with similarly a low pollution load, faeces and faecal sludge, residues from waste-water-treatment
         plants, sludge from the treatment of waste water, waste from building-sites and waste specifically connected to manufacturing
         …’.
      
Paragraph 3(3) of that regulation provides:
‘Municipal waste and waste within the meaning of Paragraph 2(2), save for waste treated by mechanical and biological processes,
         may be deposited only if they meet the reference criteria laid down in Annex for Category I or II landfill.’
      
Paragraph 4(1) of that regulation provides:
‘Waste treated by mechanical and biological processes may be deposited only if
…
the waste meets the reference criteria in Annex …’.
Annex to the regulation of provides that in the classifying of waste in landfill sites the following reference values
         have to be observed:
      
No
Criteria
Reference values
 
 
Landfill category I 
Landfill category II 
Organic content of the dry residue of the original substance 
 
 
2.expressed as combustion loss
? or = to 3% by mass
? or = to 5% by mass
 
2.expressed as TOC (total organic carbon) 
? or = to 1% by mass
? or = to 3% by mass 
 
Eluate criteria 
 
 
 
4.TOC
? or = to mg/l 
? or = to mg/l 
Annex to that regulation provides that in the classifying of waste previously treated by mechanical and biological processes
         in landfill sites the following reference values have to be observed: 
      
No 
Criteria 
Reference values
Organic content of the dry residue of the original substance expressed as TOC 
? or = to 18% by mass 
Eluate criteria 
 
4.TOC 
? or = to mg/l 
biodegradability of the dry residue of the original substance expressed as aerobic activity (AT4) or
               
? or = to mg/g 
 
expressed as the rate of gas formation in the fermentation test (GB21) 
? or = to l/kg» 
The regulation of entered into force on March 2001. As a transitional measure, Paragraph of that regulation provides
         that, on certain conditions, the depositing of waste that does not meet its criteria may be authorised until May 2005,
         and the depositing of waste that does meet its criteria in old landfill sites that do not meet its requirements may be authorised
         until July 2009.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
The plaintiff in the main proceedings, the Deponiezweckverband, is an association of the Landkreises (administrative districts)
         of Mayen-Koblenz and Cochem-Zell and the city of Koblenz, which operates the Eiterköpfe central landfill site. It seeks to
         obtain from the Land Rheinland-Pfalz, the defendant in the main proceedings, a permit to fill, after May and until
         December at the latest, two landfill cells with waste that has previously been treated by mechanical processes only.
         The Land Rheinland-Pfalz argues that the national regulation applicable does not allow that.
      
The Verwaltungsgericht Koblenz, hearing the dispute, has expressed doubts as to the compatibility of that national regulation
         with Article 5(1) and (2) of the Directive, and with the Community principle of proportionality. It has therefore decided
         to stay proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘(1)      Must Article 5(1) of the Directive and the Community rules for a strategy for the reduction of biodegradable waste going to
         landfills be interpreted as meaning that, in accordance with Article EC and notwithstanding the measures referred to in
         Article 5(2) of the Directive, namely, the reduction of the quantity of biodegradable municipal waste going to landfills to
         a certain percentage of the total amount by weight of biodegradable municipal waste in relation to a given calendar year,
         those measures may be made more stringent by a provision of domestic law, intended to implement the Community rules, which
         provides that municipal waste and waste that may be disposed of as municipal waste may not be landfilled unless the reference
         criterion “organic content of the dry residue of the original substance” – expressed as either combustion loss or as total
         organic carbon (TOC) is satisfied?
      
(2)      (a)   If so, must the rules of Community law fixed by Article 5(2) of the Directive be construed as meaning that the reduction requirements
         laid down therein, viz.:
      
–       75% by weight as from July –       50% by weight as from July and 
–       35% by weight as from July 2016, 
have been satisfied, having regard to the Community-law principle of proportionality, by a national provision under which,
         in the case of municipal waste and waste that can be deposited in the same way as municipal waste, the organic content of
         dry residue of the original substance must, after June 2005, be no more than 5% by mass, expressed as combustion loss, or
         no more than 3% by mass, expressed as TOC, and under which as from March waste treated by mechanical and biological
         processes may be landfilled at old sites until July at the latest, or beyond that date in certain cases, only if the
         organic content of the dry residue of the original substance is no more than mg/g, expressed as aerobic activity (AT4), or no more than l/kg, expressed as the rate of gas formation in the fermentation test (GB21)?
      
(b)      Does the Community-law principle of proportionality grant extensive or restricted discretion in the assessing of the effects
         of laying waste treated by thermal or mechanical and biological processes on untreated waste? May it be deduced from the principle
         of proportionality that hazards caused by waste treated by mechanical processes alone may be offset by other safety measures?’
      
 Concerning the application for reopening of the oral procedure
By document lodged at the Court Registry on December 2004, and supplemented by a letter of February 2005, the Deponiezweckverband
         Eiterköpfe sought to have the oral procedure reopened in order for certain experts’ reports to be taken into consideration.
      
According to point of the Advocate General’s Opinion, ‘the information necessary in order to undertake a judicious appraisal
         has not been supplied’, and according to footnote of that Opinion ‘[t]he case file does not contain the technical reports
         …’. Nevertheless, the plaintiff argues that the documents before the national court include five experts’ reports containing
         exactly the information referred to by the Advocate General. In its view, reopening the oral procedure is advisable in order
         to permit him to take that information into account.
      
The Court may, of its own motion, on a proposal from the Advocate General or at the request of the parties, reopen the oral
         procedure, in accordance with Article of its Rules of Procedure, if it considers that it lacks sufficient information,
         or that the case must be dealt with on the basis of an argument which has not been debated between the parties (Case C-309/Wouters and Others [2002] ECR I-1577, paragraph 42, and Case C-434/Arnold André [2004] ECR I-0000, paragraph 27). In the circumstances of this case, however, the Court, after hearing the Advocate General,
         considers that it is in possession of all the facts necessary for it to answer the questions referred. In consequence, the
         request for reopening of the oral procedure must be rejected.
      
 On the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Questions and 2(a) may appropriately be dealt with together, in so far as they concern the interpretation of the Directive
         in the light of Article EC. In so far as Questions 2(a) and 2(b) concern the Community principle of proportionality, they
         too may be dealt with together.
      
 Preliminary remark 
The first point to be noted is that the Community rules do not seek to effect complete harmonisation in the area of the environment.
         Even though Article EC refers to certain Community objectives to be attained, Article EC allows the Member States
         to introduce more stringent protective measures (Case C-318/Fornasar and Others [2000] ECR I-4785, paragraph 46). Article EC makes such measures subject only to the conditions that they should be compatible
         with the Treaty and that they should be notified to the Commission.
      
According to Article 174(2) EC, Community policy on the environment is to aim at a high level of protection taking into account
         the diversity of situations in the various regions of the Community. It is to be based on the precautionary principle and
         on the principles that preventive action should be taken, that environmental damage should as a priority be rectified at source
         and that the polluter should pay. 
      
The Directive was adopted on the basis of Article 130s(1) of the EC Treaty (now Article 175(1) EC) and, therefore, for the
         purpose of attaining the objectives set out in Article EC.
      
It is apparent from the ninth recital in the preamble to, and Article 1(1) of, the Directive that the latter is intended to
         pursue and clarify the objectives of Directive 75/by laying down measures to prevent or reduce as far as possible negative
         effects of landfilling of waste on the environment.
      
Under Article 5(1) of the Directive, the Member States are to set up national strategies in order to reduce the amount of
         biodegradable waste going to landfills. Under the same provision, those national strategies must include measures to achieve
         the targets fixed in Article 5(2) of the Directive. The last-mentioned provision states that those national strategies must
         provide that the amount of waste going to landfill should be reduced by certain percentages before certain fixed dates. The
         wording and broad logic of those provisions make it clearly apparent that they set a minimum reduction to be achieved by the
         Member States and they do not preclude the adopting by the latter of more stringent measures.
      
It follows that Article EC and the Directive allow the Member States to introduce more stringent protection measures that
         go beyond the minimum requirements fixed by the Directive (see, to that effect, Fornasar and Others, paragraph 46, concerning Council Directive 91/689/EEC of December on hazardous waste, OJ L 377, p. 20).
      
 On the first question
By its first question the national court seeks in essence to ascertain whether it is contrary to Article 5(1) and (2) of the
         Directive, read in the light of Article EC, for measures of domestic law to impose more stringent requirements than those
         laid down by the Directive with regard to the landfilling of waste. The question covers four kinds of requirements laid down
         by rules of domestic law. They are to be examined in turn.
      
First, Article 5(2) of the Directive provides that, no later than 2016, the amount of biodegradable municipal waste going
         to landfill must be progressively reduced to 35% by weight of the total amount of such waste produced in 1995. In comparison,
         the regulation of 2001, in particular Paragraphs 3(3) and 4(1) thereof and Annexes and thereto, fixes lower thresholds
         for organic waste remaining in waste accepted in landfills.
      
That regulation uses, inter alia, the tests of combustion loss and total organic carbon (TOC) to define the limit values which
         it imposes, whereas in Article 5(2) of the Directive the test of percentage by weight is used.
      
It is to be noted here that using a method of measurement such as TOC or combustion loss is not an end in itself, like the
         objectives referred to in Article 5(2) of the Directive, but simply a means by which those objectives may be attained.
      
The Member States being free to choose the means of attaining the goals fixed by Article 5(2) of the Directive, measurements
         tests such as those contained in the regulation of are in keeping with the requirements of the Directive.
      
With regard to the thresholds fixed for quantities of organic matter remaining in waste accepted in landfills, a measure of
         domestic law such as that concerned in the main proceedings clearly pursues the same objective as the Directive, in particular,
         the reduction of pollution of water and air by reducing the landfilling of biodegradable waste.
      
In order to achieve those thresholds, the regulation of demands that biodegradable waste should be treated before being
         landfilled. In the case of waste treated mechanically and biologically, that treatment involves processes such as crushing,
         sorting, composting and fermenting. For other waste thermal treatment is used, in this case incineration.
      
All those forms of treatment are in keeping with the Directive. Article 6(a) of the latter requires the Member States to take
         measures so that only waste that has already been treated is landfilled. Treatment is defined in Article 2(h) of the Directive
         as ‘physical, thermal, chemical or biological processes, including sorting, that change the characteristics of the waste in
         order to reduce its volume or hazardous nature, facilitate its handling or enhance recovery’. That makes it apparent in particular
         that the Directive provides for thermal treatment of waste so as to lessen its hazardousness.
      
It is clear from the foregoing that the thresholds and tests contained in a measure of domestic law such as that at issue
         in the main proceedings follow the same policy of protecting the environment as the Directive does. Inasmuch as such a regulation
         imposes requirements stricter than those of that Directive, it constitutes a more stringent protective measure for the purposes
         of Article EC.
      
Second, under Article 5(2) of the Directive the Member States must reduce the amount of waste referred to in three stages,
         ending no later than 2006, and 2016. The regulation of imposes earlier time-limits, viz., until May at the
         latest.
      
The use of the expression ‘not later than’ in Articles 5(2) and of the Directive shows that the Member States are at liberty
         to apply earlier time-limits if they deem it necessary (see, to that effect, Case C-11/Gallaher and Others [1993] ECR I-3545, paragraph 20, on the subject of the expression ‘at least’).
      
If a Member State chooses, in this regard, to fix earlier time-limits than those under the Directive, that is a more stringent
         protective measure for the purposes of Article EC.
      
Third, Article 5(1) and (2) of the Directive applies to biodegradable waste only. For its part, the regulation of concerns
         not only biodegradable waste but also non-biodegradable organic waste.
      
Although Article of the Directive specifically concerns a strategy the purpose of which is to reduce waste going to landfill,
         the Directive as a whole plainly applies to waste in the liberal sense of the word, as it is defined in Article 2(a).
      
Article 1(1) of the Directive lays down strict technical and operational requirements applicable to waste and to landfills,
         without restricting the kind of waste or landfill. Moreover, in accordance with Article 3(1) of the Directive the Member States
         are to apply that act to any landfill, a concept defined in Article 2(g) as ‘a waste disposal site …’ with no limitation of
         the kind of waste covered by that provision.
      
That is the context in which the sixth subparagraph of Paragraph of Annex II to the Directive states that the criteria for
         acceptance of waste for landfill may include limitations on the amount of organic matter in the waste.
      
It follows that a measure of domestic law, such as that referred to in paragraph above, which, in order to authorise landfilling,
         extends restrictions not to biodegradable substances only but to all organic substances, pursues the same goals as the Directive.
         In so far as such a measure covers a range of substances wider than that to be found in Article of the Directive, it is
         a more stringent protective measure for the purposes of Article EC.
      
Fourth, Article 5(2) of the Directive refers to municipal waste. The regulation of covers not only municipal waste but
         also, under Paragraphs 2(2) and 3(3), waste which may be disposed of with or as municipal waste, in particular sludge from
         the treatment of waste water, waste from building-sites and waste connected to manufacturing.
      
While it is true that Article 5(2) of the Directive refers to municipal waste only, the national strategy, the purpose of
         which is to reduce biodegradable waste going to landfill, provided for in Article 5(1) includes all waste within the definition
         given in Article 2(a) of the Directive. Likewise, the obligation imposed on the Member States by Article 6(a), that they should
         take measures to ensure that only previously treated waste is landfilled, applies to non-municipal as well as to municipal
         waste. In addition, Article 1(1) of the Directive makes it clear that the latter as a whole has as its aim the reduction of
         the amount of waste going to landfills, without any distinction drawn between municipal and other waste.
      
It follows that a measure of domestic law, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which seeks to reduce the amount
         of waste going to landfill and which applies to waste other than municipal waste, is compatible with the Directive and constitutes
         a more stringent protective measure for the purposes of Article EC.
      
It follows from the foregoing that, in each of the four cases examined, the measure of domestic law under contemplation is
         in keeping with the Directive, read in the light of Article EC.
      
In addition, the national court asks whether such measures, taken as a whole, may be regarded as contrary to the Directive.
With regard to that question, it must be held that, each of the four national measures under consideration being individually
         in keeping with Community law, there are no grounds for regarding them collectively as contrary to Community law. That is
         thus the case even if the limits fixed by the measure of domestic law in respect of the acceptance of biodegradable waste
         for landfill are so low that they call for treatment by mechanical and biological processes or the incineration of such waste
         before it is landfilled.
      
The reply to be given to the first question must therefore be that it is not contrary to Article 5(1) and (2) that a measure
         of domestic law should:
      
–       fix limits in respect of the acceptance of biodegradable waste for landfill lower than those fixed by the Directive, even
         if those limits are so low that they call for treatment by mechanical and biological processes or the incineration of such
         waste before it is landfilled,
      
–       fix earlier time-limits than those under the Directive in order to reduce the amount of waste going to landfill,
–       apply not only to biodegradable waste but also to non-biodegradable organic substances, and
–       apply not only to municipal waste but also to waste that may be disposed of as municipal waste.
 On the second question
By its second question, the national court in substance asks the Court whether measures of national law such as those at issue
         in the main proceedings are compatible with the Community law principle of proportionality. 
      
In order to answer that question, it is to be recalled that, in connection with the Community’s environmental policy, to the
         extent that a measure of domestic law pursues the same objectives as a directive, Article EC makes provision for and authorises
         the minimum requirements laid down by that directive to be exceeded, in the conditions set by that article.
      
Article EC authorises the Member States to maintain or introduce more stringent protective measures, on condition that
         they are compatible with the Treaty and notified to the Commission.
      
As may be deduced from the reply given to the first question, measures of domestic law such as those about which the national
         court has referred questions to the Court constitute more stringent protective measures for the purposes of Article EC.
      
It is clear from the broad logic of Article EC that, in adopting stricter measures, Member States still exercise powers
         governed by Community law, given that such measures must in any case be compatible with the Treaty. Nevertheless, it falls
         to the Member States to define the extent of the protection to be achieved.
      
In that context, in so far as it is a matter of ensuring that the minimum requirements laid down by the Directive are enforced,
         the Community principle of proportionality demands that measures of domestic law should be appropriate and necessary in relation
         to the objectives pursued.
      
In contrast, and inasmuch as other provisions of the Treaty are not involved, that principle is no longer applicable so far
         as concerns more stringent protective measures of domestic law adopted by virtue of Article EC and going beyond the minimum
         requirements laid down by the Directive.
      
As a result, the reply to the second question has to be that the Community-law principle of proportionality is not applicable
         so far as concerns more stringent protective measures of domestic law adopted by virtue of Article EC and going beyond
         the minimum requirements laid down by a Community directive in the sphere of the environment, inasmuch as other provisions
         of the Treaty are not involved.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) rules as follows:
1.      It is not contrary to Article 5(1) and (2) of Council Directive 1999/31/EC of April on the landfill of waste that
            a measure of domestic law should:
–       fix limits in respect of the acceptance of biodegradable waste for landfill lower than those fixed by the Directive, even
            if those limits are so low that they call for treatment by mechanical and biological processes or the incineration of such
            waste before it is landfilled,
–       fix earlier time-limits than those under the Directive in order to reduce the amount of waste going to landfill,
–       apply not only to biodegradable waste but also to non-biodegradable organic substances, and
–       apply not only to municipal waste but also to waste that may be disposed of as municipal waste.
2.      The Community-law principle of proportionality is not applicable so far as concerns more stringent protective measures of
            domestic law adopted by virtue of Article EC and going beyond the minimum requirements laid down by a Community directive
            in the sphere of the environment, inasmuch as other provisions of the Treaty are not involved.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 