
ORDER OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
January (*)
      
(Appeal – Non-contractual liability of the Commission – Certain and actual loss – Distortion of the clear sense of the facts and the evidence – Burden of proof)
In Case C‑374/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice brought on August 2007,
Mebrom NV, established in Rieme-Ertvelde (Belgium), represented by K. Van Maldegem and C. Mereu, avocats,
      
appellant,
the other party to the proceedings being:
Commission of the European Communities, represented by X. Lewis, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
composed of J.‑C. Bonichot (Rapporteur), President of Chamber, K. Schiemann and J. Makarczyk, Judges,
Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro,
Registrar: R. Grass,
after hearing the Advocate General,
makes the following
Order
By its appeal, Mebrom NV (‘Mebrom’) applies to have set aside the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European
         Communities of May in Case T-198/Mebrom v Commission (‘the judgment under appeal’), by which that Court dismissed as unfounded its action seeking compensation for the damage
         it claims to have suffered as a result of the failure of the Commission of the European Communities to take the necessary
         measures to allow the appellant to import methyl bromide in January and February 2005.
      
 Legal context
By Council Decision 88/540/EEC of October concerning the conclusion of the Vienna Convention for the protection of
         the ozone layer and the Montreal Protocol on substances that deplete the ozone layer (OJ L 297, p. 8), the European Community
         became a party to the Vienna Convention of March for the protection of the ozone layer and the Montreal Protocol of
         September on substances that deplete the ozone layer.
      
In 1997, the parties to the Montreal Protocol agreed to reduce in stages the production and importation of methyl bromide
         and, from January 2005, to prohibit the production and importation of that pesticide in developed countries other than for
         ‘critical uses’.
      
Under Decision IX/of the parties to the Montreal Protocol (‘Decision IX/6’), a use of methyl bromide is considered critical
         if the nominating party in respect of exemption determines, first, that the lack of availability of methyl bromide for the
         use concerned would result in a significant market disruption and, second, that there are no technically and economically
         feasible alternatives or substitutes available to the user that are acceptable from the standpoint of the environment and
         health and are suitable to the crops and circumstances referred to in the nomination.
      
Decision IX/requires, moreover, that the production and consumption of methyl bromide for critical uses should be permitted
         only if:
      
–        all technically and economically feasible steps have been taken to minimise the critical use and any associated emission of
         methyl bromide;
      
–        methyl bromide is not available in sufficient quantity and quality from existing stocks of banked or recycled methyl bromide,
         and
      
–        it is demonstrated that an appropriate effort is being made to evaluate, market and secure national regulatory approval of
         alternatives and substitutes.
      
Regulation (EC) No 2037/of the European Parliament and of the Council of June on substances that deplete the
         ozone layer (OJ L 244, p.1), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 2077/of December (OJ L 359,
         p. 28) (‘Regulation No 2037/2000’), states in recital in its preamble:
      
‘It is necessary for action to be taken at Community level to carry out the Community’s obligations under the Vienna Convention
         and the latest amendments and adjustments to the Montreal Protocol, in particular to phase out the production and the placing
         on the market of methyl bromide within the Community and to provide for a system for the licensing not only of imports but
         also of exports of ozone-depleting substances.’
      
Article 3(2)(i) of Regulation No 2037/states:
      
‘Subject to paragraphs to 10, each producer shall ensure that:
… 
(d)       it produces no methyl bromide after December 2004.
…’
Article 3(2)(ii) of that regulation provides:
      
‘In the light of the proposals made by Member States, the Commission shall, in accordance with the procedure referred to in
         Article 18(2), apply the criteria set out in Decision IX/of the Parties, together with any other relevant criteria agreed
         by the Parties, in order to determine every year any critical uses for which the production, importation and use of methyl
         bromide may be permitted in the Community after December 2004, the quantities and uses to be permitted and those users
         who may take advantage of the critical exemption. Such production and importation shall be allowed only if no adequate alternatives
         or recycled or reclaimed methyl bromide is available from any of the Parties.
      
…’
Article 4(2)(i) of the regulation provides:
      
‘Subject to paragraphs and 5, each producer and importer shall ensure that:
... 
(d)       it does not place any methyl bromide on the market or use any for its own account after December 2004.
…’
Article 4(2)(ii) of the same regulation states:
      
‘Subject to paragraph 4, the placing on the market and the use of methyl bromide by undertakings other than producers and
         importers shall be prohibited after December 2005.’
      
Article 4(4)(i) of Regulation No 2037/provides:
      
… 
(b)       paragraphs 1, and shall not apply to the placing on the market and use of controlled substances if:
… 
–        they are used to meet … the licensed requests for critical uses of those users identified as laid down in Article 3(2) …’
Article 6(1) of the regulation provides:
      
‘The release for free circulation in the Community … of controlled substances shall be subject to the presentation of an import
         licence. Such licences shall be issued by the Commission after verification of compliance with Articles 6, 7, and …’
      
Article of the regulation states:
      
‘The release for free circulation in the Community of controlled substances imported from third countries shall be subject
         to quantitative limits. Those limits shall be determined and quotas allocated to undertakings for the period January to
         December and for each 12-month period thereafter in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 18(2). They
         shall be allocated only:
      
(a)       for controlled substances of groups VI and VIII as referred to in Annex I;
(b)       for controlled substances if they are used for essential or critical uses or for quarantine and preshipment applications;
…’
Group VI of Annex I to the regulation refers to methyl bromide.
      
Point of the Notice to Importers in the European Union in of controlled substances that deplete the ozone layer, regarding
         Regulation (EC) No 2037/of the European Parliament and of the Council on substances that deplete the ozone layer (OJ
         C 187, p. 11), states:
      
‘This Notice is addressed to undertakings that intend to import the following substances into the European Community from
         sources outside the European Community from January to December 2005.
      
… 
Group VI: methyl bromide
…’
Point VIII of that Notice states:
      
‘Enterprises with a quota in should make a declaration by completing and submitting the relevant form(s) on [internet]
         page …’
      
 Background to the dispute
Until December 2004, eight importers, including Mebrom, were entitled to apply to the Commission for import licences for
         methyl bromide and secure the right to import a quota calculated on the basis of their market share in 1991.
      
As from January 2005, Regulation No 2037/prohibited the production and importation of that pesticide other than for
         critical uses.
      
In that context, the Commission modified the arrangements for allocating import licences. The Commission considers that, from
         that date, only fumigators may apply for methyl bromide to be imported and obtain for that purpose user licences, further
         to which importers obtain, if necessary, the corresponding import licences. That precludes an importer from itself having,
         in whatever capacity, an import quota.
      
From December 2003, the Commission had also decided to modify the internet site by which undertakings submitted their requests
         for import licences for methyl bromide (‘the ODS site’) in order to adapt it to these various developments. Those changes
         were completed on February 2005.
      
In the notice to importers referred to in paragraph of the present order, the Commission had, furthermore, stated that
         undertakings with a quota for were to make a declaration by submitting the relevant forms on the ODS site.
      
In August 2004, Mebrom submitted to the Commission a declaration seeking a methyl bromide quota for critical uses for 2005.
      
On December 2004, the Commission sent an email to all the users of the ODS site stating that ‘[t]he quota for [would]
         be available on [its] website … on December 2004’. The Commission also stated that the ‘import decision’ was being prepared
         and would be notified to each importer as soon as it had been adopted. It made clear that applications for import licences
         needed for the beginning of could be submitted via the ODS site from December and that they should reach the
         Commission by December at the latest, so that they could be processed before the end of the year.
      
In December 2004, Mebrom informed the Commission of its wish to import methyl bromide in January and of the impossibility
         to submit its application via the ODS site. On January 2005, Mebrom informed the Commission that its situation was becoming
         critical since it was unable to meet its customers’ requests. The Commission replied that the adaptation of the ODS site was
         proving to be more difficult than expected and that it would not be completed before January at the earliest.
      
On February 2005, the Commission informed Mebrom of its registration on the ODS site and, on February 2005, Mebrom obtained
         a licence to import methyl bromide for critical uses for two customers holding user licences granted by the Commission on
         February.
      
 The application before the Court of First Instance and the judgment under appeal
By application lodged on May 2005, Mebrom applied to the Court of First Instance for compensation for the damage resulting
         from the loss of profit on sales of methyl bromide not made in January and February 2005.
      
By the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance dismissed the application on the ground that the appellant had failed
         to establish the existence of the damage that it claimed to have suffered.
      
First, the Court held that the existence of that damage could not be established by reference to sales in January and February
         in so far as the body of legal rules and the practice of allocating import licences for methyl bromide had significantly
         changed on January 2005. It added that the sales figures for January and February provided by Mebrom were, moreover,
         on their own only statistics that were open to interpretation and that they did not, therefore, have any probative value.
      
Second, the Court held that the other evidence provided by Mebrom was insufficient to establish the existence of actual damage
         specifically suffered.
      
The Court held that the results of the questionnaires sent by Mebrom to its customers did not constitute proof of actual intentions
         to purchase specific quantities of methyl bromide in January and February 2005.
      
The Court in particular emphasised that those results had been submitted after February and that none of the undertakings
         questioned had indicated that they wished to purchase a specific quantity of methyl bromide from Mebrom during that period,
         with the exception, however, of undertaking G. The Court emphasised that certain of those undertakings approached, in March
         2005, importers other than Mebrom in order to purchase the pesticide.
      
The Court also held that Mebrom had failed to establish that January and February were the peak season for the use of methyl
         bromide and that the losses suffered during that period could not be made up in March. The Court also held that the fact that
         Mebrom’s methyl bromide imports during the first quarter of were not significantly lower than in the first quarters of
         and seemed to indicate that it was possible to make them up.
      
The Court further held that the grant of an import licence required that the relevant undertaking be registered on the ODS
         site and that it did not have stocks of methyl bromide. The Court held that undertaking G had not established that it had
         been impossible for it to become registered on the ODS site in January and February and that, furthermore, Mebrom had
         not shown that there were no remaining stocks available to its customers during that period.
      
The Court next held that Mebrom had not provided any evidence that specific requests for methyl bromide had been made by its
         customers and that it had also failed to show that such sales had been impossible due to the Commission’s delay in adapting
         the ODS site and that they could not have been made up in March 2005.
      
The Court added that the calculation of damage put forward by Mebrom did not make it possible for the damage to be correctly
         assessed, and it rejected, as being out of time, the information presented by Mebrom on that point at the hearing.
      
The Court finally held that it was inappropriate to grant Mebrom’s alternative claim seeking a ruling that the Commission
         compensate the loss suffered and an order that the parties produce to the Court, within a reasonable time, the data allowing
         the loss to be assessed.
      
The Court, therefore, dismissed Mebrom’s action as unfounded and ordered it to pay the costs.
      
 Forms of order sought
Mebrom claims that the Court should:
      
–        declare the appeal admissible and well founded;
–        set aside the judgment under appeal;
–        declare the requests it made at first instance admissible and well founded;
–        grant the request for damages made at first instance or, in the alternative, refer the case back to the Court of First Instance
         to rule on the merits; and
      
–        order the Commission to pay the costs of both sets of proceedings.
The Commission contends that the Court should:
      
–        dismiss the appeal, and
–        order the appellant to pay the costs.
 The appeal
Under Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, where the appeal is, in whole or in part, clearly inadmissible
         or clearly unfounded, the Court may at any time, acting on a report from the Judge-Rapporteur and after hearing the Advocate
         General, by reasoned order dismiss it.
      
The appellant raises six pleas in law. The first plea alleges that the Court of First Instance distorted the clear sense of
         the evidence produced before it and the facts of the case. The second plea alleges that the Court of First Instance erred
         in law by holding that the appellant had not established that the damage it alleged was actual. The third plea alleges that
         the Court of First Instance placed a disproportionate and unjustified burden of proof on the appellant. The fourth plea alleges
         that the Court of First Instance infringed the obligation to state reasons. The fifth plea alleges that the Court of First
         Instance infringed Article 48(1) of its Rules of Procedure by rejecting as inadmissible the new method to calculate damage
         suggested by the appellant at the hearing. The sixth plea alleges that the Court of First Instance infringed the rights of
         the defence, the right to a fair hearing and the principle of equality of arms by placing, in particular, an unjustified burden
         of proof on the appellant.
      
The Commission contends that the appeal is, in its entirety, clearly unfounded and that it should be dismissed.
      
 The first plea
 Arguments of the parties
The appellant claims primarily, by this plea, that it was in disregard of the facts of the case that the Court of First Instance
         held that the appellant’s customer’s intentions to purchase and, consequently, its loss of profit, had not been established.
         The appellant contends that the Court of First Instance distorted the clear sense of the evidence and the facts of the case,
         leading it to err in holding that the appellant had not suffered any loss. This plea is divided into five parts.
      
Mebrom claims, first, that the Court of First Instance distorted, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, the
         clear sense of the documents which the appellant had provided to it and which, since they came from its customers, showed
         the existence of genuine intentions to purchase methyl bromide in January and February 2005. The appellant emphasises, in
         particular, that the Court of First Instance erred in law by holding, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that it
         was not shown that there were no remaining stocks available to those undertakings during the period in question.
      
Mebrom claims, second, that the Court of First Instance distorted, in paragraphs 59, to 64, and of the judgment under
         appeal, the clear sense of the evidence submitted by holding that the appellant had not established the seasonal nature of
         the use of methyl bromide and, therefore, the fact that the loss of sales in January and February could not have been
         made up in March 2005. The appellant states that that pesticide is a fumigant which can be applied only before planting and,
         therefore, only at specific periods of the year, depending on the species. The appellant adds that it was apparent from Annex
         to its application at first instance that sales in March were lower than those of March 2004, which showed that it
         had not been possible to make up in March the loss of profit sustained in January and February 2005.
      
Mebrom claims, third, that the Court of First Instance erred in law by holding, at paragraph of the judgment under appeal,
         that the sales figures for January and February were statistics that were open to interpretation and had only an illustrative
         value. The appellant maintains that it produced evidence of its own sales, certified by its own accounts.
      
Mebrom contends, fourth, that the Court of First Instance erred in law by holding, first, in paragraph of the judgment
         under appeal, that a comparison between the sales figures for and was irrelevant due to the changes to the legal
         framework as from January and, second, in paragraph of that judgment, that the non-seasonal nature of the sale of
         methyl bromide could be deduced from an analysis of Mebrom’s imports alone of that pesticide in 2003, and 2005.
      
Fifth and finally, Mebrom claims that the Court of First Instance distorted the clear sense of the facts and evidence by not
         evaluating them overall and together and, in its reply, states that the Commission cannot submit that the alleged loss of
         profit should have been proved by the existence of commercial contracts.
      
The Commission contends that the Court of First Instance did not distort the clear sense of the facts and evidence. It maintains
         that Mebrom should have proved the alleged loss of profit by the existence of definite commercial arrangements with its customers.
         It submits, in particular, that the appellant has not shown that stocks were exhausted during the period in question, since
         the documents submitted provide no precise information on this point.
      
It claims also that the Court of First Instance did not confuse, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, sales figures
         with import figures and adds that the Court of First Instance did not contradict itself, in paragraphs and of the judgment,
         but that it deals there with two different issues. In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance
         examined whether Mebrom had produced adequate evidence of actual damage, whereas in paragraph of the judgment the question
         examined was whether losses allegedly incurred in January and February could have been made up in March 2005.
      
According to the Commission, finally, Mebrom does not show how an overall examination of the evidence by the Court of First
         Instance would have demonstrated the existence of the damage that the appellant claims to have suffered.
      
 Findings of the Court
By the first, third and fifth parts of the first plea, which may be examined together, Mebrom claims that the Court of First
         Instance distorted the clear sense of the evidence, leading it to hold erroneously that the appellant had not shown that its
         customers had firm intentions to purchase methyl bromide in January and February 2005.
      
In that regard, it must be recalled that an appeal is to be limited to points of law. It is settled case-law that the Court
         of First Instance therefore has exclusive jurisdiction to find the facts, save where a substantive inaccuracy in its findings
         is attributable to the documents submitted to it, and to appraise those facts. That appraisal thus does not, save where the
         clear sense of the evidence has been distorted, constitute a point of law which is subject, as such, to review by the Court
         of Justice in an appeal (see to that effect Case C-470/P Parliament v Ripa di Meana andOthers [2004] ECR I-4167, paragraph 40).
      
In the present case it does not appear that the Court of First Instance distorted the clear sense of the documents submitted
         by Mebrom as evidence. With regard to Mebrom’s sales figures for January and February 2004, referred to by the Court of First
         Instance in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, it should first be recalled that the Court of First Instance clearly
         stated, in paragraph of the judgment, that they were not relevant to assessing the loss of profit alleged by the appellant.
         Further, it is not apparent from the case-file that those figures were distorted by the Court of First Instance. Finally,
         it is also not apparent from the case-file that the Court of First Instance distorted the clear sense of the various pieces
         of evidence submitted by failing to assess their probative value overall.
      
Accordingly, the first, third and fifth parts of the first plea are manifestly unfounded.
      
By the second and fourth parts of that plea, which may be examined together, Mebrom contends that the Court of First Instance
         distorted the clear sense of the facts and evidence and, therefore, erred in holding that Mebrom had failed to show that the
         sales not made by it in January and February could not have been made up in March 2005.
      
However, it must be recalled that, according to established case-law, complaints directed against grounds included in a judgment
         of the Court of First Instance purely for the sake of completeness cannot lead to the judgment being set aside and are therefore
         nugatory (see inter alia the order of February in Case C‑171/P Piau v Commission, paragraph 86).
      
In the present case, it is apparent from paragraphs to 57, to 61, and of the judgment under appeal, that the appellant
         has not adduced evidence of loss of sales of methyl bromide in January and February 2005.
      
In those circumstances, the question whether those losses could have been made up in March is included purely for the
         sake of completeness.
      
Accordingly, the second and fourth parts of the first plea are clearly unfounded.
      
The first plea must, therefore, be rejected in its entirety as clearly unfounded.
      
 The second plea
 Arguments of the parties
The second plea raised by the appellant alleges that the Court of First Instance erred in law by holding that the appellant
         had not established that the damage alleged was actual. This plea is divided into three parts.
      
Mebrom claims, first, that the Court of First Instance erred in law by ruling, in paragraphs to 58, to and to
         of the judgment under appeal, on the existence of damage on the basis of factors related only to the extent of that damage.
         The appellant claims that that is in particular the case with regard to the Court’s assessment of the existence of damage
         resulting from the loss of profit on the sales of methyl bromide not made in January and February to undertaking G. The
         appellant next considers that the Court of First Instance confused, in paragraphs 56, and of that judgment, the condition
         relating to the existence of damage with that relating to a causal link. Finally, Mebrom claims that the Court of First Instance
         erred in law by holding, in paragraphs 59, 63, and of that judgment, that it was for the appellant to show that the
         drop in its sales in January and February could not have been made up subsequently in March 2005. Mebrom considers that
         the losses suffered were definitive at the end of February and that, in those circumstances, the level of sales of the
         pesticide in March had no bearing on the analysis of the damage suffered.
      
The Commission contends that these various arguments essentially reiterate those already invoked in the first plea. It submits
         that the Court of First Instance did not confuse the question of the existence of damage with the examination of the condition
         relating to a causal link and that the Court was fully entitled to verify whether the alleged drop in sales in January and
         February could not have been made up later.
      
 Findings of the Court
With regard to the first part of the second plea, it is apparent from paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal that
         the Court of First Instance relied principally on the fact that undertaking G was not registered on the ODS site in January
         and February 2005, and that it therefore did not satisfy one of the conditions required to purchase methyl bromide from Mebrom
         during that period, in order to hold that damage resulting from the loss of profit owing to sales not being made to that undertaking
         had not been shown to exist.
      
As to the remainder, it is sufficient to note that the appellant merely calls into question the assessment of the probative
         value of the evidence which, as was recalled in paragraph above, is beyond the review of the Court in an appeal.
      
It follows that the first part of the second plea is in part clearly unfounded and in part clearly inadmissible.
      
Concerning the second part of this plea, Mebrom does not make clear how the Court of First Instance confused, in paragraphs
         56, and of the judgment under appeal, the question of the existence of the damage with that of the causal link.
      
In any event, those paragraphs of the judgment under appeal do not refer to the causal link between the Commission conduct
         complained of and the damage allegedly suffered.
      
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance indicates that the comparison between the sales
         figures for and those for did not constitute evidence relevant to establishing that the alleged damage was actual
         and, in paragraph of that judgment, that the appellant was required to provide it with proof of actual damage specifically
         suffered in the course of its business.
      
It is true that, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance mentioned, in particular, that
         the appellant had not established that sales were rendered impossible ‘as a result of the conduct on the part of the Commission
         complained of’. It is apparent, however, from its reasoning as a whole, and in particular from paragraph of that judgment
         in which it recalls the three conditions which must be met for the liability of the institutions to be incurred, as well as
         from the arguments in paragraphs to of that judgment, that the Court of First Instance exclusively ruled therein on
         whether or not damage had been suffered by the appellant.
      
Accordingly, the second part of the second plea is clearly unfounded.
      
With regard to the third part of that plea, according to which the Court of First Instance erred in law by requiring Mebrom
         to show that the sales allegedly lost in January and February could not have been made up in March 2005, it is sufficient
         to recall that, as was pointed out in paragraph above, that ground is included purely for the sake of completeness. In
         consequence, the complaints directed against it cannot lead to the judgment under appeal being set aside and are, therefore,
         nugatory (see the order in Piau v Commission, paragraph 86).
      
The third part of the second plea is, accordingly, clearly unfounded.
      
Accordingly, the second plea is in part clearly inadmissible and in part clearly unfounded.
      
 The third plea
By its third plea, Mebrom claims that the Court of First Instance erred in law by requiring it to demonstrate ‘negative facts’.
         The appellant claims that the Court of First Instance, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, required it, first,
         to demonstrate that it would have been impossible for it to make up, in March 2005, the drop in its sales in the previous
         two months and, secondly, that its customers had not turned to its competitors to obtain supplies in the course of that month.
         The Court of First Instance is also alleged to have required it, in paragraphs and of that judgment, to demonstrate
         that its customers and, in particular, undertaking G, were unable to register on the ODS site in January and February and that they did not have any remaining stock of methyl bromide during that period.
      
The appellant adds that the Court of First Instance agreed, by contrast, in paragraphs to and of the judgment under
         appeal, to take into account the Commission’s mere allegations according to which, in particular, all fumigators had the opportunity
         to become registered on the ODS site in January and February and contends that, by so doing, the Court of First Instance
         infringed Article 48(2) of its Rules of Procedure since that evidence was presented for the first time at the hearing.
      
The appellant also claims that the Court of First Instance erred in law by requiring it to provide evidence allowing the existence
         of damage to be shown with absolute certainty.
      
The Commission submits that this plea is clearly unfounded and claims in that respect that it was for Mebrom to rebut the
         evidence it had presented before the Court of First Instance, which it was unable to do.
      
 Findings of the Court
In accordance with established case-law, it is for the appellant to prove that the damage for which compensation is sought
         is actual and certain (see Case C‑243/P Agraz and Others v Commission [2006] ECR I‑10833, paragraph 27).
      
With regard, first, to the question whether Mebrom could have made up in March the sales which, it claims, had not been
         made in the previous two months and to the burden of proof concerning this which is alleged to have been wrongly imposed on
         it, it suffices to state that, in accordance with the point made in paragraph above, that ground was included purely for
         the sake of completeness, such that the arguments raised against it are nugatory and, therefore, clearly unfounded.
      
Concerning, second, the question whether the appellant’s customers turned to its competitors in March 2005, and the burden
         of proof concerning this which is alleged to have been also wrongly imposed on it, it suffices to note that the Court of First
         Instance stated, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that it was clear from the information provided by the Commission
         that two of Mebrom’s customers, undertakings PO and T, had in March approached importers other than Mebrom in order to
         purchase methyl bromide. The Court of First Instance did not, therefore, impose an unjustified and disproportionate burden
         of proof on Mebrom in that regard.
      
With respect, third, to the alleged impossibility, for undertaking G, to register on the ODS site in January and February
         2005, the Court of First Instance stated, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that Mebrom had not substantiated
         that claim. Furthermore, the Court of First Instance stated, in paragraph of that judgment, that one of Mebrom’s customers,
         undertaking B, had obtained a licence on February 2005. In those circumstances, irrespective of the admissibility of the
         information provided by the Commission at the hearing, according to which such registration was open to all fumigators at
         that time, nor does it seem that the Court of First Instance imposed an unjustified and disproportionate burden of proof on
         the appellant.
      
It follows that the Court of First Instance did not infringe the rules governing the taking of evidence and that the third
         plea is, in its entirety, clearly unfounded.
      
 The fourth plea
 Arguments of the parties
By its fourth plea, the appellant claims that the judgment of the Court of First Instance is marred by a contradiction in
         reasoning, in particular, between paragraphs and and paragraph 75, since, on the one hand, the Court rejects the appellant’s
         alternative request for an order that the parties produce the evidence necessary to evaluate the damage suffered and, on the
         other hand, it finds that the appellant has not established the existence and extent of that damage.
      
The Commission considers that Mebrom confuses the question of the definite and actual nature of the damage with the amount
         of that damage.
      
 Findings of the Court
The question whether the grounds of a judgment are inadequate or contradictory is a question of law which is amenable, as
         such, to review on appeal (see to that effect Case C-401/P Somaco v Commission [1998] ECR I-2587, paragraph 53).
      
There is, however, no contradiction between the two parts in question of the judgment under appeal, since the questions of
         the existence of damage and of its extent are entirely separate. However, it is apparent from simply reading the judgment
         under appeal that paragraphs and thereof relate to the question of the existence of the damage that the appellant claims
         to have suffered, whereas paragraph of that judgment concerns the alternative request seeking a subsequent calculation
         of the precise amount of that damage. Furthermore, contrary to what is alleged by Mebrom in its appeal, the Court of First
         Instance did not hold, in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, that the appellant had not established the existence
         of the damage suffered on the ground that it had not produced sufficient evidence of the extent of that damage. In paragraph
         of that judgment, the Court of First Instance held that the existence of damage suffered in January and February could
         not be deduced from the mere comparison between Mebrom’s sales in January and February and those in the same months of
         2005, whereas, in paragraph of that judgment, the Court held that the appellant had failed to show that the sales not made
         in January and February could not have been made up in March of the same year.
      
It follows that the fourth plea is clearly unfounded.
      
 The fifth plea
 Arguments of the parties
By its fifth plea, the appellant claims that the Court of First Instance infringed Article 48(1) of its Rules of Procedure
         by holding, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the new method of calculating the damage presented by Mebrom
         at the hearing was to be regarded as inadmissible because out of time.
      
The Commission considers that this plea is clearly unfounded.
      
 Findings of the Court
According to established case-law referred to above, the complaints directed against grounds included in a judgment of the
         Court of First Instance purely for the sake of completeness are nugatory (see to that effect the order in Piau v Commission, paragraph 86). 
      
In the present case, the Court of First Instance rejected, as being out of time, the evidence presented by Mebrom at the hearing
         and intended to specify the amount of damage alleged.
      
It is apparent, however, from the very wording of the judgment under appeal, paragraph of which starts with the words ‘for
         the sake of completeness’, that the Court of First Instance addressed that question, which could, moreover, be resolved only
         on condition that the very existence of damage had been acknowledged beforehand, only in order to dispose fully of the appellant’s
         case.
      
The grounds of the judgment under appeal concerning that question are, therefore, included purely for the sake of completeness.
      
It follows that the fifth plea is clearly unfounded.
      
 The sixth plea
 Arguments of the parties
By its sixth and final plea, Mebrom claims that the Court of First Instance infringed, in paragraphs to and to of the judgment under appeal, the rights of the defence, the right to a fair hearing and the principle of equality of arms
         by holding, in particular, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that, according to observations made by the Commission,
         at the hearing, fumigators had the opportunity to register on the ODS site in January and February 2005. The Court of First
         Instance is alleged also to have infringed those principles by requiring Mebrom to provide evidence that it was impossible
         for undertaking G to register on that site at that time.
      
The Commission submits that the appellant puts forward only arguments already raised in the previous pleas.
      
 Findings of the Court
It follows from Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice and Article 112(1)(c) of the Rules of Procedure that an
         appeal must indicate precisely the contested elements of the judgment which the appellant seeks to have set aside and also
         the legal arguments specifically advanced in support of the appeal (see to that effect Case C-248/P France v Monsanto and Commission [2002] ECR I-1, paragraph 68).
      
The sixth plea, by which the appellant merely asserts that the Court of First Instance infringed the rights of the defence,
         the right to a fair hearing and the principle of equality of arms, by merely referring back to arguments put forward in another
         context, does not fulfil those requirements (see to that effect the order in Case C-51/P Unifruit Hellas v Commission [1997] ECR I-727, paragraph 33).
      
Accordingly, the sixth plea is clearly inadmissible.
      
As none of the pleas raised by the appellant in support of its appeal is capable of succeeding, the appeal must be dismissed.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, which applies to appeal proceedings by virtue of Article thereof, the unsuccessful
         party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. As the Commission
         has applied for costs and Mebrom has failed in its pleas, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Sixth Chamber) hereby orders:
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
2.      Mebrom NV shall pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 