
Order of the Court (Third Chamber) of February – Plato Plastik Robert Frank
(Case C-26/05)
Second subparagraph of Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure – Directive 94/62/EC – Packaging and packaging waste – Concepts of packaging manufacturers and packaging materials manufacturers – Manufacturer of plastic carrier bags
1.                     Environment – Packaging and packaging waste – Directive 94/(European Parliament and Council Directive 94/62, Art. 3(1)
            and (11)) (see para. 29, operative part 1)
2.                     Environment – Packaging and packaging waste – Directive 94/(European Parliament and Council Directive 94/62) (see para.
            37, operative part 2)
Re:
Reference for a preliminary ruling – Landesgericht Korneuburg – Interpretation of Article of European Parliament and Council
                  Directive 94/62/EC of December on packaging and packaging waste (OJ L 365, p. 10) – Concepts of ‘producers of
                  grouped, sales or transport packaging’ and ‘suppliers of packaging materials’ – Manufacturer of plastic carrier bags
               
Operative part:
The Court:
1.
Declares that Article 3(1) and (11) of European Parliament and Council Directive 94/62/EC of December on packaging
                     and packaging waste must be interpreted as meaning that a manufacturer of packaging is not necessarily the party associating
                     or bringing together goods and the product intended for packaging.  A manufacturer of plastic carrier bags supplied to customers
                     free of charge or for payment in shops must be considered a manufacturer of packaging;
                  
2.
Directive 94/must be interpreted as meaning that it does not preclude national legislation, such as the Decree of the Federal
                     Ministry of the Environment, Youth and the Family seeking to avoid and recycle packaging waste and certain waste materials
                     and to institute collection and recycling systems, which provides that the manufacturer of packaging, in particular plastic
                     carrier bags, is either to take the bags back after use or to participate in a collection and recycling system for packaging
                     waste, unless an economic operator intervening at a later stage of distribution takes over that obligation and the manufacturer
                     obtains a valid declaration to that effect.
                  
Top  
 