
Order of the President of the Court of April —Fapricela v Commission(Case C‑507/P(R))
Application for interim measures — Competition — Decision of the Commission imposing a fine — Bank guarantee — Application for suspension of operation of a measure — Financial damage — Lack of exceptional circumstances — Lack of urgency
1.                     Applications for interim measures — Suspension of operation of a measure — Suspension of operation of the obligation to provide
            a bank guarantee as a condition for not proceeding to immediate recovery of a fine imposed — Conditions for granting — Serious
            and irreparable damage — Impossible to obtain a bank guarantee — Extent of the burden of proof (Art. TFEU) (see paras
            33-36, 41, 53-56)
2.                     Applications for interim measures — Procedure — Whether appropriate to hear the parties — Whether appropriate to admit additional
            observations and documents after the ending of the written or oral procedure — Discretion of the judge hearing the application
            for interim relief (Art. TFEU and TFEU; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 39, first para., and 53, first para.;
            Rules of Procedure of the General Court, Art. 105) (see paras 49-51)
3.                     Applications for interim measures — Suspension of operation of a measure — Suspension of operation of the obligation to provide
            a bank guarantee as a condition for not proceeding to immediate recovery of a fine imposed — Conditions for granting — Serious
            and irreparable damage — Taking account of the situation of the group to which the undertaking belongs and of its shareholders —
            Necessity of providing, at the time of making the application, information concerning the financial capacity of the undertaking’s
            shareholders (Art. TFEU) (see paras 67-69)
4.                     Appeals — Grounds — Plea raised against a ground of the judgment not necessary in order for the operative part to be founded —
            Plea ineffective (see para. 72)
Re: 
Appeal against the judgment of the General Court of July in Case T‑398/R 
Fapricela 
v 
Commission, 
by which that court dismissed an application for suspension of the operation of Commission Decision C(2010) final of
                  June relating to a proceeding under Article TFEU and Article of the EEA Agreement (Case COMP/38.— Pre-stressing
                  steel), inter alia, in so far as it imposes the obligation to set up a bank guarantee in order to avoid immediate recovery
                  of the fine imposed under Article of that decision.
               
Operative part 
1.
	The appeal is dismissed.
2.
	Fapricela — Indústria de Trefilaria SA is ordered to pay the costs.
Top  
 