
Case C-289/Länsstyrelsen i Norrbottens län
v
Lapin liitto
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Rovaniemen hallinto-oikeus)
(Regulation (EC) No 1685/– Annex – Point 1.of Rule No – Structural Funds – Eligibility of expenditure – Taking into account of overheads)
Opinion of Advocate General Geelhoed delivered on September Judgment of the Court (First Chamber), March Summary of the Judgment
Economic and social cohesion – Structural assistance – Community financing – Eligibility for assistance of expenses incurred
            by national bodies 
(Council Regulation No 1260/1999, Arts 30(1) and 32(1); Commission Regulation No 1685/2000, Annex, Rule No 1, point 1.8)
Point 1.of Rule No in the Annex to Regulation No 1685/laying down detailed rules for the implementation of Regulation
         No 1260/as regards eligibility of expenditure of operations co-financed by the Structural Funds, as amended by Regulation
         No 448/2004, does not preclude a method of calculating overheads as eligible expenditure for the purposes of a project co-financed
         by the Structural Funds, on the sole ground that the method is based on a percentage or proportion, in particular, of wage
         costs or time worked.
      
Without prejudice to national rules laying down stricter requirements, overheads paid out by final beneficiaries constitute
         eligible expenditure, under point 1.of that rule, where they meet three requirements, that is to say, they are based on
         real costs, that those costs relate to the implementation of the operation co-financed by the Structural Funds and that the
         said overheads are allocated pro rata to the operation, according to a duly justified fair and equitable method. That latter
         condition in particular is not designed to impose a single method of calculation, but leaves to the Member States a discretion
         in the calculation of eligible expenditure. That requirement is intended only to make the taking into account of overheads
         as eligible expenditure subject to such overheads being allocated ‘pro rata to the operation, according to a duly justified
         fair and equitable method’. Consequently, point 1.cannot be interpreted as precluding methods of calculating eligible overheads
         based on a percentage or proportion, in particular, of wage costs or time worked, provided however that the final beneficiary
         is in a position to show that those overheads are allocated to the project according to a method which complies with the criteria
         set forth in that provision. The allocation to the project concerned of overheads, such as, for example, wage costs, costs
         connected to real property or those relating to information technology, must, in the light of those criteria, take account
         of the relation between the number of persons working on carrying out the project, the number of working hours which they
         devote to it or the amount of wages paid on that account, and the average number of persons working for the organisation concerned,
         the average number of hours worked or the average amount of wages paid. 
      
(see paras 22, 25-28, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
March (*)
      
(Regulation (EC) No 1685/– Annex – Point 1.of Rule No – Structural Funds – Eligibility of expenditure – Taking into account of overheads)
In Case C-289/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Rovaniemen hallinto-oikeus (Finland), made by decision of
         July 2005, received at the Court on July 2005, in the proceedings
      
Länsstyrelsen i Norrbottens län
v
Lapin liitto,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann, President of the Chamber, K. Lenaerts, E. Juhász, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur) and K. Schiemann,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       the Länsstyrelsen i Norrbottens län, by P.‑O. Eriksson and L. Anttila, acting as Agents,
–       the Finnish Government, by E. Bygglin, acting as Agent,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by P. Aalto and L. Flynn, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of point 1.of Rule No in the Annex to Commission Regulation
         (EC) No 1685/of July laying down detailed rules for the implementation of Council Regulation (EC) No 1260/as regards eligibility of expenditure of operations co-financed by the Structural Funds (OJ L 193, p. 39), as amended
         by Commission Regulation (EC) No 448/of March (OJ L 72, p. 66, hereinafter ‘Regulation No 1685/2000’).
      
That reference was made in the course of proceedings between the Länsstyrelsen i Norrbottens län (County administrative board)
         of Norrbotten (Sweden), hereinafter ‘the Administrative Board’) and Lapin liitto (Regional Council of Lapland (Finland)) concerning
         the Administrative Board’s application for financial support for the technical support costs of the Interreg III A North Programme,
         co-financed by the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) (hereinafter ‘the programme’), relating to the years and
         2002.
      
 Legal background
The third subparagraph of Article 32(1) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1260/of June laying down general provisions
         on the Structural Funds (OJ L 161, p. 1), provides:
      
‘... Interim payments and payments of the balance shall relate to expenditure actually paid out, which must correspond to
         payments effected by the final beneficiaries, supported by receipted invoices or accounting documents of equivalent probative
         value.’
      
The Annex to Regulation No 1685/2000, in its initial version, entitled ‘Eligibility rules’, provides:
‘Rule No 1: expenditure actually paid out 
Payments by final beneficiaries
1.Payments effected by final beneficiaries within the meaning of the third subparagraph of Article 32(1) of Regulation (EC)
         No 1260/... shall be in the form of cash subject to the exceptions indicated in point 1.4.
      
...
1.Under the conditions set out in points 1.to 1.7, depreciation, contributions in kind and overheads can also form part
         of the payments referred to in point 1.1. However, the Structural Funds’ co-financing of an operation shall not exceed the
         total eligible expenditure, excluding contributions in kind, at the end of the operation.
      
...
1.Overheads are eligible expenditure provided that they are based on real costs which relate to the implementation of the
         operation co-financed by the Structural Funds and are allocated pro rata to the operation, according to a duly justified fair
         and equitable method.
      
...
1.Member States may apply stricter national rules for determining eligible expenditure under points 1.to 1.7.
Proof of expenditure
As a rule, payments by final beneficiaries shall be supported by receipted invoices. Where this cannot be done, payments shall
         be supported by accounting documents of equal probative value.
      
...’
Under Article and the third paragraph of Article of Regulation No 448/2004, points 1.4, 1.and 1.of Rule No in the
         Annex to Regulation No 1685/2000, in its initial version, became, with effect from August 2000, respectively points 1.5,
         1.and 1.of Rule No in the Annex to Regulation No 1685/2000.
      
Article of Commission Regulation (EC) No 438/of March laying down detailed rules for the implementation of
         Council Regulation (EC) No 1260/as regards the management and control systems for assistance granted under the Structural
         Funds (OJ L 63, p. 21) provides:
      
‘In the case of forms of assistance where there are beneficiaries in more than one Member State, the Member States concerned
         shall agree with one another the necessary common arrangements to ensure sound financial management, taking account of national
         law, and shall inform the Commission of the arrangements agreed. The Commission and the Member States concerned shall provide
         one another with any necessary administrative assistance.’
      
In implementation of Article 19, cited above, the Republic of Finland and the Kingdom of Sweden signed, on and October
         2002, a ‘Memorandum of understanding on the implementation of the Community Initiative programme Interreg III A North’.
      
 The main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
By letter received by Lapin liitto on October 2002, the Administrative Board applied for support for the costs of technical
         support under the programme, in a sum of SEK 880.for the year 2001. The amount of that support was arrived at by applying
         to the wage costs arising from the technical support for that programme a percentage calculated by reference to the proportion
         of the overheads incurred by the administration responsible for the programme (wages and other costs paid in respect of its
         horizontal activities, including such costs connected with the programme) to the wages arising from that administration’s
         ordinary activities, which corresponds to the difference between the total cost of the wages paid in that respect and the
         above mentioned wages.
      
By decision of February 2003, Lapin liitto refused the application. It considered that the payments made should have been
         vouched for by receipts and invoices or accounting documents of equivalent probative value. The overheads should have been
         based on real costs, whereas the costs at issue in the main proceedings, calculated by means of a percentage, were not allocated
         to the programme in accordance with a duly justified fair and equitable method within the meaning of point 1.of Rule No in the Annex to Regulation No 1685/2000.
      
It is apparent from the order for reference that Lapin liitto received, on September 2003, an application from the Administrative
         Board again seeking support for the costs relating to the programme as regards the years and 2002, respectively of sums
         of SEK and SEK 982. Those costs related to overheads in respect of information technology, personnel administration,
         postage, financial management and premises.
      
By decision of November 2003, Lapin liitto rejected that application as regards the entirety of the costs connected with
         information technology, personnel administration, postage and financial management on the ground that, even after a request
         for additional information dated October 2003, the Administrative Board had not provided any explanation based on a record
         of hours worked as regards wages nor any explanation concerning the connection of the other costs with the programme.
      
In Lapin liitto’s submission, it has not been provided with any information as regards the floor areas of the offices of the
         people taking part in that programme to calculate the costs relating to premises. For that reason, it took a floor space of
         mper office to assess the costs relating to premises in place of the figure of min the application. Consequently, Lapin liitto paid, in respect of the costs relating to the premises occupied by the participants
         in the programme in and 2002, respectively, SEK 558.and SEK 203.30.
      
In its objection to the rejection decision of November 2003, the Administrative Board maintained that, following a meeting
         it had with Lapin liitto and the Ministry of the Interior, it had used a new calculation model, by which the costs (overheads),
         the reimbursement of which is claimed, are based on the real costs according to the accounts, allocated, according to a duly
         justified fair and equitable method, in proportion to the annual workforce.
      
That objection was rejected by decision of February 2004, on the ground that the Administrative Board had used as the basis
         of calculation of the eligible overheads, the annual costs arising from information technology services, financial services
         and staff services, divided by the average number of employees of the administration responsible for the programme during
         the year in question. The monthly price of a service was the same for all staff. In the second application, the costs were
         entered as costs of the programme in proportion to the time each person worked. With that method, it was not possible to identify
         costs as costs arising from that programme. As regards the wage costs included in the amount claimed, since they were not
         attributed to individuals in accordance with a record of hours worked, they could not be taken into account as technical support
         costs of that programme.
      
The referring court, before which the Administrative Board brought an action for payment of the costs at issue, states that,
         in its application, the Administrative Board divided the costs of the technical support referred to by the average number
         of staff of the whole administration concerned for the year in question, so that it was possible to calculate the proportion
         of costs per person, per year and per month. The use of that average basis of calculation enabled the above mentioned costs
         to be passed as costs of the programme in proportion to the time actually worked by each person who had worked on the programme.
      
Lapin liitto submits that the Administrative Board did not show with sufficient precision what was the proportion of technical
         support in the costs generated by that programme. So far as wages are concerned, in order to enable the costs to be passed
         as costs of that programme in compliance with Regulation No 1685/2000, Lapin liitto requires there to be a daily time-record
         of hours worked by each person who has worked part-time for the purposes of the programme.
      
In those circumstances the Rovaniemen hallinto-oikeus decided to stay the proceedings and to refer a question to the Court
         for a preliminary ruling on the interpretation of point 1.of Rule No in the Annex to Regulation No 1685/2000.
      
 The question referred 
By its question, the national court wishes, in essence, to ascertain whether point 1.of Rule No in the Annex to Regulation
         No 1685/is to be interpreted as precluding a method of calculating overheads as eligible expenditure for the purposes
         of a project co-financed by the Structural Funds, on the sole ground that such method is based on a percentage or proportion,
         in particular, of wage costs or time worked.
      
Under that provision, overheads constitute eligible expenditure provided that they are based on real costs which relate to
         the implementation of the operation co-financed by the Structural Funds and are allocated pro rata to the operation, according
         to a duly justified fair and equitable method.
      
Although the Finnish version of that provision contains no reference to the requirement that overheads be allocated ‘pro rata’
         to the operation in question, that fact is of no consequence, since it follows from settled case-law that Community provisions
         must be interpreted and applied uniformly in the light of the versions existing in all the Community languages and since,
         in this case, the language versions other than the Finnish expressly refer to the requirement that overheads be allocated
         pro rata or proportionally to the operation in question (see by analogy, in particular, Case C‑219/P Ferriere Nord v Commission [1997] ECR I-4411, paragraph 15).
      
Under point 1.of Rule No in the Annex to Regulation No 1685/2000, Member States are authorised to apply stricter national
         rules for determining eligible expenditure under points 1.to 1.of that rule.
      
Without prejudice to national rules laying down stricter requirements, overheads paid out by final beneficiaries accordingly
         constitute eligible expenditure, under point 1.of that rule, where they meet three requirements, that is to say, they are
         based on real costs, that those costs relate to the implementation of the operation co-financed by the Structural Funds and
         that the said overheads are allocated pro rata to the operation, according to a duly justified fair and equitable method.
      
So far as the first requirement for eligibility is concerned, it is sufficient to observe, as the Commission puts it, that
         overheads are based on real costs if they were actually paid out by final beneficiaries and are supported by receipted invoices
         or accounting documents of equal probative value within the meaning of the first and third subparagraphs of Article 32(1)
         of Regulation No 1260/1999.
      
So far as the second requirement for eligibility is concerned, it is appropriate to note that, under Article 30(1) of Regulation
         No 1260/1999, expenditure in respect of operations is to be eligible for a contribution from the Structural Funds only if
         those operations form part of the assistance concerned. Consequently, overheads arising from resources and services which
         the final beneficiaries need for the purposes of carrying out the operation co-financed by those Funds are covered as eligible
         expenditure.
      
So far as the third requirement for eligibility is concerned, on the scope of which the parties to the main proceedings disagree,
         its purpose is not to impose a single method of calculation, but it leaves to the Member States a discretion in the calculation
         of eligible expenditure. That requirement is intended only to make the taking into account of overheads as eligible expenditure
         subject to such overheads being allocated ‘pro rata to the operation, according to a duly justified fair and equitable method’.
      
Consequently, point 1.of Rule No in the Annex to Regulation No 1685/cannot be interpreted as precluding methods of
         calculating eligible overheads based on a percentage or proportion, in particular, of wage costs or time worked, provided
         however that the final beneficiary is in a position to show that those overheads are allocated to the project according to
         a method which complies with the criteria set forth in that provision.
      
It must be made clear, as the Commission correctly pointed out, that the allocation to the project concerned of overheads,
         such as, for example, wage costs, costs connected to real property or those relating to information technology, must, in the
         light of the above mentioned criteria, take account of the relation between the number of persons working on carrying out
         the project, the number of working hours which they devote to it or the amount of wages paid on that account, and the average
         number of persons working for the organisation concerned, the average number of hours worked or the average amount of wages
         paid.
      
Consequently, the reply to the question referred must be that point 1.of Rule No in the Annex to Regulation No 1685/does not preclude a method of calculating overheads as eligible expenditure for the purposes of a project co-financed by the
         Structural Funds, on the sole ground that such method is based on a percentage or proportion, in particular, of wage costs
         or time worked.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
Point 1.of Rule No in the Annex to Commission Regulation (EC) No 1685/of July laying down detailed rules
            for the implementation of Council Regulation (EC) No 1260/as regards eligibility of expenditure of operations co-financed
            by the Structural Funds, as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 448/of March 2004, does not preclude a method
            of calculating overheads as eligible expenditure for the purposes of a project co-financed by the Structural Funds, on the
            sole ground that the method is based on a percentage or proportion, in particular, of wage costs or time worked. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Finnish.
      
Top  
 