
Avis juridique important
|
61993JJudgment of the Court (Second Chamber) of March 1994.  -  Nicole Vaneetveld v Le Foyer SA and Le Foyer SA v Fédération des Mutualités Socialistes et Syndicales de la Province de Liège.  -  Reference for a preliminary ruling: Tribunal de commerce de Huy - Belgium.  -  Insurance - Directive - Time-limit for transposition - Direct effect.  -  Case C-316/93.  
European Court reports Page I-Summary
Parties
Grounds
Decision on costs
Operative part
Keywords
++++1. Preliminary rulings - Jurisdiction of the Court - Question not containing an exhaustive description of the legal and factual situation but relating to specific technical points - Enough information before the Court to enable it to give a useful reply - Question on which a ruling should be given  (EEC Treaty, Art. 177)  2. Approximation of laws - Civil liability insurance for motor vehicles - Directive 84/- When applicable - Individuals' reliance on the directive before the expiry of the time-limit it lays down for the entry into force of national implementing provisions - Not possible  (Directive 84/5, Art. 5(2))  
Summary
1. The need to arrive at an interpretation of Community law which is useful for the national court requires that court to define the factual and legislative context of the questions it puts or at least to explain the factual hypotheses on which they are based. None the less, that requirement is less pressing where the questions relate to specific technical points and enable the Court to give a useful reply where the national court has not given an exhaustive description of the legal and factual situation.  A ruling should be given on a question where the case-file forwarded by the national court and the written observations submitted by the parties to the main proceedings have given the Court enough information to enable it to interpret the rules of Community law in respect of the situation which is the subject of the main proceedings.  2. It follows from the clear wording of Article of Directive 84/on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles that even though Member States were under an obligation to amend their national provisions by December at the latest, they were obliged to apply them only in respect of insurance cover for accidents occurring on or after December 1988.  Since a directive can be relied on by individuals before national courts only after the expiry of the time-limit laid down for the entry into force of the national provisions transposing it, the provisions of that directive did not, before the date of December laid down by Article 5(2), create rights for individuals which the national courts must protect.  
Parties
In Case C-316/93,  REFERENCE to the Court under Article of the EEC Treaty by the Tribunal de Commerce, Huy (Belgium), for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending before that court between  Nicole Vaneetveld  and  Le Foyer SA  and  Le Foyer SA  and  Fédération des Mutualités Socialistes et Syndicales de la Province de Liège (FMSS)  on the interpretation of the Second Council Directive (84/5/EEC) of December on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles (Official Journal L 8, p. 17),  THE COURT (Second Chamber),  composed of: G.F. Mancini, President of the Chamber, F.A. Schockweiler (Rapporteur) and J.L. Murray, Judges,  Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs,  Registrar: L. Hewlett, Administrator,  after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:  - N. Vaneetveld, by J.-L. Dessy, of the Huy Bar,  - Le Foyer SA, by L. Simont, of the Brussels Bar and O.W. Brouwer, of the Amsterdam Bar,  - the French Government, by H. Renie, Principal Assistant Secretary at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and C. de Salins, Adviser at that Ministry, acting as Agents,  - the Commission of the European Communities, by T. Cusack, Legal Adviser, acting as Agent,  having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,  after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 1994,  gives the following  Judgment  
Grounds
By judgment of June 1993, which was received at the Court on June 1993, the Tribunal de Commerce (Commercial Court), Huy, referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article of the EEC Treaty three questions on the interpretation of the Second Council Directive (84/5/EEC) of December on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles (Official Journal L 8, p. 17, hereinafter referred to as the "Second Directive").  Those questions were raised in the course of proceedings brought by Mrs N. Vaneetveld against the insurance company Le Foyer SA (hereinafter referred to as "Le Foyer") for compensation for damage she suffered as a result of a traffic accident on May 1988.  It is apparent from the case-file forwarded by the national court and the observations submitted to the Court of Justice that the person responsible for the accident, Mr Dubois, is the husband of Mrs Vaneetveld, from whom he is separated but not divorced, and that he is insured with Le Foyer.  Article of the Belgian Law of July on compulsory insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles (Moniteur Belge of July 1956, p. 4714) permits the exclusion from insurance cover of the spouse of the insured person.  Mr Dubois' s insurance policy with Le Foyer did not cover the insured person' s spouse.  Having learnt that Mrs Vaneetveld was not divorced, but only separated from Mr Dubois, Le Foyer refused to make any payment to the accident victim.  Mrs Vaneetveld thereupon brought proceedings before the Tribunal de Commerce, Huy, for compensation for all the damage she had suffered. For its part, the insurance company brought proceedings in the same court against the Fédération des Mutualités Socialistes et Syndicales de la Province de Liège to recover the sums it had already paid to the Fédération in respect of medical expenses borne by the latter on behalf of Mrs Vaneetveld.  Article of the Second Directive defines the personal scope of the insurance as follows:  "The members of the family of the insured person, driver or any other person who is liable under civil law in the event of an accident, and whose liability is covered by the insurance referred to in Article 1(1) shall not be excluded from insurance in respect of their personal injuries by virtue of that relationship."  The Second Directive was transposed into Belgian law by the Law of November on compulsory insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles (Moniteur Belge of December 1989, p. 20122). The second subparagraph of Article 4(1) of that Law prohibits the exclusion from insurance cover of the insured person' s spouse in the event of physical injury. According to Article of the law, the entry into force of the said Law "has the effect of automatically amending, within the limits fixed by the provisions of the law, the obligations on insurers as they arise from the general conditions and current policies".  By virtue of a Royal Decree of February (Moniteur Belge of April 1991, p. 7257), the provisions of the Law of November apply, with effect from May 1991, to all current insurance policies against civil liability in respect of motor vehicles.  Taking the view that these two cases, which it joined, raised a problem of interpretation of the Second Directive, the Tribunal de Commerce, Huy, stayed proceedings pending a ruling by the Court of Justice on the following questions:  "1. Are the provisions of Article of the Second Directive of direct effect in the Belgian domestic legal system?  2. If so, do those provisions create rights for individuals which the national courts must protect?  3. In particular, were those rights created with effect from the date when the directive entered into force or with effect from December 1987, the date by which Member States were to amend their national provisions, or with effect from December in accordance with Article 5(2) of that directive?"  The first point is to examine whether the Court should rule on the questions referred to it, or whether, as the French Government suggests, they should be declared inadmissible on the ground that the national court provided no information on the factual and legal context of the questions.  It is true that the Court has held that the need to arrive at an interpretation of Community law which is useful for the national court requires that court to define the factual and legislative context of the questions, or at least to explain the factual hypotheses on which they are based (see Case C-83/Meilicke v ADV/ORGA [1992] ECR I-4871; Joined Cases C-320/90, C-321/and C-322/Telemarsicabruzzo v Circostel [1993] ECR I-393; Case C-157/Banchero [1993] ECR I-1085; Case C-386/Monin Automobiles v French State [1993] ECR I-2049). None the less, that requirement is less pressing where the questions relate to specific technical points and enable the Court to give a useful reply even where the national court has not given an exhaustive description of the legal and factual situation.  In this regard, it should be noted that the case-file forwarded by the national court and the written observations submitted by the parties to the main proceedings have given the Court enough information to enable it to interpret the rules of Community law in respect of the situation which is the subject of the main proceedings (see the judgment in Telemarsicabruzzo, cited above).  In its questions the national court asks this Court whether, and if so, from what date, the Second Directive, in prohibiting the exclusion from compulsory insurance of the insured person' s spouse in the event of physical injury, creates rights for individuals which the national courts must protect.  It should be noted first that a directive can be relied on by individuals before national courts only after the expiry of the time-limit laid down for its transposition into national law.  In this regard, Article of the Second Directive provides that:  "1. Member States shall amend their national provisions to comply with this Directive not later than December 1987. They shall forthwith inform the Commission thereof.  2. The provisions thus amended shall be applied not later than December 1988.  ... ."  It follows from the clear wording of that article that, even though Member States were under an obligation to amend their national provisions by December at the latest, they were obliged to apply them only in respect of insurance cover for accidents occurring on or after December 1988.  The reply to the third question referred by the national court should therefore be that the Second Directive must be interpreted as meaning that, before the date of December laid down by Article 5(2), the provisions of that directive did not create rights for individuals which the national courts must protect.  In the light of that reply, it is not necessary to examine the first two questions on whether the Second Directive did indeed create rights for individuals which the national courts must protect.  
Decision on costs
Costs  The costs incurred by the French Government and by the Commission of the European Communities, which have submitted observations to the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court.  
Operative part
On those grounds,  THE COURT (Second Chamber),  in answer to the questions referred to it by the Tribunal de Commerce, Huy, (Belgium), by judgment of June 1993, hereby rules:  The Second Council Directive (84/5/EEC) of December on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles must be interpreted as meaning that, before the date of December laid down by Article 5(2), the provisions of that directive did not create rights for individuals which the national courts must protect.  
Top  
 