
Case C-34/Gerardo Ruiz Zambrano
v
Office national de l’emploi (ONEm)
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the tribunal du travail de Bruxelles)
(Citizenship of the Union – Article TFEU – Grant of right of residence under European Union law to a minor child on the territory of the Member State of which that
         child is a national, irrespective of the previous exercise by him of his right of free movement in the territory of the Member
         States – Grant, in the same circumstances, of a derived right of residence, to an ascendant relative, a third country national, upon
         whom the minor child is dependent – Consequences of the right of residence of the minor child on the employment law requirements to be fulfilled by the third-country
         national ascendant relative of that minor)
      
Summary of the Judgment
Citizens of the European Union – Provisions of the FEU Treaty – Scope ratione personae – Minor child national of a Member
            State never having exercised his right of free movement – Included
(Art. TFEU)
Article TFEU is to be interpreted as meaning that it precludes a Member State from refusing a third country national upon
         whom his minor children, who are European Union citizens, are dependent, a right of residence in the Member State of residence
         and nationality of those children, and from refusing to grant a work permit to that third country national, in so far as such
         decisions deprive those children of the genuine enjoyment of the substance of the rights attaching to the status of European
         Union citizen.
      
Citizenship of the Union is intended to be the fundamental status of nationals of the Member States. Such a refusal would
         lead to a situation in which those children, citizens of the Union, would have to leave the territory of the Union in order
         to accompany their parents. Similarly, if a work permit were not granted to such a person, he would risk not having sufficient
         resources to provide for himself and his family, which would also result in the children, citizens of the Union, having to
         leave the territory of the Union. In those circumstances, those citizens of the Union would, in fact, be unable to exercise
         the substance of the rights conferred on them by virtue of their status as citizens of the Union.
      
(see paras 41, 44-45, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
March (*)
      
(Citizenship of the Union – Article TFEU – Grant of right of residence under European Union law to a minor child on the territory of the Member State of which that
         child is a national, irrespective of the previous exercise by him of his right of free movement in the territory of the Member
         States – Grant, in the same circumstances, of a derived right of residence, to an ascendant relative, a third country national, upon
         whom the minor child is dependent – Consequences of the right of residence of the minor child on the employment law requirements to be fulfilled by the third-country
         national ascendant relative of that minor)
      
In Case C‑34/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Tribunal du travail de Bruxelles (Belgium), made by decision
         of December 2008, received at the Court on January 2009, in the proceedings
      
Gerardo Ruiz Zambrano,
      
v
Office national de l’emploi (ONEm),
      
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, A. Tizzano, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur), K. Lenaerts, J.-C. Bonichot, Presidents
         of Chamber, A. Rosas, M. Ilešič, J. Malenovský, U. Lõhmus, E. Levits, A. Ó Caoimh, L. Bay Larsen and M. Berger, Judges,
      
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on January 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–      Mr Ruiz Zambrano, by P. Robert, avocat,
–      the Belgian Government, by C. Pochet, acting as Agent, assisted by F. Motulsky and K. de Haes, avocats,
–      the Danish Government, by B. Weis Fogh, acting as Agent,
–        the German Government, by M. Lumma and N. Graf Vitzthum, acting as Agents,
–      Ireland, by D. O’Hagan, acting as Agent, assisted by D. Conlan Smyth, Barrister,
–      the Greek Government, by S. Vodina, T. Papadopoulou and M. Michelogiannaki, acting as Agents,
–      the Netherlands Government, by C. Wissels, M. de Grave and J. Langer, acting as Agents,
–      the Austrian Government, by E. Riedl, acting as Agent,
–      the Polish Government, by M. Dowgielewicz, and subsequently by M. Szpunar, acting as Agents,
–      the European Commission, by D. Maidani and M. Wilderspin, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles EC, EC and EC, and also Articles 21,
         and of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (‘the Charter of Fundamental Rights’).
      
That reference was made in the context of proceedings between Mr Ruiz Zambrano, a Columbian national, and the Office national
         de l’emploi (National Employment Office) (‘ONEm’) concerning the refusal by the latter to grant him unemployment benefits
         under Belgian legislation.
      
 Legal context
 European Union law
Article 3(1) of Directive 2004/38/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of April on the right of citizens
         of the Union and their family members to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States, amending Regulation
         (EEC) No 1612/and repealing Directives 64/221/EEC, 68/360/EEC, 72/194/EEC, 73/148/EEC, 75/34/EEC, 75/35/EEC, 90/364/EEC,
         90/365/EEC and 93/96/EEC (OJ L 158, p. 77, and corrigenda OJ L 229, p. 35, and OJ L 197, p. 34), provides:
      
‘This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who move to or reside in a Member State other than that of which they are
         a national, and to their family members as defined in point of Article who accompany or join them.’
      
 National law
 The Belgian Nationality Code
Under Article 10(1) of the Belgian Nationality Code (Moniteur belge, July 1984, p. 10095), in the version applicable at the time of the facts in the main proceedings (‘the Belgian Nationality
         Code’):
      
‘Any child born in Belgium who, at any time before reaching the age of or being declared of full age, would be stateless
         if he or she did not have Belgian nationality, shall be Belgian.’
      
 The Royal Decree of November Article of the Royal Decree of November (Moniteur belge of December 1991, p. 29888) concerning rules on unemployment provides as follows:
      
‘In order to be eligible for unemployment benefit, a full-time worker must have completed a qualifying period comprising the
         following number of working days:
      
…
2.      during the months preceding the claim [for unemployment benefit], if the worker is more than and less than years
         of age,
      
…’
Article 43(1) of the Royal Decree states:
      
‘Without prejudice to the previous provisions, a foreign or stateless worker is entitled to unemployment benefit if he or
         she complies with the legislation relating to aliens and to the employment of foreign workers.
      
Work undertaken in Belgium is not taken into account unless it complies with the legislation relating to the employment of
         foreign workers. 
      
…’
Under Article 69(1) of the Royal Decree:
      
‘In order to receive benefits, foreign and stateless unemployed persons must satisfy the legislation concerning aliens and
         that relating to the employment of foreign labour.’
      
 The Decree-Law of December Article 7(14) of the Decree-Law of December on social security for workers (Moniteur belge of December 1944), inserted by the Framework Law of August (Moniteur belge of August 2002, p. 38408), is worded as follows:
      
‘Foreign and stateless workers shall be eligible to receive benefits only if, at the time of applying for benefits, they satisfy
         the legislation concerning residency and that relating to the employment of foreign labour.
      
Work done in Belgium by a foreign or stateless worker shall be taken into account for the purpose of the qualifying period
         only if it was carried out in accordance with the legislation on the employment of foreign labour.
      
…’
 The Law of April Article 4(1) of the Law of April on the employment of foreign workers (Moniteur belge of May 1999, p. 17800) provides:
      
‘An employer wishing to employ a foreign worker must obtain prior employment authorisation from the competent authority.
The employer may use the services of that worker only as provided for in that authorisation.
The King may provide for exceptions to the first paragraph herein, as He deems appropriate.’
Under Article of that law:
      
‘The King may, by a decree debated in the Council of Ministers, exempt such categories of foreign workers as He shall determine
         from the requirement to obtain a work permit.
      
Employers of foreign workers referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be exempted from the obligation to obtain a work
         permit.’
      
 The Royal Decree of June Article 2(2) of the Royal Decree of June implementing the Law of April on the employment of foreign workers
         (Moniteur belge of June 1999, p. 24162) provides: 
      
‘The following shall not be required to obtain a work permit:
…
2.      the spouse of a Belgian national, provided that s/he comes in order to settle, or does settle, with that national;
(a)      descendants under years of age or dependants of the Belgian national or his spouse;
(b)      dependent ascendants of the Belgian national or his/her spouse;
(c)      the spouse of the persons referred to in (a) or (b);
…’
 The Law of December Article of the Law of December on access to Belgian territory, residence, establishment and expulsion of foreign
         nationals (Moniteur belge du December 1980, p. 14584), in the version thereof applicable to the main proceedings (‘the Law of December 1980’),
         provides:
      
‘In order to be able to reside in the Kingdom beyond the term fixed in Article 6, a foreigner who is not covered by one of
         the cases provided for in Article must be authorised by the Minister or his representative.
      
Save for exceptions provided for by international treaty, a law or royal decree, the foreigner must request that authorisation
         from the competent diplomatic mission or Belgian consul in his place of residence or stay abroad.
      
In exceptional circumstances, the foreigner may request that authorisation from the mayor of the municipality where he is
         residing, who will forward to the Minister or his representative. It will, in that case, be issued in Belgium.’
      
Article of the same law provides:
      
‘1.      Without prejudice to the provisions in the regulations of the Council [of the European Union] and the Commission of the European
         Communities and more favourable ones on which an EC foreign national might rely, the following provisions shall apply to him.
      
2.      For the purposes of this Law, “EC foreign national” shall mean any national of a Member State of the European Communities
         who resides in or travels to the Kingdom and who:
      
(i)      pursues or intends to pursue there an activity as an employed or self-employed person;
(ii)      receives or intends to receive services there:
(iii) enjoys or intends to enjoy there a right to remain;
(iv)      enjoys or intends to enjoy there a right of residence after ceasing a professional activity or occupation pursued in the Community;
(v)      undergoes or intends to undergo there, as a principal pursuit, vocational training in an approved educational establishment;
         or
      
(vi)      belongs to none of the categories under (i) to (v) above.
3.      Subject to any contrary provisions of this Law, the following persons shall, whatever their nationality, be treated in the
         same way as an EC foreign national covered by paragraph 2(i), (ii) and (iii) above, provided that they come in order to settle,
         or do settle, with him:
      
(i)      the spouse of that national;
(ii)      the national’s descendants or those of his spouse who are under years of age and dependent on them;
(iii) the national’s ascendants or those of his spouse who are dependent on them;
(iv)      the spouse of the persons referred to in (ii) or (iii).
4.      Subject to any contrary provisions of this Law, the following persons shall, whatever their nationality, be treated in the
         same way as an EC foreign national covered by paragraph 2(iv) and (vi) above, provided that they come in order to settle,
         or do settle, with him:
      
(i)      the spouse of that national;
(ii)      the national’s descendants or those of his spouse who are dependent on them;
(iii) the national’s ascendants or those of his spouse who are dependent on them;
(iv)      the spouse of the persons referred to in (ii) or (iii).
5.      Subject to any contrary provisions of this Law, the spouse of an EC foreign national covered by paragraph 2(v) above and his
         children or those of his spouse who are dependent on them shall, whatever their nationality, be treated in the same way as
         the EC foreign national provided that they come in order to settle, or do settle, with him.
      
6.      The spouse of a Belgian who comes in order to settle, or does settle, with him, and also their descendants who are under years of age or dependent on them, their ascendants who are dependent on them and any spouse of those descendants or ascendants,
         who come to settle, or do settle, with them, shall also be treated in the same way as an EC foreign national.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
On April 1999, Mr Ruiz Zambrano, who was in possession of a visa issued by the Belgian embassy in Bogotá (Colombia), applied
         for asylum in Belgium. In February 2000, his wife, also a Columbian national, likewise applied for refugee status in Belgium.
      
By decision of September 2000, the Belgian authorities refused their applications and ordered them to leave Belgium. However,
         the order notified to them included a non-refoulement clause stating that they should not be sent back to Colombia in view of the civil war in that country.
      
On October 2000, Mr Ruiz Zambrano applied to have his situation regularised pursuant to the third paragraph of Article
         of the Law of December 1980. In his application, he referred to the absolute impossibility of returning to Colombia and
         the severe deterioration of the situation there, whilst emphasising his efforts to integrate into Belgian society, his learning
         of French and his child’s attendance at pre-school, in addition to the risk, in the event of a return to Columbia, of a worsening
         of the significant post-traumatic syndrome he had suffered in as a result of his son, then aged 3, being abducted for
         a week.
      
By decision of August 2001, that application was rejected. An action was brought for annulment and suspension of that decision
         before the Conseil d’État, which rejected the action for suspension by a judgment of May 2003.
      
Since April 2001, Mr Ruiz Zambrano and his wife have been registered in the municipality of Schaerbeek (Belgium). On October 2001, although he did not hold a work permit, Mr Ruiz Zambrano signed an employment contract for an unlimited period
         to work full-time with the Plastoria company, with effect from October 2001.
      
On September 2003, Mr Ruiz Zambrano’s wife gave birth to a second child, Diego, who acquired Belgian nationality pursuant
         to Article 10(1) of the Belgian Nationality Code, since Columbian law does not recognise Colombian nationality for children
         born outside the territory of Colombia where the parents do not take specific steps to have them so recognised.
      
The order for reference further indicates that, at the time of his second child’s birth, Mr Ruiz Zambrano had sufficient resources
         from his working activities to provide for his family. His work was paid according to the various applicable scales, with
         statutory deductions made for social security and the payment of employer contributions.
      
On April 2004, Mr and Mrs Ruiz Zambrano again applied to have their situation regularised pursuant to the third paragraph
         of Article of the Law of December 1980, putting forward as a new factor the birth of their second child and relying on
         Article of Protocol to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, signed at
         Rome on November (‘ECHR’), which prevents that child from being required to leave the territory of the State of which
         he is a national.
      
Following the birth of their third child, Jessica, on August 2005, who, like her brother Diego, acquired Belgian nationality,
         on September Mr and Mrs Ruiz Zambrano lodged an application to take up residence pursuant to Article of the Law
         of December 1980, in their capacity as ascendants of a Belgian national. On September 2005, a registration certificate
         was issued to them provisionally covering their residence until February 2006.
      
Mr Ruiz Zambrano’s application to take up residence was rejected on November 2005, on the ground that he ‘[could] not rely
         on Article of the Law of December because he had disregarded the laws of his country by not registering his child
         with the diplomatic or consular authorities, but had correctly followed the procedures available to him for acquiring Belgian
         nationality [for his child] and then trying on that basis to legalise his own residence’. On January 2006, his wife’s application
         to take up residence was rejected on the same ground.
      
Since the introduction of his action for review of the decision rejecting his application for residence in March 2006, Mr
         Ruiz Zambrano has held a special residence permit valid for the entire duration of that action.
      
In the meantime, on October 2005, Mr Ruiz Zambrano’s employment contract was temporarily suspended on economic grounds,
         which led him to lodge a first application for unemployment benefit, which was rejected by a decision notified to him on February 2006. That decision was challenged before the referring court by application of April 2006.
      
In the course of the inquiries in the action brought against that decision, the Office des Étrangers (Aliens’ Office) confirmed
         that ‘the applicant and his wife cannot pursue any employment, but no expulsion measure can be taken against them because
         their application for legalising their situation is still under consideration’.
      
In the course of an inspection carried out on October by the Direction générale du contrôle des lois sociales (Directorate
         General, Supervision of Social Legislation) at the registered office of Mr Ruiz Zambrano’s employer, he was found to be at
         work. He had to stop working immediately. The next day, Mr Ruiz Zambrano’s employer terminated his contract of employment
         with immediate effect and without compensation.
      
The application lodged by Mr Ruiz Zambrano for full-time unemployment benefits as from October was rejected by a decision
         of the ONEm (National Employment Office), which was notified on November 2006. On December an action was also brought
         against that decision before the referring court.
      
On July 2007, Mr Ruiz Zambrano was notified of the decision of the Office des Étrangers rejecting his application of April to regularise his situation. The action brought against that decision before the Conseil du contentieux des étrangers
         (Council for asylum and immigration proceedings) was declared to be devoid of purpose by a judgment of January 2008, as
         the Office des Étrangers had withdrawn that decision.
      
By letter of October 2007, the Office des Étrangers informed Mr Ruiz Zambrano that the action for review he had brought
         in March against the decision rejecting his application to take up residence of September had to be reintroduced
         within days of the notification of that letter, in the form of an action for annulment before the Conseil du contentieux
         des étrangers.
      
On November 2007, Mr Ruiz Zambrano brought such an action for annulment, based, first, on the inexistence of the ‘legal
         engineering’ of which he had been charged in that decision, since the acquisition of Belgian nationality by his minor children
         was not the result of any steps taken by him, but rather of the application of the relevant Belgian legislation. Mr Ruiz Zambrano
         also alleges infringement of Articles and of Directive 2004/38, as well as infringement of Article of the ECHR, and
         of Article 3(1) of Protocol No thereto.
      
In its written observations lodged before the Court, the Belgian Government states that, since April 2009, Mr Ruiz Zambrano
         has had a provisional and renewable residence permit, and should have a type C work permit, pursuant to the instructions of
         March of the Minister for immigration and asylum policy relating to the application of the former third paragraph
         of Article and Article 9a of the Law of December 1980.
      
It is apparent from the order for reference that the two decisions which are the subject-matter of the main proceedings, by
         which the ONEm refused to recognise Mr Ruiz Zambrano’s entitlement to unemployment benefit, first, during the periods of temporary
         unemployment from October and then October 2006, following the loss of his job, are based solely on the finding
         that the working days on which he relies for the purpose of completing the qualifying period for his age category, that is,
         working days during the months preceding his claim for unemployment benefit, were not completed as required by the
         legislation governing foreigners’ residence and employment of foreign workers.
      
Mr Ruiz Zambrano challenges that argument before the referring court, stating inter alia that he enjoys a right of residence
         directly by virtue of the EC Treaty or, at the very least, that he enjoys the derived right of residence, recognised in Case
         C‑200/Zhu and Chen [2004] ECR I‑for the ascendants of a minor child who is a national of a Member State and that, therefore, he is exempt
         from the obligation to hold a work permit.
      
In those circumstances, the Tribunal du travail de Bruxelles (Employment Tribunal, Brussels) (Belgium) decided to stay proceedings
         and to refer the following questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Do Articles [EC], [EC] and [EC], or one or more of them when read separately or in conjunction, confer a right of
         residence upon a citizen of the Union in the territory of the Member State of which that citizen is a national, irrespective
         of whether he has previously exercised his right to move within the territory of the Member States? 
      
2.      Must Articles [EC], [EC] and [EC], in conjunction with the provisions of Articles 21, and of the Charter of
         Fundamental Rights, be interpreted as meaning that the right which they recognise, without discrimination on the grounds of
         nationality, in favour of any citizen of the Union to move and reside freely in the territory of the Member States means that,
         where that citizen is an infant dependent on a relative in the ascending line who is a national of a non-member State, the
         infant’s enjoyment of the right of residence in the Member State in which he resides and of which he is a national must be
         safeguarded, irrespective of whether the right to move freely has been previously exercised by the child or through his legal
         representative, by coupling that right of residence with the useful effect whose necessity is recognised by Community case-law
         [Zhu and Chen], and granting the relative in the ascending line who is a national of a non-member State, upon whom the child is dependent
         and who has sufficient resources and sickness insurance, the secondary right of residence which that same national of a non-member
         State would have if the child who is dependent upon him were a Union citizen who is not a national of the Member State in
         which he resides?
      
3.      Must Articles [EC], [EC] and [EC], in conjunction with the provisions of Articles 21, and of the Charter of
         Fundamental Rights, be interpreted as meaning that the right of a minor child who is a national of a Member State to reside
         in the territory of the State in which he resides must entail the grant of an exemption from the requirement to hold a work
         permit to the relative in the ascending line who is a national of a non-member State, upon whom the child is dependent and
         who, were it not for the requirement to hold a work permit under the national law of the Member State in which he resides,
         fulfils the condition of sufficient resources and the possession of sickness insurance by virtue of paid employment making
         him subject to the social security system of that State, so that the child’s right of residence is coupled with the useful
         effect recognised by Community case-law [Zhu and Chen] in favour of a minor child who is a European citizen with a nationality other than that of the Member State in which he
         resides and is dependent upon a relative in the ascending line who is a national of a non-member State?’
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
By its questions, which it is appropriate to consider together, the referring court asks, essentially, whether the provisions
         of the TFEU on European Union citizenship are to be interpreted as meaning that they confer on a relative in the ascending
         line who is a third country national, upon whom his minor children, who are European Union citizens, are dependent, a right
         of residence in the Member State of which they are nationals and in which they reside, and also exempt him from having to
         obtain a work permit in that Member State.
      
All governments which submitted observations to the Court and the European Commission argue that a situation such as that
         of Mr Ruiz Zambrano’s second and third children, where those children reside in the Member State of which they are nationals
         and have never left the territory of that Member State, does not come within the situations envisaged by the freedoms of movement
         and residence guaranteed under European Union law. Therefore, the provisions of European Union law referred to by the national
         court are not applicable to the dispute in the main proceedings.
      
Mr Ruiz Zambrano argues in response that the reliance by his children Diego and Jessica on the provisions relating to European
         Union citizenship does not presuppose that they must move outside the Member State in question and that he, in his capacity
         as a family member, is entitled to a right of residence and is exempt from having to obtain a work permit in that Member State.
      
It should be observed at the outset that, under Article 3(1) of Directive 2004/38, entitled ‘[b]eneficiaries’, that directive
         applies to ‘all Union citizens who move to or reside in a Member State other than that of which they are a national, and to
         their family members …’. Therefore, that directive does not apply to a situation such as that at issue in the main proceedings.
      
Article TFEU confers the status of citizen of the Union on every person holding the nationality of a Member State (see,
         inter alia, Case C-224/D’Hoop [2002] ECR I-6191, paragraph 27, and Case C‑148/Garcia Avello [2003] ECR I‑11613, paragraph 21). Since Mr Ruiz Zambrano’s second and third children possess Belgian nationality, the conditions
         for the acquisition of which it is for the Member State in question to lay down (see, to that effect, inter alia, Case C‑135/Rottmann [2010] ECR I-0000, paragraph 39), they undeniably enjoy that status (see, to that effect, Garcia Avello, paragraph 21, and Zhu and Chen, paragraph 20).
      
As the Court has stated several times, citizenship of the Union is intended to be the fundamental status of nationals of the
         Member States (see, inter alia, Case C‑184/Grzelczyk [2001] ECR I‑6193, paragraph 31; Case C‑413/Baumbast and R [2002] ECR I‑7091, paragraph 82; Garcia Avello, paragraph 22; Zhu and Chen, paragraph 25; and Rottmann, paragraph 43).
      
In those circumstances, Article TFEU precludes national measures which have the effect of depriving citizens of the Union
         of the genuine enjoyment of the substance of the rights conferred by virtue of their status as citizens of the Union (see,
         to that effect, Rottmann, paragraph 42).
      
A refusal to grant a right of residence to a third country national with dependent minor children in the Member State where
         those children are nationals and reside, and also a refusal to grant such a person a work permit, has such an effect.
      
It must be assumed that such a refusal would lead to a situation where those children, citizens of the Union, would have to
         leave the territory of the Union in order to accompany their parents. Similarly, if a work permit were not granted to such
         a person, he would risk not having sufficient resources to provide for himself and his family, which would also result in
         the children, citizens of the Union, having to leave the territory of the Union. In those circumstances, those citizens of
         the Union would, in fact, be unable to exercise the substance of the rights conferred on them by virtue of their status as
         citizens of the Union.
      
Accordingly, the answer to the questions referred is that Article TFEU is to be interpreted as meaning that it precludes
         a Member State from refusing a third country national upon whom his minor children, who are European Union citizens, are dependent,
         a right of residence in the Member State of residence and nationality of those children, and from refusing to grant a work
         permit to that third country national, in so far as such decisions deprive those children of the genuine enjoyment of the
         substance of the rights attaching to the status of European Union citizen.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:
Article TFEU is to be interpreted as meaning that it precludes a Member State from refusing a third country national upon
            whom his minor children, who are European Union citizens, are dependent, a right of residence in the Member State of residence
            and nationality of those children, and from refusing to grant a work permit to that third country national, in so far as such
            decisions deprive those children of the genuine enjoyment of the substance of the rights attaching to the status of European
            Union citizen.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 