
Case C-311/Société de Gestion Industrielle (SGI)
v
État belge
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the tribunal de première instance de Mons)
(Freedom of establishment – Free movement of capital – Direct taxation – Income tax legislation − Determination of the taxable income of companies − Companies having a relationship of interdependence
         − Unusual or gratuitous advantage granted by a resident company to a company established in another Member State − Addition
         of the amount of the advantage in question to the profits of the resident company which granted it − Balanced allocation of
         the power to tax between Member States − Combating tax avoidance − Prevention of abuse − Proportionality)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Provisions of the Treaty – Scope
(Arts EC, EC and EC)
2.        Community law – Principles – Equal treatment – Discrimination on grounds of nationality – Relationship between Article EC and Articles EC and EC
(Arts EC, EC and EC)
3.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Tax legislation – Income tax
(Arts EC and EC)
1.        Legislation of a Member State under which a resident company is taxed in respect of an unusual or gratuitous advantage where
         the advantage has been granted to a company established in another Member State with which it has, directly or indirectly,
         a relationship of interdependence, and is not so taxed where the advantage has been granted to another resident company with
         which it has such a relationship, must be examined in the light of Articles EC and EC alone, where the dispute concerned
         relates solely to the effect of the legislation in question on the tax treatment of a company which has with the other companies
         concerned a relationship of interdependence characterised by definite influence. Although such legislation is also capable
         of affecting the exercise of other freedoms of movement, and in particular the free movement of capital within the meaning
         of Article EC, Articles EC and EC are nevertheless applicable in such a situation. 
      
(see paras 30, 36-37)
2.        Article EC applies independently only to situations governed by Community law for which the EC Treaty lays down no specific
         rules of non-discrimination. Articles EC and EC lay down such specific rules on non‑discrimination in relation to freedom
         of establishment and the free movement of capital.
      
(see paras 31-32)
3.        Article EC, read in conjunction with Article EC, must be interpreted as not precluding, in principle, legislation of
         a Member State under which a resident company is taxed in respect of an unusual or gratuitous advantage where the advantage
         has been granted to a company established in another Member State with which it has, directly or indirectly, a relationship
         of interdependence, whereas a resident company cannot be taxed on such an advantage where the advantage has been granted to
         another resident company with which it has such a relationship.
      
Such a difference in the tax treatment of resident companies based on the place where the companies receiving unusual or gratuitous
         advantages have their registered office constitutes a restriction on freedom of establishment within the meaning of Article
         EC, read in conjunction with Article EC. A resident company could be deterred from acquiring, creating or maintaining
         a subsidiary in another Member State or from acquiring or maintaining a substantial holding in a company established in that
         State because of the tax burden imposed, in a cross‑border situation, on the grant of advantages at which such legislation
         is directed. Moreover, such legislation is liable to have a restrictive effect on companies established in other Member States,
         since such a company could be deterred from acquiring, creating or maintaining a subsidiary in the Member State concerned
         or from acquiring or maintaining a substantial holding in a company established in that State because of the tax burden imposed
         there on the grant of the advantages at which that legislation is directed. There is, in any event, still a risk of double
         taxation in a cross‑border situation because the unusual or gratuitous advantages granted by a resident company which are
         added back to that company’s own profits may give rise to the recipient company being taxed thereon in the Member State in
         which it is established.
      
However, in the light of the need to maintain the balanced allocation of the power to tax between the Member States and to
         prevent tax avoidance, taken together, such legislation pursues legitimate objectives which are compatible with the Treaty
         and constitute overriding reasons in the public interest and is appropriate for ensuring the attainment of those objectives.
         To permit resident companies to transfer their profits in the form of unusual or gratuitous advantages to companies with which
         they have a relationship of interdependence that are established in other Member States may well undermine the balanced allocation
         of the power to impose taxes between the Member States. It would be liable to undermine the very system of the allocation
         of the power to impose taxes between Member States because, according to the choice made by companies having relationships
         of interdependence, the Member State of the company granting unusual or gratuitous advantages would be forced to renounce
         its right, in its capacity as the State of residence of that company, to tax its income in favour, possibly, of the Member
         State in which the recipient company has its establishment. By providing that the resident company is to be taxed in respect
         of an unusual or gratuitous advantage which it has granted to a company established in another Member State, the legislation
         in question permits the Member State concerned to exercise its tax jurisdiction in relation to activities carried out in its
         territory.
      
Moreover, to permit resident companies to grant unusual or gratuitous advantages to companies with which they have a relationship
         of interdependence that are established in other Member States, without making provision for any corrective tax measures,
         carries the risk that, by means of artificial arrangements, income transfers may be organised within companies having a relationship
         of interdependence towards those established in Member States applying the lowest rates of taxation or in Member States in
         which such income is not taxed.
      
However, it is for the national court to verify whether such legislation goes beyond what is necessary to attain the objectives
         pursued by the legislation, taken together. National legislation which provides for a consideration of objective and verifiable
         elements in order to determine whether a transaction represents an artificial arrangement, entered into for tax reasons, is
         to be regarded as not going beyond what is necessary to attain the objectives relating to the need to maintain the balanced
         allocation of the power to tax between the Member States and to prevent tax avoidance, taken together, where, first, on each
         occasion on which there is a suspicion that a transaction goes beyond what the companies concerned would have agreed under
         fully competitive conditions, the taxpayer is given an opportunity, without being subject to undue administrative constraints,
         to provide evidence of any commercial justification that there may have been for that transaction. Second, where the consideration
         of such elements leads to the conclusion that the transaction in question goes beyond what the companies concerned would have
         agreed under fully competitive conditions, the corrective tax measure must be confined to the part which exceeds what would
         have been agreed if the companies did not have a relationship of interdependence. In those circumstances, subject to verification
         to be carried out by the national court as regards the last two points, which concern the interpretation and application of
         national law, such national legislation is proportionate to the set of objectives pursued by it.
      
(see paras 44-45, 53, 55, 63-64, 67, 69-72, 75-76, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
January (*)
      
(Freedom of establishment – Free movement of capital – Direct taxation – Income tax legislation − Determination of the taxable income of companies − Companies having a relationship of interdependence
         − Unusual or gratuitous advantage granted by a resident company to a company established in another Member State − Addition
         of the amount of the advantage in question to the profits of the resident company which granted it − Balanced allocation of
         the power to tax between Member States − Combating tax avoidance − Prevention of abuse − Proportionality)
      
In Case C‑311/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the tribunal de première instance de Mons (Belgium), made by
         decision of June 2007, received at the Court on July 2008, in the proceedings
      
Société de Gestion Industrielle SA (SGI)
v
État belge,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, President of the Second Chamber, acting for the President of the Third Chamber, P. Lindh,
         A. Rosas (Rapporteur), U. Lõhmus and A. Ó Caoimh, Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: C. Strömholm, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on June 2009,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Société de Gestion Industrielle SA (SGI), by R. Forestini and J.F. Libert, avocats,
–        the Belgian Government, by J.-C. Halleux, acting as Agent,
–        the German Government, by M. Lumma and C. Blaschke, acting as Agents,
–        the Swedish Government, by A. Falk and S. Johannesson, acting as Agents,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by R. Lyal and J.-P. Keppenne, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2009,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles EC, EC, EC and EC. 
      
The reference was made in proceedings between Société de Gestion Industrielle SA (SGI) (‘SGI’), a company incorporated under
         Belgian law, and État belge (the Belgian State) which were brought on the ground that the national tax authorities had added
         back to that company’s own profits the amount of unusual or gratuitous advantages which the company had granted to companies
         with which it has a relationship of interdependence that are established in other Member States. 
      
 National legal background
Article of the Code des impôts sur le revenu (Income Tax Code), consolidated by the Royal Decree of April and confirmed
         by the Law of June (Supplement to the Moniteur belge, July 1992, p. 17120), in the version applicable to the dispute in the main proceedings (‘the CIR 1992’), is worded as
         follows:
      
‘Subject to the provisions of Article 54, where an undertaking established in Belgium grants unusual or gratuitous advantages,
         those advantages shall be added to its own profits, unless they are used in order to determine the taxable income of the recipients.
         
      
Notwithstanding the restriction laid down in the first paragraph, there shall be added to the undertaking’s own profits unusual
         or gratuitous advantages which it grants to: 
      
1.      a taxpayer referred to in Article with which the undertaking established in Belgium is, directly or indirectly, in some
         form of relationship of interdependence;
      
2.      a taxpayer referred to in Article or a foreign establishment which, under the legislation of the country in which it is
         established, is not subject to income tax in that country or is subject to a tax system there which is markedly more favourable
         than the tax system to which the undertaking established in Belgium is subject;
      
3.      a taxpayer referred to in Article which has common interests with the taxpayer or establishment referred to in subparagraph
         or subparagraph 2.’
      
It is apparent from the order for reference that, according to national case‑law, in order to be regarded as ‘unusual’ within
         the meaning of subparagraph of the second paragraph of Article of the CIR 1992, the advantage granted must be contrary
         to the normal course of events and established business rules and practice, in the light of the prevailing economic circumstances
         and the financial situation of the parties. A ‘gratuitous’ advantage is one which is granted in the absence of any obligation
         or consideration. 
      
Article of the CIR provides as follows:
      
‘Expenses shall be regarded as deductible business expenses if they have been incurred or borne by the taxpayer during the
         tax period for the purposes of generating or retaining taxable income and the authenticity and amount of those expenses is
         demonstrated by documentary evidence or, where that is not possible, by any other form of evidence admitted under general
         law, other than by oath. 
      
Expenses shall be treated as incurred or borne during the tax period if, during such period, they were actually paid or borne
         or they acquired the characteristics of proven and established debts or losses and are accounted for as such.’ 
      
Article of the CIR is worded as follows:
      
‘Business losses may not be deducted from any portion of earnings or profits which derives from unusual or gratuitous advantages
         obtained by the taxpayer, directly or indirectly, in whatsoever form and by whatsoever means, from an undertaking with which,
         directly or indirectly, it has a relationship of interdependence.’
      
Article of the CIR provides that it is not possible for certain deductions to be made from the portion of income
         deriving from unusual or gratuitous advantages. 
      
Article 227(2) of the CIR defines non‑resident companies as follows:
      
‘Foreign companies … which do not have their registered office, principal place of business or centre of management or administration
         in Belgium …’ 
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
SGI is a holding company incorporated under Belgian law. It has a 65% holding in the capital of Recydem SA (‘Recydem’), a
         company incorporated under French law. It is also one of the directors of that company. 
      
Cobelpin SA (‘Cobelpin’), a company incorporated under Luxembourg law, is one of the shareholders of SGI. In its reply of
         April to a written question put by the Court on March 2009, SGI stated that Cobelpin has a 34% shareholding in SGI.
         Cobelpin is a director and managing director of SGI. 
      
Mr Leone is a managing director of SGI and a director of Cobelpin and Recydem. 
      
On December 2000, SGI granted an interest-free loan of BEF (EUR 933) to Recydem. According to the Belgian
         tax authorities, for the tax year it was necessary, in accordance with subparagraph of the second paragraph of Article
         of the CIR 1992, to add to SGI’s own profits a sum of BEF (EUR 897) in respect of unusual or gratuitous advantages
         granted by SGI to that subsidiary. That sum corresponds to notional interest calculated at an annual rate of 5%. 
      
From July 2000, SGI paid director’s remuneration of LUF (EUR 676) per month to Cobelpin. Taking the view that
         the requirements in Article of the CIR were not satisfied, the Belgian tax authorities refused to allow that remuneration
         as deductible business expenses for the tax years and 2002. The sums paid were considered to be clearly disproportionate
         and unrelated to the economic benefit of the services in question. Cobelpin’s representative on the SGI board of directors
         was also on the board in his own name. 
      
Thus, SGI was issued with revised assessments for the tax years and 2002. Since the objections which SGI lodged against
         those assessments on January and February were rejected by administrative decision of July 2004, the company
         brought an action before the tribunal de première instance de Mons (Court of First Instance, Mons) on August 2004. 
      
The tribunal de première instance de Mons considers that the Belgian tax authorities correctly applied subparagraph of the
         second paragraph of Article of the CIR by adding back to SGI’s own profits the notional interest on the loan which
         it had granted to Recydem. There was in the court’s view, no economic justification for that loan. Whereas, during the period
         in question, the subsidiary was in a secure financial position and generated profits, SGI was subject to a severe financial
         burden as a result of granting loans. 
      
The tribunal de première instance de Mons considers that the director’s remuneration paid by SGI to Cobelpin is not deductible
         as business expenses under Article of the CIR and that such benefits should be added to SGI’s own profits under subparagraph
         of the second paragraph of Article of the CIR 1992. 
      
However, the referring court has doubts as to whether the latter provision is compatible with the principle of freedom of
         establishment within the meaning of Article EC et seq. and the principle of the free movement of capital enshrined in Article
         EC et seq. It explains that the profits of a resident company are increased by the amount of the unusual or gratuitous
         advantages granted by it if the recipient company with which it has a relationship of interdependence is established in another
         Member State, whereas that is not the case where such advantages have been granted to another resident company in such a position
         and are used to determine that company’s taxable income. 
      
In those circumstances, the tribunal de première instance de Mons decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following
         questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Does Article [EC], in conjunction with Article [EC] and, if appropriate, Article [EC], preclude legislation of a
         Member State which, like that at issue, gives rise to the taxation of a company resident in Belgium in respect of an unusual
         or gratuitous advantage which it has granted to a company established in another Member State with which the Belgian company
         has, directly or indirectly, a relationship of interdependence, whereas, in identical circumstances, the company resident
         in Belgium cannot be taxed in respect of an unusual or gratuitous advantage where that advantage is granted to another company
         established in Belgium with which the Belgian company has, directly or indirectly, a relationship of interdependence?
      
2.      Does Article [EC], in conjunction with Article [EC] and, if appropriate, Article [EC], preclude legislation of a
         Member State which, like that at issue, gives rise to the taxation of a company resident in Belgium in respect of an unusual
         or gratuitous advantage which it has granted to a company established in another Member State with which the Belgian company
         has, directly or indirectly, a relationship of interdependence, whereas, in identical circumstances, the company resident
         in Belgium cannot be taxed in respect of an unusual or gratuitous advantage where that advantage is granted to another company
         established in Belgium with which the Belgian company has, directly or indirectly, a relationship of interdependence?’
      
 The questions referred
By its two questions, which are framed in virtually identical terms, the tribunal de première instance de Mons asks, essentially,
         whether Article EC, read in conjunction with Article EC, and/or Article EC must be interpreted as precluding legislation
         of a Member State, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, under which a resident company is taxed in respect of an
         ‘unusual’ or ‘gratuitous’ advantage which it has granted to a company established in another Member State with which it has,
         directly or indirectly, a relationship of interdependence, whereas a resident company cannot be taxed on such an advantage
         where the advantage has been granted to another resident company with which it has such a relationship. 
      
It is apparent from the order for reference that the first question, which essentially concerns the exercise of freedom of
         establishment within the meaning of Articles EC and EC, relates in substance to SGI’s grant of an interest‑free loan
         to its French subsidiary, Recydem, and, in particular, to the fact that the Belgian tax authorities, acting pursuant to subparagraph
         of the second paragraph of Article of the CIR 1992, added the amount of notional interest payable on that loan to SGI’s
         own profits for the purpose of determining its taxable income. 
      
It is also apparent from the order for reference that the second question, which concerns essentially the interpretation of
         Article EC governing the free movement of capital, relates to payment by SGI to its Luxembourg shareholder, Cobelpin, of
         director’s remuneration, which is regarded as unreasonably high, and to the tax treatment of that remuneration as regards
         SGI. It is clear from the order that the Belgian tax authorities, relying on Article of the CIR 1992, refused to deduct
         those payments as business expenses. It is not possible to ascertain on the basis of the information on the case‑file whether,
         in that context, those authorities applied subparagraph of the second paragraph of Article of the CIR 1992. 
      
However, even if Article of the CIR were relevant for the purpose of resolving the dispute in the main proceedings,
         the fact remains that the tribunal de première instance de Mons has referred questions to the Court concerning only the interpretation
         of the freedoms in question in connection with subparagraph of the second paragraph of Article of the CIR 1992. It is
         sufficient to point out that that court, which must assume responsibility for the forthcoming judicial decision, is best placed,
         in the light of the particular circumstances of the case before it, to define the relevant national legal framework and to
         delimit its reference for a preliminary ruling by reference to that framework (see, to that effect, Joined Cases C‑378/to C‑380/Angelidaki and Others [2009] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and the case‑law cited). 
      
 The freedoms in question
It is necessary to determine at the outset whether and to what extent national legislation such as that at issue in the main
         proceedings is capable of affecting the exercise of freedom of establishment within the meaning of Articles EC and EC
         and/or that of the free movement of capital enshrined in Article EC et seq. 
      
All the interested parties which have submitted observations to the Court consider that the first question should be examined
         from the point of view of freedom of establishment. As regards the facts underlying the second question, SGI and the Belgian
         and German Governments submit that the provisions governing the free movement of capital are applicable. On the other hand,
         the other interested parties are of the view that it is appropriate to answer that question in the same terms as the first.
         SGI refers to Article EC in connection with both questions. 
      
According to established case‑law, in order to determine whether national legislation falls within the scope of one or other
         of the freedoms of movement, the purpose of the legislation concerned must be taken into consideration (see, to that effect,
         Case C‑196/Cadbury Schweppes and Cadbury Schweppes Overseas [2006] ECR I‑7995, paragraphs to 33; Case C‑452/Fidium Finanz [2006] ECR I‑9521, paragraphs and to 49; and Case C‑182/Glaxo Wellcome [2009] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 36). 
      
According to the Belgian Government, the legislation at issue in the main proceedings concerns the manner in which the gross
         profit of resident companies is determined for the purpose of the taxation of their income. In order to prevent tax avoidance,
         income that has not been generated as a result of unusual or gratuitous advantages being granted to non‑resident companies
         with which the resident company has a relationship of interdependence is added back to the latter’s profits. In such circumstances,
         that system is said to enable the national tax authorities to tax a resident company on amounts which correspond, as the case
         may be, to the sum paid by it over and above the arm’s length price or to the loss of profit sustained by the company. 
      
In its reply of April to a written question put by the Court on March 2009, the Belgian Government stated that
         the legislation at issue in the main proceedings is aimed at situations in which different conditions influence the relationships
         of the companies in question from those applying to relationships between independent undertakings. According to the Belgian
         Government, there is a ‘relationship of interdependence’ within the meaning of that legislation, inter alia where one of the
         companies in question has a holding in the capital of the other which enables it to exercise definite influence over that
         company’s decisions and to determine its activities within the meaning of the Baars line of case‑law (Case C‑251/[2000] ECR I‑2787, paragraph 22). 
      
The Court has repeatedly held that national legislation which applies in such circumstances comes within the substantive scope
         of the provisions of the EC Treaty on freedom of establishment (see, inter alia, Baars, paragraphs and 22; Cadbury Schweppes and Cadbury Schweppes Overseas, paragraph 31; and Glaxo Wellcome, paragraph 47). 
      
However, according to the Belgian Government, the legislation at issue in the main proceedings is not applicable only to situations
         falling within the scope of the Baars case‑law. Whether there is a relationship of interdependence between the companies concerned does not depend on the extent
         of the holding of one of those companies in the capital of the other. In its response referred to at paragraph above, the
         Belgian Government stated that the legislation in question covers all links which, in the light of the facts and circumstances,
         give rise to some form of interdependence, be it direct or indirect, between the companies concerned. That could take the
         form of a holding in the capital of the other company in question which is not characterised by the exercise of ‘definite
         influence’ within the meaning of that case‑law, but also, for example, the form of dependence in terms of raw materials or
         dependence as regards technical cooperation and guarantees. 
      
In the light of that guidance, it must be held that the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings is, in principle,
         also capable of affecting the exercise of other freedoms of movement, and in particular the free movement of capital within
         the meaning of Article EC. 
      
As regards the applicability of Article EC, which lays down a general prohibition of all discrimination on grounds of nationality,
         it should be noted that that provision applies independently only to situations governed by European Union law for which the
         Treaty lays down no specific rules of non-discrimination (see, inter alia, Joined Cases C‑397/and C‑410/Metallgesellschaft and Others [2001] ECR I‑1727, paragraphs and 39; Case C‑443/Hollmann [2007] ECR I‑8491, paragraphs and 29; and Case C‑105/Lammers & Van Cleeff [2008] ECR I‑173, paragraph 14). 
      
Articles EC and EC lay down such specific rules on non‑discrimination in relation to freedom of establishment and the
         free movement of capital. 
      
As regards the Treaty provisions which are applicable in circumstances such as those in the main proceedings, it should be
         noted that it is not disputed before the referring court that there is a ‘relationship of interdependence’, within the meaning
         of the legislation at issue, between SGI and Recydem and between SGI and Cobelpin. 
      
With regard to the nature of those relationships, it is apparent from the order for reference that SGI has a 65% holding in
         the capital of Recydem. According to the reply referred to at paragraph above, Cobelpin has a 34% holding in the capital
         of SGI. The Court does not have available to it information to enable it to establish whether there are other equity links
         between those companies. 
      
Such holdings are, in principle, capable of giving SGI ‘definite influence’, within the meaning of the Baars case‑law referred to at paragraphs and above, over the decisions and activities of Recydem and of giving Cobelpin such
         influence over the decisions and activities of SGI. Moreover, according to the order for reference, there are links between
         those companies at management level. 
      
Consequently, since the dispute in the main proceedings relates solely to the effect of the legislation in question on the
         tax treatment of a company which has with the other companies concerned a relationship of interdependence that is characterised
         by ‘definite influence’ within the meaning of the Baars case‑law, Articles EC and EC on freedom of establishment are applicable. 
      
It is therefore necessary to answer the questions referred solely in the light of Articles EC and EC. It is appropriate
         to consider those questions together. 
      
 Whether there is a restriction on the freedom of establishment
The freedom of establishment which Article EC grants to Community nationals includes the right for them to take up and
         pursue activities as self-employed persons and to set up and manage undertakings, under the same conditions as those laid
         down for its own nationals by the law of the Member State of establishment. It entails, for companies or firms formed in accordance
         with the law of a Member State and having their registered office, central administration or principal place of business within
         the European Community, the right to pursue their activities in the Member State concerned through a subsidiary, branch or
         agency (see, inter alia, Case C‑471/Keller Holding [2006] ECR I-2107, paragraph 29, and Glaxo Wellcome, paragraph 45). 
      
Even though, according to their wording, the provisions of the Treaty concerning freedom of establishment are directed at
         ensuring that foreign nationals and companies are treated in the host Member State in the same way as nationals of that State,
         they also prohibit the Member State of origin from hindering the establishment in another Member State of one of its nationals
         or of a company incorporated under its legislation (see, inter alia, Case C‑264/ICI [1998] ECR I‑4695, paragraph 21; Case C‑446/Marks & Spencer [2005] ECR I‑10837, paragraph 31; Case C‑298/Columbus Container Services [2007] ECR I‑10451, paragraph 33; and Case C‑418/Papillon [2008] ECR I‑8947, paragraph 16). 
      
In the case of companies, their ‘registered office’ for the purposes of Article EC serves, in the same way as nationality
         in the case of individuals, as the connecting factor with the legal system of a Member State. Acceptance of the proposition
         that the Member State of establishment may freely apply different treatment merely by reason of the fact that the registered
         office of a company is situated in another Member State would deprive Article EC of all meaning (see, to that effect, Case
         270/Commission v France [1986] ECR 273, paragraph 18; Case C‑330/Commerzbank [1993] ECR I‑4017, paragraph 13; and Case C‑303/Aberdeen Property Fininvest Alpha [2009] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 38). 
      
SGI, the Swedish Government and the Commission take the view that the legislation at issue in the main proceedings constitutes
         a restriction within the meaning of European Union law. The Belgian and German Governments take the opposite view. They argue
         that, in the light of the general context, the legislation is not such as to place at a disadvantage resident companies granting
         unusual or gratuitous advantages to companies with which they have a relationship of interdependence that are established
         in other Member States by comparison with resident companies granting such advantages to other resident companies which are
         in such a position. The system in question does not therefore constitute a restriction. 
      
In the present case, it is common ground that, under the legislation at issue in the main proceedings, unusual or gratuitous
         advantages granted by a resident company to a company with which it has a relationship of interdependence are added to the
         former company’s own profits only if the recipient company is established in another Member State. By contrast, a resident
         company is not taxed on such an advantage if the advantage is granted to another resident company with which it has such a
         relationship, provided that the advantage is used in order to determine the taxable income of the recipient company. 
      
It follows that the tax position of a company resident in Belgium which, like SGI, grants unusual or gratuitous advantages
         to companies with which it has a relationship of interdependence that are established in other Member States is less favourable
         than it would be if it granted such advantages to resident companies with which it has such a relationship. 
      
Such a difference in the tax treatment of resident companies based on the place where the companies receiving the advantages
         in question have their registered office is liable to constitute a restriction on freedom of establishment within the meaning
         of Article EC. A resident company could be deterred from acquiring, creating or maintaining a subsidiary in another Member
         State or from acquiring or maintaining a substantial holding in a company established in that State because of the tax burden
         imposed, in a cross‑border situation, on the grant of advantages at which the legislation at issue in the main proceedings
         is directed. 
      
Moreover, that legislation is liable to have a restrictive effect on companies established in other Member States. Such a
         company could be deterred from acquiring, creating or maintaining a subsidiary in Belgium or from acquiring or maintaining
         a substantial holding in a company established in that State because of the tax burden imposed there on the grant of the advantages
         at which that legislation is directed. 
      
That conclusion cannot be invalidated by the arguments put forward by the Belgian and German Governments. 
      
The Belgian Government contends that the tax disadvantage resulting from the application of that legislation does not arise
         from the fact that the Belgian tax authorities add the unusual or gratuitous advantage granted by the resident company back
         to that company’s own profits but from the risk of double taxation if the Member State in which the recipient company is established
         does not make a corresponding tax adjustment. In its submission, that risk is greatly diminished by the fact that it is possible
         to apply Convention 90/436/EEC of July on the elimination of double taxation in connection with the adjustment of
         profits of associated enterprises (OJ L 225, p. 10) (‘the Arbitration Convention’). 
      
The Belgian Government also draws attention to the fact that, in domestic situations, Articles and of the CIR provide that certain tax deductions are not available to resident companies which have benefited from unusual or gratuitous
         advantages. Accordingly, the difference in tax treatment of resident companies based on the place where recipient companies
         have their registered office is less significant than it might appear. 
      
According to the German Government, the Belgian tax authorities do not impose any form of additional taxation in cross‑border
         situations. Since they have no power to tax the income of a recipient company established in another Member State, they tax
         the unusual or gratuitous advantage in the hands of the resident company which granted it. That Government points out that
         tax is payable on that kind of advantage in domestic situations, not by the resident company which granted the advantage but
         by the recipient resident company. It is therefore doubtful whether the legislation at issue in the main proceedings has a
         restrictive effect. 
      
First, it should be noted that, for legislation to be regarded as a restriction on freedom of establishment, it is sufficient
         that it be capable of restricting the exercise of that freedom in a Member State by companies established in another Member
         State, without there being any need to establish that the legislation in question has actually had the effect of leading some
         of those companies to refrain from acquiring, creating or maintaining a subsidiary in the first Member State (see Case C‑524/Test Claimants in the Thin Cap Group Litigation [2007] ECR I‑2107, paragraph 62, and Case C‑231/Oy AA [2007] ECR I‑6373, paragraph 42). 
      
As regards the arguments relating to the tax treatment in a domestic situation of the income of the resident recipient company,
         it is apparent, as the Advocate General observed at point of her Opinion, that the Governments in question base their observations
         on a global view of the group of companies and presume that it is irrelevant to which company within a group particular income
         is attributed. 
      
In that connection, it should be noted that the resident company granting an unusual or gratuitous advantage and the recipient
         company are separate legal persons, both of which have their own individual tax liability. In any event, the tax burden borne
         by the recipient company in a domestic situation cannot be likened to the taxation, in a cross-border situation, of the company
         granting the advantage in question. 
      
Even if, in a domestic situation in which the companies concerned are, directly or indirectly, 100% related to each other,
         the allocation of the tax burden between them may, in some circumstances, have no implications for the purpose of taxation,
         there is, in any event, still a risk of double taxation in a cross‑border situation. As the Advocate General has rightly observed
         at points and of her Opinion, in such a situation, the unusual or gratuitous advantages granted by a resident company
         which are added back to that company’s own profits may give rise to the recipient company being taxed thereon in the Member
         State in which it is established. 
      
As regards the possibility of applying the Arbitration Convention, it should be pointed out, as observed by the Advocate General
         at point of her Opinion, that where the tax authorities in question endeavour to resolve a matter by mutual agreement,
         as provided for by Article in Section of the Convention, an additional administrative and financial burden is imposed
         on the company which has submitted its case to such a procedure. Moreover, a procedure aimed at resolution by mutual agreement,
         followed, if necessary, by an arbitration procedure, may extend over several years. During that period, the company in question
         must bear the burden of double taxation. Furthermore, it is apparent, in particular in the light of the matters set out at
         paragraph above, that the legislation at issue in the main proceedings is applicable in certain situations falling outside
         the scope of the Convention. 
      
It follows that legislation of a Member State such as that at issue in the main proceedings constitutes a restriction on freedom
         of establishment within the meaning of Article EC, read in conjunction with Article EC. 
      
 Whether the legislation at issue in the main proceedings can be justified
According to established case‑law, a measure which is liable to hinder the freedom of establishment enshrined in Article EC is permissible only if it pursues a legitimate objective compatible with the Treaty and is justified by overriding reasons
         in the public interest. It is also necessary, in such a case, that its application be appropriate to ensuring the attainment
         of the objective thus pursued and not go beyond what is necessary to attain it (see, inter alia, Case C‑250/Futura Participations and Singer [1997] ECR I‑2471, paragraph 26; Case C‑9/de Lasteyrie du Saillant [2004] ECR I‑2409, paragraph 49; Marks & Spencer, paragraph 35; and Lammers & Van Cleeff, paragraph 25). 
      
The Swedish Government and the Commission take the view that the legislation at issue in the main proceedings is justified
         by the need to ensure a balanced allocation of the power to tax between Member States, the fear of tax avoidance and the need
         to combat abusive practices, taken together. However, the Commission points out that it is necessary to comply with the principle
         of proportionality. The Belgian and German Governments rely, in the alternative, on the same grounds of justification. 
      
The Belgian Government states that the legislation at issue in the main proceedings seeks to combat tax avoidance by making
         it possible to adjust, for taxation purposes, situations in which the companies concerned apply conditions to their relationships
         which go beyond what would have been agreed under fully competitive conditions. At the hearing, the Belgian Government stated
         that the system in question was based on Article of the model tax convention on income and on capital drawn up by the Organisation
         for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and Article of the Arbitration Convention, which provide for similar adjustments
         to profits when transactions between associated companies are inconsistent with the arm’s length principle. 
      
According to the Belgian Government, the concept of ‘advantage’ within the meaning of the legislation at issue in the main
         proceedings is based on the premiss that the recipient is enriched and the person granting the advantage receives no real
         consideration equivalent to that advantage. The requirement that the advantage must be ‘unusual’ is designed to cover situations
         which are contrary to the normal course of events, rules or established practice or contrary to what is customary, in similar
         cases. The requirement that the advantage must be ‘gratuitous’ presupposes that it is granted on the basis that it does not
         represent the fulfilment an obligation or that no consideration is provided in that connection. 
      
First, as regards the balanced allocation between Member States of the power to tax, it should be recalled that such a justification
         may be accepted, in particular, where the system in question is designed to prevent conduct capable of jeopardising the right
         of a Member State to exercise its tax jurisdiction in relation to activities carried out in its territory (see, inter alia,
         Marks & Spencer, paragraph 46; Case C‑347/Rewe Zentralfinanz [2007] ECR I‑2647, paragraph 42; Oy AA, paragraph 54; and Aberdeen Property Fininvest Alpha, paragraph 66). 
      
The Court has recognised that the preservation of the allocation of the power to impose taxes between Member States may make
         it necessary to apply to the economic activities of companies established in one of those States only the tax rules of that
         State in respect of both profits and losses (see inter alia, Oy AA, paragraph 54, and Case C‑414/Lidl Belgium [2008] ECR I‑3601, paragraph 31). 
      
To give companies the right to elect to have their losses or profits taken into account in the Member State in which they
         are established or in another Member State could seriously undermine a balanced allocation of the power to impose taxes between
         the Member States, since the tax base would be increased in one of the States in question, and reduced in the other, by the
         amount of the losses or profits transferred (see, to that effect, Marks & Spencer, paragraph 46; Oy AA, paragraph 55; and Lidl Belgium, paragraph 32). 
      
In the present case, it must be held that to permit resident companies to transfer their profits in the form of unusual or
         gratuitous advantages to companies with which they have a relationship of interdependence that are established in other Member
         States may well undermine the balanced allocation of the power to impose taxes between the Member States. It would be liable
         to undermine the very system of the allocation of the power to impose taxes between Member States because, according to the
         choice made by companies having relationships of interdependence, the Member State of the company granting unusual or gratuitous
         advantages would be forced to renounce its right, in its capacity as the State of residence of that company, to tax its income
         in favour, possibly, of the Member State in which the recipient company has its establishment (see, to that effect, Oy AA, paragraph 56). 
      
By providing that the resident company is to be taxed in respect of an unusual or gratuitous advantage which it has granted
         to a company established in another Member State, the legislation at issue in the main proceedings permits the Belgian State
         to exercise its tax jurisdiction in relation to activities carried out in its territory. 
      
Second, as regards the prevention of tax avoidance, it should be recalled that a national measure restricting freedom of establishment
         may be justified where it specifically targets wholly artificial arrangements designed to circumvent the legislation of the
         Member State concerned (see, to that effect, ICI, paragraph 26; Marks & Spencer, paragraph 57; Cadbury Schweppes and Cadbury Schweppes Overseas, paragraph 51; and Test Claimants in the Thin Cap Group Litigation, paragraph 72). 
      
In that context, national legislation which is not specifically designed to exclude from the tax advantage it confers such
         purely artificial arrangements – devoid of economic reality, created with the aim of escaping the tax normally due on the
         profits generated by activities carried out on national territory – may nevertheless be regarded as justified by the objective
         of preventing tax avoidance, taken together with that of preserving the balanced allocation of the power to impose taxes between
         the Member States (see, to that effect, Oy AA, paragraph 63). 
      
As regards the relevance of that ground of justification in the light of circumstances such as those of the main proceedings,
         to permit resident companies to grant unusual or gratuitous advantages to companies with which they have a relationship of
         interdependence that are established in other Member States, without making provision for any corrective tax measures, carries
         the risk that, by means of artificial arrangements, income transfers may be organised within companies having a relationship
         of interdependence towards those established in Member States applying the lowest rates of taxation or in Member States in
         which such income is not taxed (see, to that effect, Oy AA, paragraph 58). 
      
By providing that the resident company is to be taxed in respect of an unusual or gratuitous advantage which it has granted
         to a company established in another Member State, the legislation at issue in the main proceedings is able to prevent such
         practices, liable to be encouraged by the finding of significant disparities between the bases of assessment or rates of tax
         applied in the various Member States and designed only to avoid the tax normally due in the Member State in which the company
         granting the advantage has its seat (see, to that effect, Oy AA, paragraph 59). 
      
In the light of those two considerations, concerning the need to maintain the balanced allocation of the power to tax between
         the Member States and to prevent tax avoidance, taken together, it must be held that legislation such as that at issue in
         the main proceedings pursues legitimate objectives which are compatible with the Treaty and constitute overriding reasons
         in the public interest and that it is appropriate for ensuring the attainment of those objectives. 
      
That being so, it remains necessary to examine whether legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings goes beyond
         what is necessary to attain the objectives pursued, taken together. 
      
National legislation which provides for a consideration of objective and verifiable elements in order to determine whether
         a transaction represents an artificial arrangement, entered into for tax reasons, is to be regarded as not going beyond what
         is necessary to attain the objectives relating to the need to maintain the balanced allocation of the power to tax between
         the Member States and to prevent tax avoidance where, first, on each occasion on which there is a suspicion that a transaction
         goes beyond what the companies concerned would have agreed under fully competitive conditions, the taxpayer is given an opportunity,
         without being subject to undue administrative constraints, to provide evidence of any commercial justification that there
         may have been for that transaction (see, to that effect, Test Claimants in the Thin Cap Group Litigation, paragraph 82, and order in Case C‑201/Test Claimants in the CFC and Dividend Group Litigation [2008] ECR I‑2875, paragraph 84). 
      
Second, where the consideration of such elements leads to the conclusion that the transaction in question goes beyond what
         the companies concerned would have agreed under fully competitive conditions, the corrective tax measure must be confined
         to the part which exceeds what would have been agreed if the companies did not have a relationship of interdependence. 
      
According to the Belgian Government, the burden of proof as to the existence of an ‘unusual’ or ‘gratuitous’ advantage within
         the meaning of the legislation at issue in the main proceeding rests with the national tax authorities. It states that when
         those authorities apply that legislation, the taxpayer is given an opportunity to provide evidence of any commercial justification
         that there may have been for the transaction in question. The taxpayer has a month, a period which may be extended, within
         which to establish that no unusual or gratuitous advantage is involved, having regard to the circumstances in which the transaction
         was effected. If, however, those authorities persist in their intention of issuing a revised assessment and do not accept
         the taxpayer’s arguments, the latter can challenge the assessment to tax before the national courts. 
      
The Belgian Government adds that, where the legislation at issue in the main proceedings is applied, only the unusual or gratuitous
         part of the advantage in question is added back to the profits of the company which granted it. 
      
In those circumstances, subject to verification to be carried out by the referring court as regards the last two points, which
         concern the interpretation and application of Belgian law, it must be concluded that, in the light of the foregoing, national
         legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings is proportionate to the set of objectives pursued by it. 
      
Accordingly, the answer to the questions referred is that Article EC, read in conjunction with Article EC, must be interpreted
         as not precluding, in principle, legislation of a Member State, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, under which
         a resident company is taxed in respect of an unusual or gratuitous advantage where the advantage has been granted to a company
         established in another Member State with which it has, directly or indirectly, a relationship of interdependence, whereas
         a resident company cannot be taxed on such an advantage where the advantage has been granted to another resident company with
         which it has such a relationship. However, it is for the national court to verify whether the legislation at issue in the
         main proceedings goes beyond what is necessary to attain the objectives pursued by the legislation, taken together. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
Article EC, read in conjunction with Article EC, must be interpreted as not precluding, in principle, legislation of
            a Member State, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, under which a resident company is taxed in respect of an unusual
            or gratuitous advantage where the advantage has been granted to a company established in another Member State with which it
            has, directly or indirectly, a relationship of interdependence, whereas a resident company cannot be taxed on such an advantage
            where the advantage has been granted to another resident company with which it has such a relationship. However, it is for
            the referring court to verify whether the legislation at issue in the main proceedings goes beyond what is necessary to attain
            the objectives pursued by the legislation, taken together. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 