
Case C-382/Stils Met SIA
v
Valsts ieņēmumu dienests
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Augstākās Tiesas Senāts)
(Common Customs Tariff – Tariff classification – Combined Nomenclature – Chapter – Steel strands, ropes and cables – Heading – TARIC code – Error in the tariff classification – Release of goods for free circulation – Regulation (EC) No 384/– Anti-dumping duties – Fine of an amount equal to the total anti-dumping duties)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Common Customs Tariff – Tariff headings
(Council Regulation No 2658/87, Art. 2, Annex I; Commission Regulation No 1789/2003)
2.        Common commercial policy – Protection against dumping
(Council Regulation No 384/96, Art. 14(1))
1.        The Integrated Tariff of the European Communities established by Article of Regulation No 2658/on the tariff and statistical
         nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff, in the version applying in and 2005, must be interpreted as meaning that
         ropes and cables of steel, other than stainless steel, not coated or only plated or coated with zinc, with a maximum cross‑sectional
         dimension exceeding mm but not exceeding mm, not consigned either from Moldova or from Morocco, fall within TARIC codes
         19, or 19, depending on their cross-sectional dimension.
      
(see para. 40, operative part 1)
2.        Article 14(1) of Regulation No 384/on protection against dumped imports from countries not members of the European Community
         must be interpreted as not precluding legislation of a Member State which provides for the imposition, in the event of an
         error in the tariff classification of goods imported into the customs territory of the European Union, of a fine equal to
         the total amount of the anti-dumping duties applicable to those goods, provided that the conditions in accordance with which
         the amount of the fine is to be set are analogous to those applicable to infringements of national law of a similar nature
         and importance and which make the penalty effective, proportionate and dissuasive, a matter which it is for the referring
         court to determine.
      
(see para. 48, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Common Customs Tariff – Tariff classification – Combined Nomenclature – Chapter – Steel strands, ropes and cables – Heading – TARIC code – Error in the tariff classification – Release of goods for free circulation – Regulation (EC) No 384/– Anti-dumping duties – Fine of an amount equal to the total anti-dumping duties)
In Case C‑382/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Augstākās Tiesas Senāts (Latvia), made by decision of September
         2009, received at the Court on September 2009, in the proceedings
      
Stils Met SIA
v
Valsts ieņēmumu dienests,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
composed of J.-J. Kasel, President of Chamber, A. Borg Barthet (Rapporteur) and E. Levits, Judges,
Advocate General: N. Jääskinen,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Stils Met SIA, by V. Meļkovs,
–        the Valsts ieņēmumu dienests, by N. Jezdakova, acting as Agent,
–        the Latvian Government, by K. Drēviņa and K. Krasovska, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by A. Sauka and L. Bouyon, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of the Integrated Tariff of the European Communities (‘TARIC’),
         established by Article of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July on the tariff and statistical nomenclature
         and on the Common Customs Tariff (OJ L 256, p. 1), and Council Regulation (EC) No 384/of December on protection
         against dumped imports from countries not members of the European Community (OJ 1996, L 56, p. 1).
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between Stils Met SIA (‘Stils Met’), a company governed by Latvian law, and the
         Valsts ieņēmumu dienests (State Tax Authority; ‘the Dienests’) concerning the import of steel ropes and cables from Ukraine
         between May and September 2005.
      
 Legal context
 European Union (‘EU’) legislation
 Customs legislation
Article of Regulation No 2658/87, as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 254/of January (OJ L 28, p.
         16) (‘Regulation No 2658/87’), provides:
      
‘1.      A goods nomenclature, hereinafter called the “Combined Nomenclature” …, which meets at one and the same time, the requirements
         of the Common Customs Tariff, the external trade statistics of the Community and other Community policies concerning the importation
         or exportation of goods shall be established by the Commission.
      
2.      The combined nomenclature shall comprise:
(a)      the harmonised system nomenclature [established by the International Convention on the Harmonised Commodity Description and
         Coding System];
      
(b)      Community subdivisions to that nomenclature, referred to as ‘CN subheadings’ in those cases where a corresponding rate of
         duty is specified;
      
(c)      preliminary provisions, additional section or chapter notes and footnotes relating to CN subheadings.
3.      The combined nomenclature is reproduced in Annex I. …
…’
Article of Regulation No 2658/provides:
      
‘[A TARIC] which meets the requirements of the Common Customs Tariff, external trade statistics, the commercial, agricultural
         and other Community policies concerning the importation or exportation of goods, shall be established by the Commission. 
      
The tariff shall be based on the Combined Nomenclature and include:
(a)      the measures contained in this Regulation;
(b)      the additional Community subdivisions, referred to as “TARIC subheadings”, which are needed for the implementation of specific
         Community measures listed in Annex II;
      
(c)      any other information necessary for the implementation or management of the TARIC codes and additional codes as defined in
         Article 3(2) and (3);
      
(d)      the rates of customs duty and other import and export charges, including duty exemptions and preferential tariff rates applicable
         to specific goods on importation or exportation;
      
(e)      measures shown in Annex II applicable on the importation and exportation of specific goods.’
Under Article 3(1) and (2) of that regulation:
      
‘1.      Each CN subheading shall have an eight digit code number:
(a)      the first six digits shall be the code numbers relating to the headings and subheadings of the harmonised system nomenclature;
(b)      the seventh and eighth digits shall identify the … subheadings [of the Combined Nomenclature of goods established under Article
         1].
      
…
2.      The [TARIC] subheadings shall be identified by the 9th and 10th digits which, together with the code numbers referred to in
         paragraph 1, form the [TARIC] code numbers. …’
      
Article of that regulation provides that the TARIC is to be established, updated, managed and disseminated by the Commission.
      
Part One of the Combined Nomenclature forming Annex I to Regulation No 2658/87, as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No
         1789/of September (OJ L 281, p. 1) (‘the CN’), contains a number of preliminary provisions. In that annex,
         Subsection A, entitled ‘General rules for the interpretation of the [CN]’, of Section I (General Rules) of Part One, provides:
         
      
‘Classification of goods in the [CN] shall be governed by the following principles:
1.      The titles of sections, chapters and sub-chapters are provided for ease of reference only; for legal purposes, classification
         shall be determined according to the terms of the headings and any relative section or chapter notes and, provided such headings
         or notes do not otherwise require, according to the following provisions. 
      
…’
Part Two of the CN contains Section XV concerning ‘Base metals and articles of base metal’. That section includes Chapter
         73, entitled ‘Articles of iron or steel’. 
      
CN Heading is subdivided as follows:
      
CN Code 
Description 
Stranded wire, ropes, cables, plaited bands, slings and the like, of iron or steel, not electrically insulated:
− Stranded wire, ropes and cables:
− − With fittings attached, or made up into articles, for use in civil aircraft
− − Other:
− − − Of stainless steel
− − − Other, with a maximum cross-sectional dimension:
− − − − Not exceeding mm:
…
…
…
− − − − Exceeding mm:
− − − − − Stranded wire:
…
…
…
− − − − − Ropes and cables (including locked coil ropes):
− − − − − − Not coated or only plated or coated with zinc, with a maximum cross-sectional dimension:
− − − − − − − Exceeding mm but not exceeding mm
− − − − − − − Exceeding mm but not exceeding mm
− − − − − − − Exceeding mm but not exceeding mm
− − − − − − − Exceeding mm
…
− − − − − − Other
…
Note to Chapter of the CN reads: 
      
‘In this Chapter and, in the case of Notes (d), (e) and (f) throughout the [CN], the following expressions have the meanings
         hereby assigned to them:
      
…
(d)      Steel
Ferrous materials other than those of heading 72.[(that is to say, ferrous products obtained by direct reduction of iron
         ore and other spongy ferrous products, in lumps, pellets or similar forms; iron having a minimum purity by weight of 99,94%,
         in lumps, pellets or similar forms)] which (with the exception of certain types produced in the form of castings) are usefully
         malleable and which contain by weight 2% or less of carbon. However, chromium steels may contain higher proportions of carbon.
         
      
(e)      Stainless steel
Alloy steels containing, by weight, 1,2% or less of carbon and 10,5% or more of chromium, with or without other elements.
(f)      Other alloy steel
Steels not complying with the definition of stainless steel and containing by weight one or more of the following elements
         in the proportion shown:
      
–      0,3% or more of aluminium,
–      0,0008% or more of boron,
–      0,3% or more of chromium,
–      0,3% or more of cobalt,
–      0,4% or more of copper,
–      0,4% or more of lead,
–      1,65% or more of manganese,
–      0,08% or more of molybdenum,
–      0,3% or more of nickel,
–      0,06% or more of niobium,
–      0,6% or more of silicon,
–      0,05% or more of titanium,
–      0,3% or more of tungsten (wolfram),
–      0,1% or more of vanadium,
–      0,05% or more of zirconium,
–      0,1% or more of other elements (except sulphur, phosphorus, carbon and nitrogen), taken separately.
…’
In and 2005, the TARIC contained the following subheadings for CN subheadings 82, and 86:
         
      
- - - - - - - Exceeding mm but not exceeding mm
- - - - - - - - Of steel
- - - - - - - - - Consigned from Moldova
- - - - - - - - - Consigned from Morocco
- - - - - - - - - Other 
- - - - - - - - Other 
- - - - - - - Exceeding mm but not exceeding mm
- - - - - - - - Of steel
- - - - - - - - - Consigned from Moldova
- - - - - - - - - Consigned from Morocco
- - - - - - - - - Other
- - - - - - - - Other
- - - - - - - Exceeding mm but not exceeding mm
- - - - - - - - Of steel
- - - - - - - - - Consigned from Moldova
- - - - - - - - - Consigned from Morocco
- - - - - - - - - Other
- - - - - - - - Other
The Combined Nomenclature forming Annex I to Regulation No 2658/87, in the version incorporating the amendments to that annex
         introduced by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1810/of September (OJ L 327, p. 1), is identical to the CN as
         regards all the provisions referred to in paragraphs to of this judgment.
      
 Legislation concerning anti-dumping measures
At the material time, the provisions governing the application of anti-dumping measures by the European Union were contained
         in Regulation No 384/96.
      
Article 14(1) of that regulation provides:
      
‘Provisional or definitive anti-dumping duties shall be imposed by regulation, and collected by Member States in the form,
         at the rate specified and according to the other criteria laid down in the regulation imposing such duties. Such duties shall
         also be collected independently of the customs duties, taxes and other charges normally imposed on imports. No product shall
         be subject to both anti-dumping and countervailing duties for the purpose of dealing with one and the same situation arising
         from dumping or from export subsidisation.’ 
      
Under Article 1(1) and (3) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1796/of August imposing a definitive anti-dumping duty,
         and collecting definitively the provisional duty imposed, on imports of steel ropes and cables originating in the People’s
         Republic of China, Hungary, India, Mexico, Poland, South Africa and Ukraine and terminating the anti-dumping proceeding in
         respect of imports originating in the Republic of Korea (OJ L 217, p. 1):
      
‘1.      A definitive anti-dumping duty is hereby imposed on imports of steel ropes and cables, currently classifiable within CN codes
         ex (TARIC code 82*10), ex (TARIC code 84*10), ex (TARIC code 86*10),
         ex (TARIC code 88*10) and ex (TARIC code 99*10) and originating in the People’s Republic
         of China, Hungary, India, Mexico, Poland, South Africa, Ukraine.
      
…
3.      Unless otherwise specified, the provisions in force concerning the customs duties shall apply.’
 National legislation
At the material time, in the Law on taxes and duties (likums ‘Par nodokļiem un nodevām’, Latvijas Vēstnesis, 1995, No 26), paragraphs and of Article 1, which was entitled ‘Liability in the event of reduction of the taxable amount’,
         provided:
      
‘(1)      Where, in breach of tax law, a person liable for payment of a tax reduces the taxable amount when making a declaration to
         the tax authority, the tax authority is to make an assessment of the underpaid amount of tax and impose a fine equivalent
         to that amount, if the legislation governing the specific tax does not impose a fine in any other amount.
      
(2)      No fine shall be imposed where the following two conditions are met:
–      (1)   The person liable for payment of the tax has supplied an amending or supplementary statement (supported by evidence) before
         the authority begins its investigations; 
      
–      (2)   Within five working days of the amending statement, the person in question has paid the outstanding tax and the increased
         amount of the principal debt, together with the default interest payable up until the date of the amending or supplementary
         statement (supported by evidence).’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Between May and September 2005, Stils Met imported steel ropes and cables from Ukraine for free circulation in Latvia.
         The goods were declared under TARIC subheadings 90, and 90. 
      
In the course of an inspection, the Dienests determined that the goods concerned were of steel and that, accordingly, given
         the dimension of their cross-section and their geographical provenance, they came under TARIC subheadings 19, and 19, respectively. 
      
Consequently, by decision of June 2006, the Dienests ordered Stils Met to make a payment to the exchequer of LVL 286.(approximately EUR 356), of which LVL 629.related to anti-dumping duties, LVL 013.to value added tax and
         LVL 643.to a fine equivalent to the total amount outstanding.
      
Stils Met brought an action for annulment of that decision. It claimed in particular that, when declaring the goods, it had
         presented certificates supplied by the manufacturer’s laboratories containing information for the declarant and the customs
         authorities concerning the chemical composition of those goods and, in particular, evidence that they fell within the description
         ‘other alloy steel’ within the meaning of Note 1(f) to Chapter of the CN.
      
Stils Met also maintained that, although the Dienests had classified the goods in question correctly, that authority was not
         entitled to impose a fine on it under the national legislation.
      
The Administratīvā rajona tiesa (District Administrative Court) upheld the action brought by Stils Met and annulled the decision
         of the Dienests by judgment of October 2007. After checking the data concerning the chemical composition of the goods concerned,
         that court held that the Dienests did not possess sufficient evidence to show that those goods should be considered to be
         steel within the meaning of Note 1(d) to Chapter of the CN.
      
The Dienests appealed against that judgment before the Administratīvā apgabaltiesa (Regional Administrative Court), which
         reversed the judgment under appeal. In view of the subdivision in the CN between products of stainless steel, on the one hand,
         and other products of iron or of steel, on the other hand, that court held that, within the TARIC subheadings deriving from
         CN subheadings 82, and 86, the category ‘steel’ covers articles of steel, except those of stainless
         steel, irrespective of their chemical composition, whilst the category ‘other’ covers products which are not of steel, that
         is to say, products of iron. 
      
Stils Met lodged an appeal on a point of law before the Augstākās Tiesas Senāts (Supreme Court) against the decision on appeal.
         
      
According to Stils Met, it is necessary to determine, by reference to Note to Chapter of the CN, in which category –
         (d) ‘steel’, (e) ‘stainless steel’ or (f) ‘other alloy steel’ – the goods at issue in the main proceedings belong. It submits
         that, if the information concerning the chemical composition of those goods is insufficient to establish that they are made
         of ‘other alloy steel’, they should be classified – as the Dienests has done – under the TARIC subheadings for products of
         steel, that is to say, under those with codes ending with the digits 11. If, however, that information is sufficient to establish
         that they are made of ‘other alloy steel’, they should be classified in the relevant TARIC subheadings for products other
         than of steel, that is to say, those with codes ending with the digits 90.
      
Stils Met also maintains that anti-dumping duties cannot be regarded as a tax or duty within the meaning of the Latvian Law
         on taxes and duties, which means that the fines provided for by that law are not applicable in the dispute in the main proceedings.
         
      
Taking the view that the outcome of the dispute before it required an interpretation of the relevant Community legislation,
         the Augstākās tiesas Senāts decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court of Justice for
         a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Are TARIC codes 19, and to be interpreted as meaning that steel articles of the stated
         cross-sectional dimensions – stranded wire, ropes and cables, not coated or only plated or coated with zinc, in particular,
         of alloy steel (but not of stainless steel) – which were not imported from Moldova or Morocco, should have been classified
         under those codes in and 2005, irrespective of their chemical composition?
      
2.      Is Article 14(1) of … Regulation (EC) No 384/… to be interpreted as precluding imposition of a … fine equal to the total
         amount of the anti‑dumping duties provided for by the legislation of the [Member] State concerned (Article 32(2) of the Latvian
         Law on taxes and duties) in the event of a breach of tax law?’ 
      
 Consideration of the questions referred
 The first question
By its first question the referring court asks, in essence, whether the TARIC must be interpreted as meaning that, in and 2005, ropes and cables of steel, other than stainless steel, such as those at issue in the main proceedings, not coated
         or only plated or coated with zinc, with a maximum cross-sectional dimension exceeding mm but not exceeding mm and not
         consigned either from Moldova or from Morocco, should have been classified in TARIC subheadings 19, or 19, or in TARIC subheadings 90, or 90.
      
As a preliminary point, it should be noted that it is settled case-law that, in the interests of legal certainty and for ease
         of verification, the decisive criterion for the classification of goods for customs purposes is in general to be sought in
         their objective characteristics and properties as defined in the wording of the relevant heading of the CN and the notes to
         the sections or chapters (see, inter alia, Case C‑173/Kloosterboer Sevices [2009] ECR I‑5347, paragraph 24).
      
In the present case, it is common ground that the goods at issue in the main proceedings fall within CN subheadings 82,
         and 86, respectively, depending on their cross-sectional dimension. According to the wording of those subheadings,
         they cover ropes and cables, not coated or only plated or coated with zinc, of iron or steel, other than stainless steel,
         with a maximum cross-sectional dimension exceeding mm but not exceeding mm. Within the TARIC, such products are subdivided
         into products ‘of steel’ (TARIC subheadings 11, or 11) and ‘other’ (TARIC subheadings
         90, or 90).
      
Stils Met maintains that it is necessary to determine, by reference to Note to Chapter of the CN, whether the steel ropes
         and cables at issue in the main proceedings fall within the category of ‘steel’, ‘stainless steel’ or ‘other alloy steel’.
         Thus, if the information on the chemical composition of the goods at issue is sufficient to establish that they are made of
         ‘other alloy steel’, they must be classified under TARIC subheadings 90, or 90, depending
         on their maximum cross-sectional dimension. 
      
The Dienests, the Latvian Government and the European Commission, on the other hand, contend that ropes and cables of alloy
         steel such as those at issue in the main proceedings must be classified under TARIC subheadings 19, or 19. They maintain in that regard that, although articles of stainless steel are assigned a separate CN code,
         TARIC subheadings 19, and do not differentiate between the types of steel, so they
         cover both alloy and non-alloy steel. However, in view of the description and structure of heading 7312, goods of iron, that
         is to say, those which are not of steel, should be classified under TARIC subheadings 90, and 90.
      
It should be observed first of all that, according to the wording of CN heading 7312, that heading covers ‘stranded wire,
         ropes, cables, plaited bands, slings and the like, of iron or steel, not electrically insulated’. The CN classifies stranded
         wire, ropes and cables ‘of stainless steel’ under subheading and ‘other’ stranded wire, ropes and cables under
         the subsequent subheadings. It follows that stranded wire, ropes and cables of stainless steel fall within CN subheading 30,
         whilst stranded wire, ropes and cables of iron or steel, other than stainless steel, fall within the subsequent subheadings.
      
Thus, ropes and cables of iron or steel, other than stainless steel, not coated or only plated or coated with zinc, with a
         maximum cross-sectional dimension exceeding mm but not exceeding mm, fall within subheadings 82, or
         86.
      
It follows that TARIC codes 11, and cover ropes and cables of steel, other than stainless
         steel. It is also apparent from the structure and wording of the relevant TARIC subheadings that TARIC codes (consigned from Moldova), (consigned from Morocco) and (other) depend on the geographical provenance
         of the ropes and cables of steel, other than stainless steel. The same is true of the TARIC codes applying to ropes and cables
         covered by CN subheadings and 86. Consequently, ropes and cables of steel, other than stainless steel,
         not coated or only plated or coated with zinc, with a maximum cross-sectional dimension exceeding mm but not exceeding mm, consigned from countries other than Moldova or Morocco, fall within TARIC codes 19, and 19.
      
It is also apparent from the structure of the TARIC that TARIC codes 90, and cover
         ropes and cables – not coated or only plated or coated with zinc, with a maximum cross-sectional dimension exceeding mm
         but not exceeding mm – other than of steel, that is to say, those of iron.
      
It should also be noted that the Court has consistently held that both the notes to the chapters of the Common Customs Tariff
         and the Explanatory Notes to the Nomenclature of the Customs Cooperation Council are important means for ensuring the uniform
         application of the Tariff and as such may be regarded as useful aids to its interpretation (see, inter alia, Case C‑338/Wiener SI [1997] ECR I‑6495, paragraph 11, and Case C‑276/Turbon International [2002] ECR I‑1389, paragraph 22).
      
In the present case, Note to Chapter of the CN explains what is meant by steel, stainless steel and other alloy steel.
         It is apparent from the wording of that note that those definitions are relevant throughout the CN, hence including Chapter
         of the latter. Point (d) of that note gives a definition of ‘steel’ in general. ‘Stainless steel’, defined in point (e),
         and ‘other alloy steel’, defined in point (f), are particular categories of steel and must therefore be regarded as falling
         within the general category of ‘steel’. 
      
Account being taken of those definitions for the purposes of classifying ropes and cables of steel such as those at issue
         in the main proceedings, ropes and cables of stainless steel, within the meaning of point (e) of Note to Chapter of the
         CN, fall within CN subheading 30. However, since heading of the CN does not differentiate between ropes and cables
         of steel and those of ‘other alloy steel’, within the meaning of point (f) of that note, it must be held that ropes and cables
         of steel, other than stainless steel, not coated or only plated or coated with zinc, consigned from countries other than Moldova
         or Morocco, fall within TARIC subheadings 19, or 19, depending on their cross-sectional
         dimension.
      
In the light of all the foregoing, the answer to the first question is that the TARIC, in the version applying in and
         2005, must be interpreted as meaning that ropes and cables of steel, other than stainless steel, not coated or only plated
         or coated with zinc, with a maximum cross-sectional dimension exceeding mm but not exceeding mm, not consigned either
         from Moldova or from Morocco, fall within TARIC codes 19, or 19, depending on their cross-sectional
         dimension.
      
 The second question
By its second question, the referring court asks in essence whether Article 14(1) of Regulation No 384/must be interpreted
         as precluding legislation of a Member State which provides for the imposition, in the event of an error in the tariff classification
         of goods imported into the customs territory of the European Union, of a fine equal to the total amount of the anti-dumping
         duties applicable to those goods according to their correct tariff classification.
      
As a preliminary point, it should be noted that, under Article 14(1) of Regulation No 384/96, anti-dumping duties are to be
         imposed by regulation and collected by Member States in the form, at the rate specified and according to the other criteria
         laid down in the regulation imposing such duties. In the present case, Regulation No 1796/makes no provision for penalties
         in the event of a breach of its provisions. 
      
On the other hand, Article 1(3) of that regulation provides that, unless otherwise specified, the provisions in force concerning
         customs duties are to apply. However, it is clear that those provisions do not  impose any penalty for an error in the tariff
         classification of goods imported into the customs territory of the European Union.
      
In that regard, it should be noted that, according to settled case-law, where EU legislation does not specifically provide
         any penalty for an infringement or refers for that purpose to national legislation, Article EC requires the Member States
         to take all the measures necessary to guarantee the application and effectiveness of EU law. For that purpose, while the choice
         of penalty remains within their discretion, they must ensure in particular that infringements of EU law are penalised under
         conditions, both procedural and substantive, which are analogous to those applicable to infringements of national law of a
         similar nature and importance and which, in any event, make the penalty effective, proportionate and dissuasive (see Case
         C-36/Siesse [1995] ECR I-3573, paragraph 20, and Case C‑91/Hannl-Hofstetter [2003] ECR I‑12077, paragraph 17).
      
It follows from the above that the Member States are empowered to choose the measures which seem appropriate to them in the
         event of infringement of the provisions of Regulation No 1796/1999. They must, however, exercise that power in accordance
         with EU law and its general principles and, consequently, in accordance with the principle of proportionality (see, by analogy,
         Siesse, paragraph 21; Case C‑213/De Andrade [2000] ECR I-11083, paragraph 20; and Hannl-Hofstetter, paragraph 18).
      
The actual principle underlying the imposition of a fine such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which is designed
         to ensure that persons liable for payment of a tax comply with their obligations regarding declarations for tax purposes,
         does not appear to conflict with EU law. A provision such as that at issue in the main proceedings has the effect of encouraging
         economic operators to submit to the competent national authorities declarations which are in conformity with the relevant
         legislation, including the EU customs legislation and the anti-dumping measures stemming from EU legislation. Without such
         a measure, errors in the tariff classification of goods subject to anti-dumping duties would not ultimately have any consequences
         for the economic operators concerned.
      
As regards the amount of the fine, the conditions in accordance with which this is to be set must – according to the case-law
         referred to in paragraph above – be analogous to those applicable to infringements of national law of a similar nature
         and importance. Although, at first sight, that appears, in the light of the wording of that provision, to be so in the case
         of a national provision such as that at issue in the main proceedings, it is nevertheless for the referring court to determine
         whether the fine at issue in the main proceedings is actually consistent with those principles.
      
In the light of the above, the answer to the second question is that Article 14(1) of Regulation No 384/must be interpreted
         as not precluding legislation of a Member State which provides for the imposition, in the event of an error in the tariff
         classification of goods imported into the customs territory of the European Union, of a fine equal to the total amount of
         the anti-dumping duties applicable to those goods, provided that the conditions in accordance with which the amount of the
         fine is to be set are analogous to those applicable to infringements of national law of a similar nature and importance and
         which make the penalty effective, proportionate and dissuasive, a matter which it is for the referring court to determine.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fifth Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      The Integrated Tariff of the European Communities established by Article of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July
            on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff, in the version applying in and 2005,
            must be interpreted as meaning that ropes and cables of steel, other than stainless steel, not coated or only plated or coated
            with zinc, with a maximum cross‑sectional dimension exceeding mm but not exceeding mm, not consigned either from Moldova
            or from Morocco, fall within TARIC codes 19, or 19, depending on their cross-sectional
            dimension.
2.      Article 14(1) of Council Regulation (EC) No 384/of December on protection against dumped imports from countries
            not members of the European Community must be interpreted as not precluding legislation of a Member State which provides for
            the imposition, in the event of an error in the tariff classification of goods imported into the customs territory of the
            European Union, of a fine equal to the total amount of the anti-dumping duties applicable to those goods, provided that the
            conditions in accordance with which the amount of the fine is to be set are analogous to those applicable to infringements
            of national law of a similar nature and importance and which make the penalty effective, proportionate and dissuasive, a matter
            which it is for the referring court to determine.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Latvian.
      
Top  
 