
Case C-168/Elisa María Mostaza Claro
v
Centro Móvil Milenium SL
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Audiencia Provincial de Madrid)
(Directive 93/13/EEC – Unfair terms in consumer contracts – Failure to raise the unfair nature of a term during arbitration proceedings – Possibility of raising that objection in the context of an action brought against the arbitration award)
Summary of the Judgment
Approximation of laws – Unfair terms in consumer contracts – Directive 93/(Council Directive 93/13, Arts 3(1)(t) and 6(1))
Directive 93/13, concerning unfair terms in consumer contracts, must be interpreted as meaning that a national court seised
         of an action for annulment of an arbitration award must determine whether the arbitration agreement is void and annul that
         award where that agreement contains an unfair term, even though the consumer has not pleaded that invalidity in the course
         of the arbitration proceedings, but only in that of the action for annulment.
      
(see para. 39, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Directive 93/13/EEC – Unfair terms in consumer contracts – Failure to raise the unfair nature of a term during arbitration proceedings – Possibility of raising that objection in the context of an action brought against the arbitration award)
In Case C-168/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Audiencia Provincial de Madrid (Spain), made by decision
         of February 2005, received at the Court on April 2005, in the proceedings
      
Elisa María Mostaza Claro
v
Centro Móvil Milenium SL,
      
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann, President of the Chamber, K. Lenaerts, E. Juhász, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur) and M. Ilešič, Judges,
Advocate General: A. Tizzano,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Centro Móvil Milenium SL, by H. García Pi, abogado,
–        the Spanish Government, by E. Braquehais Conesa, acting as Agent,
–        the German Government, by C. Schulze-Bahr, acting as Agent,
–        the Hungarian Government, by P. Gottfried, acting as Agent,
–        the Finnish Government, by T. Pynnä, acting as Agent,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by A. Aresu and L. Escobar Guerrero, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Council Directive 93/13/EEC of April on unfair
         terms in consumer contracts (OJ L 95, p. 29) (‘the Directive’).
      
This reference has been made in the context of proceedings between Ms Mostaza Claro and Centro Móvil Milenium SL (‘Móvil’)
         concerning the validity of an arbitration clause included in the contract which she concluded with that company.
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
Article 3(1) of the Directive provides:
      
‘A contractual term which has not been individually negotiated shall be regarded as unfair if, contrary to the requirement
         of good faith, it causes a significant imbalance in the parties’ rights and obligations arising under the contract, to the
         detriment of the consumer.’
      
Article 6(1) of the Directive provides:
      
‘Member States shall lay down that unfair terms used in a contract concluded with a consumer by a seller or supplier shall,
         as provided for under their national law, not be binding on the consumer and that the contract shall continue to bind the
         parties upon those terms if it is capable of continuing in existence without the unfair terms.’
      
Article 7(1) of the Directive provides:
      
‘Member States shall ensure that, in the interests of consumers and of competitors, adequate and effective means exist to
         prevent the continued use of unfair terms in contracts concluded with consumers by sellers or suppliers.’ 
      
The annex to the Directive contains an indicative list of the terms which may be regarded as unfair. Among them, point 1(q)
         of that annex refers to terms which have the object or effect of ‘excluding or hindering the consumer’s right to take legal
         action or exercise any other legal remedy, particularly by requiring the consumer to take disputes exclusively to arbitration
         not covered by legal provisions, unduly restricting the evidence available to him or imposing on him a burden of proof which,
         according to the applicable law, should lie with another party to the contract.’
      
 National legislation
Under Spanish law, consumers were initially protected against unfair terms by Ley General 26/para la Defensa de los Consumidores
         y Usuarios, of July 1984, Boletín Oficial del Estado (Official State Gazette) (BOE) No of July (General Law 26/for the protection of consumers and users) (‘Law
         26/1984’).
      
Law 26/was amended by Ley 7/sobre Condiciones Generales de la Contratación, of April 1998, BOE No of April
         (Law 7/on general contractual conditions) (‘Law 7/1998’), which transposed the Directive into national law.
      
In particular, Law 7/added to Law 26/an Article 10a and a first additional provision.
      
Article 10a(1) of Law 26/provides: ‘[A]ll those terms not individually negotiated which, contrary to the requirement
         of good faith, cause a significant imbalance in the parties’ rights and obligations arising under the contract, to the detriment
         of the consumer, shall be regarded as unfair terms. In any event, the terms listed in the first additional provision to this
         Law shall be regarded as unfair. …’
      
The first additional provision to Law 26/essentially reproduces the list of terms capable of being regarded as unfair
         which is annexed to the Directive, stating that that list is merely minimal in nature. According to point of that additional
         provision, ‘submission to arbitration other than consumer arbitration, except in the case of arbitration bodies established
         by statutory provision in respect of a specific sector or circumstances’ is to be regarded as unfair.
      
Article of Law 7/provides:
      
‘1.      General conditions which infringe the provisions of this Law or any other rule ordering or prohibiting certain conduct, to
         the detriment of a party to the contract, shall automatically be void, save in so far as they make separate provision for
         cases of breach.
      
2.      In particular, general terms which are unfair, where the contract has been concluded with a consumer as defined in any event
         in Article 10a and the first additional provision of Law 26/… shall be void.’
      
At the time of the facts in the main proceedings, arbitration proceedings were governed by Ley 36/de Arbitraje, of December 1988, BOE No of December (Law 36/on arbitration) (‘Law 36/1988’).
      
Article 23(1) of Law 36/provided:
      
‘An objection to arbitration on the ground that the arbitrators lack objective jurisdiction or on the grounds of the non-existence,
         nullity or expiry of the arbitration agreement must be raised at the same time as the parties make their initial submissions.’
      
Article of Law 36/was worded as follows:
      
‘The arbitration award may be annulled only in the following cases:
1.      Where the arbitration agreement is null and void.
…
5.      Where the award is contrary to public policy.’
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred to the Court
On May 2002, a mobile telephone contract was concluded between Móvil and Ms Mostaza Claro. The contract contained an arbitration
         clause under which any disputes arising from the contract were to be referred for arbitration to the Asociación Europea de
         Arbitraje de Derecho y Equidad (European Association of Arbitration in Law and in Equity) (AEADE).
      
As Ms Mostaza Claro did not comply with the minimum subscription period, Móvil initiated arbitration proceedings before the
         AEADE. By letter of July 2003, the latter granted Ms Mostaza Claro a period of days in which to refuse arbitration proceedings, stating that, in the event of refusal, she could
         bring legal proceedings. Ms Mostaza Claro presented arguments on the merits of the dispute, but did not repudiate the arbitration
         proceedings or claim that the arbitration agreement was void. The arbitration proceedings subsequently took place and the
         arbitrator found against her.
      
Ms Mostaza Claro contested the arbitration decision delivered by the AEADE before the referring court, submitting that the
         unfair nature of the arbitration clause meant that the arbitration agreement was null and void.
      
In the order for reference, the Audiencia Provincial (Provincial Court) de Madrid (Spain) states that there is no doubt that
         the arbitration agreement includes an unfair contractual term and is therefore null and void.
      
However, as Ms Mostaza Claro did not plead that the agreement was invalid in the context of the arbitration proceedings, and in order to
         interpret the national law in accordance with the Directive, the Audiencia Provincial de Madrid decided to stay the proceedings
         and to refer the following question to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘May the protection of consumers under Council Directive 93/13/EEC … require the court hearing an action for annulment of
         an arbitration award to determine whether the arbitration agreement is void and to annul the award if it finds that that arbitration
         agreement contains an unfair term to the consumer’s detriment, when that issue is raised in the action for annulment but was
         not raised by the consumer in the arbitration proceedings?’
      
 Preliminary observations 
It is apparent from the documents sent to the Court by the Audiencia Provincial that the latter has established that the arbitration
         clause contained in the contract concluded between Móvil and Ms Mostaza Claro was unfair.
      
In that respect, it must be recalled that the Court may not rule on the application of general criteria used by the Community
         legislature in order to define the concept of unfair term to a particular term, which must be considered in the light of the
         particular circumstances of the case in question (Case C-237/Freiburger Kommunalbauten [2004] ECR I-3403, paragraph 22).
      
It is therefore for the national court to decide whether a contractual term such as that at issue in the main proceedings
         satisfies the requirements for it to be regarded as unfair under Article 3(1) of the Directive (Freiburger Kommunalbauten, paragraph 25).
      
 The question referred
According to settled case-law, in the absence of relevant Community rules, the detailed procedural rules designed to ensure
         the protection of the rights which individuals acquire under Community law are a matter for the domestic legal order of each
         Member State, under the principle of the procedural autonomy of the Member States, provided that they are not less favourable
         than those governing similar domestic situations (principle of equivalence) and that they do not render impossible in practice
         or excessively difficult the exercise of rights conferred by the Community legal order (principle of effectiveness) (see,
         inter alia, Case C‑78/Preston and Others [2000] ECR I-3201, paragraph 31, and Joined Cases C-392/and C-422/i-Germany andArcor [2006] ECR I-0000, paragraph 57).
      
The system of protection introduced by the Directive is based on the idea that the consumer is in a weak position vis-à-vis
         the seller or supplier, as regards both his bargaining power and his level of knowledge. This leads to the consumer agreeing
         to terms drawn up in advance by the seller or supplier without being able to influence the content of those terms (Joined
         Cases C-240/to C-244/Océano GrupoEditorial and Salvat Editores [2000] ECR I-4941, paragraph 25).
      
Such an imbalance between the consumer and the seller or supplier may only be corrected by positive action unconnected with
         the actual parties to the contract (Océano Grupo Editorial and Salvat Editores, paragraph 27).
      
It is on the basis of those principles that the Court has ruled that the national court’s power to determine of its own motion
         whether a term is unfair constitutes a means both of achieving the result sought by Article of the Directive, namely preventing
         an individual consumer from being bound by an unfair term, and of contributing to achieving the aim of Article 7, since if
         the court undertakes such an examination, that may act as a deterrent and contribute to preventing unfair terms in contracts
         concluded between consumers and sellers or suppliers (Océano GrupoEditorial and Salvat Editores, paragraph 28, and Case C-473/Cofidis [2002] ECR I-10875, paragraph 32).
      
That power of the national court has been regarded as necessary for ensuring that the consumer enjoys effective protection,
         in view in particular of the real risk that he is unaware of his rights or encounters difficulties in enforcing them (Océano Grupo Editorial and Salvat Editores, paragraph 26, and Cofidis, paragraph 33).
      
The protection which the Directive confers on consumers thus extends to cases in which a consumer who has concluded with a
         seller or supplier a contract containing an unfair term fails to raise the unfair nature of the term, whether because he is
         unaware of his rights or because he is deterred from enforcing them on account of the costs which judicial proceedings would
         involve (Cofidis, paragraph 34).
      
Under those circumstances, the result sought by Article of the Directive which, as was recalled at paragraph of this
         judgment, requires the Member States to ensure that consumers are not bound by unfair terms, could not be achieved if the
         court seised of an action for annulment of an arbitration award was unable to determine whether that award was void solely
         because the consumer did not plead the invalidity of the arbitration agreement in the course of the arbitration proceedings.
      
Such an omission by the consumer could not then, under any circumstances, be compensated for by action on the part of persons
         not party to the contract. The regime of special protection established by the Directive would be definitively undermined.
      
This is precisely the direction that has been taken by the Spanish legislation. Although not applicable to the dispute in
         the main proceedings, it is worth pointing out that Ley 60/de Arbitraje, of December 2003, BOE No of December
         (Law 60/on Arbitration), no longer requires an objection to the arbitration, in particular on the grounds of the
         invalidity of the arbitration agreement, to be raised at the same time as the parties make their original claims.
      
Móvil and the German Government submit that, if the national court were allowed to determine whether an arbitration agreement
         is void where the consumer did not raise such an objection during the arbitration proceedings, this would seriously undermine
         the effectiveness of arbitration awards.
      
It follows from that argument that it is in the interest of efficient arbitration proceedings that review of arbitration awards
         should be limited in scope and that annulment of or refusal to recognise an award should be possible only in exceptional circumstances
         (Case C‑126/Eco Swiss [1999] ECR I-3055, paragraph 35).
      
However, the Court has already ruled that, where its domestic rules of procedure require a national court to grant an application
         for annulment of an arbitration award where such an application is founded on failure to observe national rules of public
         policy, it must also grant such an application where it is founded on failure to comply with Community rules of this type
         (see, to that effect, Eco Swiss, paragraph 37).
      
The importance of consumer protection has in particular led the Community legislature to lay down, in Article 6(1) of the
         Directive, that unfair terms used in a contract concluded with a consumer by a seller or supplier ‘shall … not be binding
         on the consumer’. This is a mandatory provision which, taking into account the weaker position of one of the parties to the
         contract, aims to replace the formal balance which the latter establishes between the rights and obligations of the parties
         with an effective balance which re-establishes equality between them.
      
Moreover, as the aim of the Directive is to strengthen consumer protection, it constitutes, according to Article 3(1)(t) EC,
         a measure which is essential to the accomplishment of the tasks entrusted to the Community and, in particular, to raising
         the standard of living and the quality of life in its territory (see, by analogy, concerning Article EC, Eco Swiss, paragraph 36).
      
The nature and importance of the public interest underlying the protection which the Directive confers on consumers justify,
         moreover, the national court being required to assess of its own motion whether a contractual term is unfair, compensating
         in this way for the imbalance which exists between the consumer and the seller or supplier.
      
Having regard to the foregoing, the answer to the question referred must be that the Directive must be interpreted as meaning
         that a national court seised of an action for annulment of an arbitration award must determine whether the arbitration agreement
         is void and annul that award where that agreement contains an unfair term, even though the consumer has not pleaded that invalidity
         in the course of the arbitration proceedings, but only in that of the action for annulment. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
Council Directive 93/13/EEC of April on unfair terms in consumer contracts must be interpreted as meaning that a national
            court seised of an action for annulment of an arbitration award must determine whether the arbitration agreement is void and
            annul that award where that agreement contains an unfair term, even though the consumer has not pleaded that invalidity in
            the course of the arbitration proceedings, but only in that of the action for annulment.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Spanish.
      
Top  
 