
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-293/Gregorio My
v
Office national des pensions (ONP)
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Tribunal du travail de Bruxelles)
(Community officials – Transfer of pension rights – Article of Annex VIII to the Staff Regulations – Early retirement pension – Reckoning of periods of employment with the European Community – Article EC)
Summary of the judgment
1.        Freedom of movement for persons – Workers – Definition – Member State national employed by an international organisation –
            Included – Limit – Worker who is a Member State national and spent his entire working life in that Member State
(Art. EC)
2.        Member States – Obligations – Duty of genuine cooperation with the Community institutions – Failure to take account of periods
            of employment within the European Communities for the grant of an early retirement pension under a national scheme – Not permissible
(Art. EC; Staff Regulations, Annex VIII, Art. 11(2))
1.        An official of the European Communities working in a Member State other than his State of origin has the status of a migrant
         worker. He does not lose his status of worker within the meaning of Article 39(1) EC through occupying a post within an international
         organisation, even if the rules relating to his entry into and residence in the country in which he is employed are specifically
         governed by an international agreement.
      
The provisions of the Treaty relating to the free movement of workers, and particularly Article EC, cannot, however, be
         applied to situations which are wholly internal to a Member State. Accordingly those provisions do not apply to a worker who
         has spent his entire working life in the Member State of which he is a national, first as an employer and then, up to retirement
         age, as an official of the European Communities. 
      
(see paras 37, 39-40, 43)
2.        Article EC, in conjunction with the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Communities, must be interpreted as
         meaning that national legislation which does not permit years of employment completed by a Community citizen in the service
         of a Community institution to be taken into account for the purposes of entitlement to an early retirement pension under the
         national scheme is contrary to those provisions. 
      
Such national legislation is likely to impede and therefore to discourage employment within an institution of the European
         Union, inasmuch as, by accepting employment with such an institution, a worker who was formerly a member of a national pension
         scheme risks losing the right to benefit under that scheme from an old-age pension to which he would have been entitled had
         he not accepted that employment. 
      
Such consequences cannot be accepted in the light of the duty of genuine cooperation and assistance which Member States owe
         the Community and which finds expression in the obligation laid down in Article EC to facilitate the achievement of the
         Community’s tasks. 
      
(see paras 47-49, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)December 2004(1)
(Community officials  –  Transfer of pension rights  –  Article of Annex VIII to the Staff Regulations  –  Early retirement pension  –  Reckoning of periods of employment with the European Community  –  Article EC)
 In Case C-293/03,REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article ECfrom the Tribunal du travail de Bruxelles (Belgium), made by decision of May 2003, received at the Court on July 2003, in the proceedings:
            
Gregorio My
v
Office national des pensions (ONP),
THE COURT (Second Chamber),,
 composed of: C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, C. Gulmann, R. Schintgen (Rapporteur), G. Arestis and J. Klučka,
            Judges,
            
 Advocate General: A. Tizzano,Registrar:  M. Múgica Arzamendi, Principal Administrator,
             having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on June 2004,after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
            
–
 Mr My, by C. Rosenfeld, avocat,
            
–
 the Office national des pensions, by G. Perl and J.-P. Lheureux, acting as Agents,
            
–
 the Greek Government, by A. Samoni-Rantou and M. Tassopoulou, acting as Agents,
            
–
 the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster, acting as Agent,
            
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by D. Martin, acting as Agent,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles 2, 3, 17, 18, 39, 40, and EC and of
         Article of Regulation (EEC) No 1612/of the Council of October on freedom of movement for workers within the Community
         (OJ, English Special Edition (II), p. 475).
         
            
 That reference is made in the course of proceedings between Mr My and the Office national des pensions (National Pension Office)
         (‘ONP’) concerning the refusal by the latter to take account of the periods of employment within an institution of the European
         Communities for the purposes of eligibility for an early retirement pension under the Belgian scheme.
         
Legal background
Community legislation
            
 Under Article 11(1) and (2) of Annex VIII to the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Communities (‘Staff Regulations’)
         in the version applicable at the time of the facts in the main proceedings:
         ‘1. An official who leaves the service of the Communities to:
         –         enter the service of a government administration or a national or international organisation which has concluded an agreement
         with the Communities;
         –         pursue an activity in an employed or self-employed capacity, by virtue of which he acquires pension rights under a scheme
         whose administrative bodies have concluded an agreement with the Communities,
          shall be entitled to have the actuarial equivalent of his retirement pension rights in the Communities transferred to the
         pension fund of that administration or organisation or to the pension fund under which he acquires retirement pension rights
         by virtue of the activity pursued in an employed or self-employed capacity.
          2. An official who enters the service of the Communities after:
         –         leaving the service of a government administration or of a national or international organisation; or
         –         pursuing an activity in an employed or self-employed capacity;
          shall be entitled upon establishment to have paid to the Communities either the actuarial equivalent or the flat-rate redemption
         value of retirement pension rights acquired by virtue of such service or activities.
          In such case the institution in which the official serves shall, taking into account his grade on establishment, determine
         the number of years of pensionable service with which he shall be credited under its own pension scheme in respect of the
         former period of service, on the basis of the amount of the actuarial equivalent or sums repaid as aforesaid.’
         
National legislation
            
 Under Article of the Law of May establishing a certain relationship between the Belgian pension schemes and those
         of international public law institutions (Moniteurbelge, June 1991, ‘the Law’):
         ‘Any civil servant may, with the agreement of the competent institution, request that the amount of retirement pension relating
         to service and periods prior to the date on which he joined the institution in question should be paid to that institution.’
         
         
            
 Under Article of that law, however, the person concerned is given the right to withdraw the request for a transfer of pension
         entitlements accumulated under the Belgian scheme.  Such withdrawal is final and irrevocable.
         
            
 Article 2(1)(5) of the Law defines the term ‘official’ as relating to ‘any member of staff covered by the institution’s
         pension scheme in respect of whom a transfer of pension rights is not governed by a regulation or specific agreement’.  The
         term ‘institution’ is defined in Article 2(1)(1) as covering ‘the Community institutions, the bodies connected with them for
         purposes of application of the Staff Regulations of officials and other servants of the European Union and organisations devoted
         to furthering the Communities’ interests whose pension scheme confers on established officials the right to request the transfer,
         to the pension fund of the institution, pension rights acquired before entry into the service of the institution’.
         
            
 The Law of February governing the transfer of pension rights between the Belgian pension schemes and those of public
         international law institutions (Moniteurbelge, March 2003, ‘the Law’) provides, from that date, in Article 14, that an official leaving the employ of the European
         Communities to take up employment in Belgium may request the transfer to the Belgian scheme of either the actuarial equivalent
         of the pension rights acquired in the Community scheme or the flat-rate redemption value corresponding to contributions made
         under that scheme.
         
            
 Article of the Law provides that that law is to take effect on January and apply to transfer requests submitted
         as from that date.
         
            
 Furthermore, the first paragraph of Article 4(2) of the Royal Decree of December implementing Articles 15, and
         of the Law of July modernising social security and ensuring the viability of the statutory pension schemes (Moniteurbelge, January 1997, ‘the Royal Decree’), provides: 
         ‘In order to claim an early retirement pension in accordance with paragraph the claimant must prove that he has completed
         at least calendar years of employment conferring entitlement to a pension under this Decree, under the Law of July 1990,
         under Royal Decree No 50, under a Belgian scheme for manual workers, employees, miners, seamen or self-employed workers, under
         a Belgian scheme applicable to workers in the public services or of the Société nationale des chemins de fer belges [Belgian
         National Railway Company] or under any other Belgian scheme.’
         
The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred
            
 Mr My, an Italian national born on February 1941, worked for years under the Belgian social security scheme for employees,
         and then from June for the Council of the European Communities as an official until May 2001.
         
            
 In March 1992, Mr My applied to the ONP in accordance with the Belgian Law of May for his pension rights accumulated
         under the Belgian scheme to be transferred to the pension scheme of the Community institutions.  In October 1992, the ONP
         notified him of the transfer value of those rights.
         
            
 However, in October 2000, the Council informed the ONP that Mr My had decided to withdraw his application for transfer of
         his pension rights acquired under Belgian law, in accordance with Article of the Law.  By letter of October to Mr My, the ONP acknowledged receipt of that withdrawal.
         
            
 On October 2000, Mr My applied for an early retirement pension under Article 4(2) of the Royal Decree.
         
            
 By decision of May 2001, the ONP rejected that application on the ground that Mr My had not accumulated the years of
         service required under Article 4(2) of the Royal Decree in order to qualify for an early retirement pension.  In that regard,
         the ONP refused to take into account the years of service completed by Mr My as a Community official as the scheme laid
         down by the Staff Regulations was not referred to in the Belgian legislation.
         
            
 Doubting the compatibility, firstly, of the law and the Staff Regulations, in that they do not guarantee a right to transfer
         pension rights from the Community scheme to the national scheme and, secondly, of Article 4(2) of the Royal Decree, in that
         it does not permit periods of employment within a Community institution to be taken into account, with the principles of free
         movement of workers and of non-discrimination and with the rights guaranteed to citizens of the Union by the EC Treaty, the
         Tribunal du travail de Bruxelles decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question to the Court for a preliminary
         ruling:
         ‘Are national provisions, such as the [Law] and Article 4(2) of the [Royal Decree], or Article of Annex VIII to the
         Staff Regulations … contrary to Articles 2, 3, 17, 18, 39, 40, and EC and Article of Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68:
         
(a)
in that these national provisions and the Staff Regulations do not allow a citizen of the European Union, such as the plaintiff,
               whose professional career has been carried out first in an undertaking or in a national public service and then in the European
               Union civil service, or vice versa, to compare the pension benefits which he would obtain under each scheme, be it national
               or European, through transfer of rights acquired under the other scheme, and, based on this comparison, to request transfer
               of these rights either from the national scheme to the European scheme or, conversely, from the European scheme to the national
               scheme;
            
(b)
in that by providing that the person concerned must expressly waive the right to transfer from the Belgian scheme to the European
               scheme or by causing an administrative practice to that effect, without the aforementioned comparison having been made, these
               provisions mislead or could mislead him;
            
(c)
in that these national provisions do not allow years of service as an official of the European Union to be taken into account
               for the purposes of the grant of an early national pension?’
            
The question referredThe admissibility of the reference for a preliminary ruling
            
 Firstly, the Netherlands Government considers that the reference for a preliminary ruling is inadmissible because of the lack
         of information in the decision for referral as to both the factual circumstances and the legal context of the main proceedings.
         
            
 The Court observes that it is settled case-law that the need to provide an interpretation of Community law which will be of
         use to the national court makes it necessary for the national court to define the factual and legal context of the questions
         it is asking or, at the very least, explain the factual circumstances on which those questions are based, in order to enable
         the Court to give appropriate replies and to give the Member States’ Governments and other interested parties the opportunity
         of submitting their observations in accordance with Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice (see, inter alia, Joined
         Cases C-51/and C-191/Deliège [2000] ECR I-2549, paragraphs and 31).
         
            
 In this case, it is apparent from the observations submitted by the parties to the main proceedings, the Greek Government,
         the Netherlands Government itself and the Commission of the European Communities that the information contained in the decision
         for referral was sufficient to enable them properly to state their views on the question put to the Court.  Furthermore, the
         information contained in the referring judgment was supplemented by the file sent by the national court and by the written
         observations submitted to the Court.   All of these elements, summarised in the Report for the Hearing, were made known to
         the Member States’ Governments and the other interested parties in preparation for the hearing, during which they were able,
         if necessary, to supplement their observations.
         
            
 The objection raised by the Netherlands Government must therefore be dismissed.
         
            
 Secondly, the ONP considers that the reference for a preliminary ruling is inadmissible on the ground that, following the
         entry into force of the Law, it is devoid of purpose inasmuch as, in its view, that law makes it possible for officials
         of the European Communities to request transfer of their pension rights acquired within the Community scheme to the Belgian
         scheme, which permits periods of employment as an official of a Community institution to be taken into account for the purposes
         of entitlement to a national early retirement pension.
         
            
 The Court observes that, although the Law does permit, as the ONP stated at the hearing, periods which led to the payment
         of contributions to the Community scheme to be taken into consideration even where, as in the main proceedings, the person
         involved has not requested the transfer of his pension rights from the Community scheme to the Belgian scheme, it is apparent
         from the file that Mr My lodged his application for an early retirement pension on October 2000, a year before the entry
         into force of the law.  Under Article of that law, it came into force on January and applies only to applications
         for transfer made after that date.
         
            
 Consequently, the objection raised by the ONP must also be dismissed.
         
            
 Finally, the Commission considers that the first two parts of the question, dealing with the transfer of pension rights in
         the strict sense, bear no relation to the main proceedings, which concern only whether the plaintiff’s years of service
         with the Council should be taken into account in respect of his entitlement to an early retirement pension under Belgian law.
          According to the Commission, therefore, only that last part need be answered by the Court.
         
            
 The Court observes that, it is settled case-law that in the context of the cooperation between the Court of Justice and the
         national courts provided for by Article EC it is solely for the national court, before which the dispute has been brought
         and which must assume responsibility for the subsequent judicial decision, to determine in the light of the particular circumstances
         of the case both the need for a preliminary ruling in order to enable it to deliver judgment and the relevance of the questions
         which it submits to the Court.  Consequently, where the questions submitted for a preliminary ruling concern the interpretation
         of Community law, the Court is, in principle, bound to give a ruling (see, inter alia, Case C-415/Bosman [1995] ECR I-4921, paragraph 59, and Case C-35/Arduino [2002] ECR I-1529, paragraph 24). 
         
            
 Nevertheless, the Court has also stated that, in exceptional circumstances, it can examine the conditions in which the case
         was referred to it by the national court, in order to assess whether it has jurisdiction (see, to that effect, Case 244/Foglia v Novello [1981] ECR 3045, paragraph 21).  The Court may refuse to rule on a question referred for a preliminary ruling by a national
         court only where it is quite obvious that the interpretation of Community law that is sought bears no relation to the facts
         of the main action or its purpose, where the problem is hypothetical, or where the Court does not have before it the factual
         or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions submitted to it (see, inter alia, Bosman, paragraph 61, and Arduino, paragraph 25). 
         
            
 As has already been mentioned, in the main proceedings Mr My has never requested transfer of the pension rights he acquired
         under the Community scheme to the Belgian pension scheme, but only that he be granted a national early retirement pension.
          In that regard, Mr My has contested the ONP’s refusal to take into consideration his years of service as an official at
         the Council in calculating the calendar years of employment required under Article 4(2) of the Royal Decree, on which his
         entitlement to that pension depends.
         
            
 It follows that the main proceedings concern only whether Community law requires the Belgian authorities to take into consideration
         Mr My’s periods of employment completed both under the Belgian pension scheme and under the Community scheme.
         
            
 In those circumstances, there is no need to answer the first two parts of the question referred.
         
Reckoning of periods of employment with the European Communities Articles 2, 3, and EC
         
            
 As the Court has already held (Case 126/GiménezZaera [1987] ECR 3697, paragraph 11, and Joined Cases C-78/to C-83/Compagniecommercialedel’OuestandOthers [1992] ECR I-1847, paragraphs and 18), Articles and EC set out general aims made explicit by other provisions of the
         Treaty.  They cannot be applied independently of the more specific provisions of the Treaty mentioned in the question referred.
         
            
 In the same way, Articles and EC serve merely as the legal basis for the adoption, by the Council, of the measures
         necessary to achieve the free movement of workers, guaranteed by Article EC, and the Staff Regulations of Officials of
         the European Communities and the Conditions of Employment of other servants of the Communities.
         
            
 Consequently, Articles 2, 3, and EC have no relevance to the present case.
          Articles and EC
         
            
 Article EC, whilst establishing citizenship of the Union, merely provides that citizens of the Union enjoy the rights conferred
         by the Treaty and are subject to the duties imposed thereby.  It cannot therefore be applied independently of the specific
         provisions of the Treaty which govern the rights and duties of the citizens of the Union.
         
            
 Article EC, which sets out generally the right of every citizen of the Union to move and reside freely within the territory
         of the Member States, finds specific expression in Article EC in relation to the freedom of movement for workers.  To the
         extent that the national court is also seeking an interpretation from the Court of the latter provision, it is appropriate
         to deal first with that point (see, in that regard, Case C‑100/OteizaOlazabal [2002] ECR I-10981, paragraph 26).
          Article EC
         
            
 Article EC confers on the Council the task of instituting a scheme allowing workers to overcome any obstacles which may
         arise for them from national rules in the field of social security.  The Council has in principle fulfilled that obligation
         by adopting Regulation (EEC) No 1408/of the Council of June on the application of social security schemes to employed
         persons, to self-employed persons and to members of their families moving within the Community, as amended and updated by
         Council Regulation (EC) No 118/of December (OJ L 28, p. 1).
         
            
 As the Court held in Case C-411/Ferlini [2000] ECR I-8081, paragraph 41, officials of the European Communities cannot be characterised as workers within the meaning
         of Regulation No 1408/as they are not subject to national legislation on social security, as required under Article 2(1)
         of that regulation, which defines its scope of personal application. 
         
            
 Consequently, Mr My’s situation is not covered either by Article EC or by Regulation No 1408/71.
          Article EC and Article of Regulation No 1612/It is established case-law that an official of the European Communities has the status of a migrant worker.  A Community national
         working in a Member State other than his State of origin does not lose his status of worker within the meaning of Article
         39(1) EC through occupying a post within an international organisation, even if the rules relating to his entry into and residence
         in the country in which he is employed are specifically governed by an international agreement (Joined Cases 389/and 390/Echternach and Moritz [1989] ECR 723, paragraph 11; Case C-310/Schmid [1993] ECR I-3011, paragraph 20, and Ferlini, cited above, paragraph 42).
         
            
 It follows that a worker who is a national of a Member State, such as Mr My, may not be refused the rights and social advantages
         which Article EC and Regulation No 1612/afford him (see Case 152/Forcheri [1983] ECR 2323, paragraph 9; Echternach and Moritz, paragraph 12; Schmid, paragraph 22; and Ferlini, paragraph 43).
         
            
 However, it is apparent from the file that Mr My, who arrived in Belgium at the age of nine, spent his entire working life
         in Belgium, firstly as an employee of various Belgian companies, then, up to retirement age, as an official in the General
         Secretariat of the Council.
         
            
 The provisions of the Treaty relating to the free movement of workers, and particularly Article EC, cannot be applied to
         situations which are wholly internal to a Member State (Joined Cases C-64/and C-65/Uecker and Jacquet [1997] ECR I-3171, paragraph 16, and the case-law cited).
         
            
 In order, nevertheless, to establish the existence of a link to one of the situations covered by Article EC, the Commission
         submitted that the period of employment in an international civil service such as that of the European Union should be equated
         to a period spent in the civil service of another Member State.
         
            
 Such a legal fiction, as is apparent from points to of the Advocate General’s Opinion, finds no support in the provisions
         of the Treaty relating to the free movement of workers.
         
            
 Consequently, Mr My’s situation is not covered either by Article EC or by Article of Regulation No 1612/68.
          Article 11(2) of Annex VIII to the Staff Regulations and Article EC
         
            
 The system for the transfer of pension rights, as set out in Article 11(2) of Annex VIII to the Staff Regulations, seeks by
         enabling the Community scheme to be coordinated with the national schemes to facilitate movement from national employment,
         whether public or private, to the Community administration and thus to ensure that the Communities have the best possible
         chance of being able to choose qualified staff who already possess suitable experience (Case 137/Commission v Belgium [1981] ECR 2393, paragraphs and 12).
         
            
 In particular, the Court has held that, by refusing to adopt the measures necessary for the transfer to the Community pension
         scheme of sums due to be repaid in respect of or the actuarial equivalent of retirement pension rights acquired under the
         national pension scheme, as provided for by Article 11(2) of Annex VIII to the Staff Regulations, a Member State might also
         impede the recruitment by the Community of national officials with a certain length of service, since movement from the national
         administration to that of the Community would entail the loss of pension rights to which they would be entitled if they had
         not accepted employment with the Community (Commission v Belgium, paragraph 19).
         
            
 That is also the case where a Member State refuses to take into account, for the purposes of entitlement to an early retirement
         pension under its own scheme, periods of employment under the Community pension scheme.
         
            
 It is plain that national legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings is likely to impede and therefore to discourage
         employment within an institution of the European Union, inasmuch as, by accepting employment with such an institution, a worker
         who was formerly a member of a national pension scheme risks losing the right to benefit under that scheme from an old-age
         pension to which he would have been entitled had he not accepted that employment.
         
            
 Such consequences cannot be accepted in the light of the duty of genuine cooperation and assistance which Member States owe
         the Community and which finds expression in the obligation laid down in Article EC to facilitate the achievement of the
         Community’s tasks.
         
            
 Consequently, the reply to the question referred must be that Article EC, in conjunction with the Staff Regulations, must
         be interpreted as meaning that national legislation which does not permit years of employment completed by a Community citizen
         in the service of a Community institution to be taken into account for the purposes of entitlement to an early retirement
         pension under the national scheme is contrary to those provisions. 
         
            
 In the light of the foregoing, there is no need to answer the question referred insofar as it concerns the interpretation
         of Article EC.
         
Costs
            
 Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court.  Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the
         costs of those parties, are not recoverable.
         
 On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) rules as follows:
         
Article EC, in conjunction with the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Communities, must be interpreted as
                     meaning that national legislation which does not permit years of employment completed by a Community citizen in the service
                     of a Community institution to be taken into account for the purposes of entitlement to an early retirement pension under the
                     national scheme is contrary to those provisions. 
                  
[Signatures]
      
 –
            
Language of the case: French.
Top  
 