
Avis juridique important
|
61987JJudgment of the Court of May 1988.  -  Commission of the European Communities v Italian Republic.  -  Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations - Exemption from VAT of the services of veterinary surgeons.  -  Case 122/87.  
European Court reports Page Summary
Parties
Grounds
Decision on costs
Operative part
Keywords
++++Tax provisions - Harmonization of laws - Turnover taxes - Common system of value-added tax - Exemptions under the Sixth Directive - Exemption of the provision of care in the exercise of the medical and paramedical professions - Services provided by veterinary surgeons - Chargeable to tax  ( Council Directive 77/388/EEC, Art . ( A ) ( ) ( c ) )  
Summary
Article ( A ) ( ) ( c ) of Directive 77/concerning exemption from value-added tax of care provided in the exercise of the medical and paramedical professions must be interpreted as meaning that the exemption provided for  therein does not extend to services provided by veterinary surgeons . As is expressly indicated in most of the language versions of the directive, that provision relates to care administered to persons and excludes care administered to animals .  
Parties
In Case 122/Commission of the European Communities, represented by Giuliano Marenco and Daniel Calleja, members of its Legal Department, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of G . Kremlis, Jean Monnet Building, Kirchberg,  applicant,  v  Italian Republic, represented by Luigi Ferrari Bravo, Head of the Department of Contentious Diplomatic Affairs, acting as Agent, assisted by Ivo Braguglia, Avvocato dello Stato, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Italian Embassy,  defendant,  APPLICATION for a declaration that by exempting from value-added tax the services provided by veterinary surgeons the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty,  THE COURT  composed of : Lord Mackenzie Stuart, President, G . Bosco, J . C . Moitinho de Almeida and G . C . Rodríguez Iglesias ( Presidents of Chambers ), T . Koopmans, U . Everling, Y . Galmot, C . Kakouris and F . Schockweiler, Judges,  Advocate General : J . L . da Cruz Vilaça  Registrar : H . A . Ruehl, Principal Administrator  having regard to the Report for the Hearing and further to the hearing on March 1988,  after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General delivered at the sitting on March 1988,  gives the following  Judgment  
Grounds
By an application lodged at the Court Registry on April 1987, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action under Article of the EEC Treaty for a declaration that by exempting from value-added tax the services provided by veterinary surgeons in the exercise of their profession the Italian Republic had failed to fulfil its obligations under the Sixth Council Directive ( 77/388/EEC ) of May on the harmonization of the laws of the Member states concerning turnover taxes - Common system of value-added tax : uniform basis of assessment ( Official Journal 1977, L 145, p . ) (" the Sixth Directive ").  By virtue of the combined provisions of Article of Decree No of the President of the Republic of October 1972, as amended by Decree No of the President of the Republic of January ( Gazzetta Ufficiale della Repubblica Italiana ( Official Gazette of the Italian Republic ) No 30, 31.1.1979, p.) and Article of Royal Decree No of July 1934, services provided by veterinary surgeons are exempt from value-added tax ( VAT ).  Considering that exemption to be contrary to the Sixth Directive and in particular Article thereof, the Commission, by letter of June 1985, called upon the Italian Republic, pursuant to the first paragraph of Article of the EEC Treaty, to submit its observations . The Italian Government did not concede that it was in breach of the Treaty and therefore, on June 1986, the Commission delivered to it a reasoned opinion . In the absence of any response thereto the Commission brought the present action .  Reference is made to the Report for the Hearing for a fuller account of the Italian legislation, the course of the procedure and the submissions and arguments of the parties, which are mentioned or discussed hereinafter only in so far as is necessary for the reasoning of the Court .  Article of the Sixth Directive provides :  "The following shall be subject to value-added tax :  . The supply of goods or services effected for consideration within the territory of the country by a taxable person acting as such ... ".  Article provides :  ". 'Taxable person' shall mean any person who independently carries out in any place any economic activity specified in paragraph ... ".  The activities specified include all services .  The Commission maintains that by virtue of the above-mentioned provisions VAT must be charged on the services provided by veterinary surgeons .  In the pre-litigation procedure, the Italian Government relied in its defence upon Article ( A ) ( ) ( c ) of the Sixth Directive, which provides for the exemption of certain services from VAT . It contends that the services provided by veterinary surgeons come within the scope of that provision, which refers to the provision of care "in the exercise of the medical and paramedical professions as defined by the Member State concerned ".  It must be observed, without its even being necessary to consider whether the term "medical and paramedical professions" might include veterinary surgeons, that all the language versions of the part of Article cited above, with the exception of the English and Italian versions, expressly limit the exemption of the provision of care to care administered "to persons" and that that limitation unambiguously excludes care administered to animals from the scope of Article ( A ) ( ) ( c ).  That interpretation is reinforced by the fact that Article ( ) ( b ) of the Sixth Directive allows those Member States which, upon its entry into force, exempted the services provided by veterinary surgeons from VAT ( the Italian Republic did not ) to continue to do so during a transitional period . That transitional provision would be devoid of purpose if Article were to be interpreted as requiring definitive exemption of the same services .  It should be noted, lastly, that at the hearing the Italian Republic finally conceded that the Commission' s action was well founded .  In view of the foregoing considerations, the Commission' s application must be upheld .  
Decision on costs
Costs  Under Article ( ) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs . Since the Italian Republic has failed in its submissions, it must be ordered to pay the costs .  
Operative part
On those grounds,  THE COURT  hereby :  ( ) Declares that by exempting from value-added tax the services provided by veterinary surgeons in the exercise of their profession, the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the Sixth Council Directive ( 77/388/EEC ) of May ( Official Journal 1977, L 145, p . );  ( ) Orders the Italian Republic to pay the costs .  
Top  
 