
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-140/Regina on the application of S.P. Anastasiou (Pissouri) Ltd and OthersvMinister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food(Reference for a preliminary ruling from theHouse of Lords (United Kingdom))
         
«(Approximation of laws – Protection of plant health – Directive 77/93/EEC – Import into the Community of plants originating in non-member countries and subject to special requirements – Special requirements which cannot be fulfilled at places other than that of origin – Affixing of an appropriate origin mark to plant packaging – Official statement that plants originate in an area known to be free from the relevant harmful organism)»
Opinion of Advocate General Stix-Hackl delivered on June Judgment of the Court (Full Court), September Summary of the Judgment
Approximation of laws – Protection of plant health – Directive 77/– Import into the Community of plants originating in non-member countries and subject to special requirements – Special requirements which cannot be fulfilled at places other than that of origin – Affixing of an appropriate origin mark to plant packaging – Authorities empowered to issue phytosanitary certificates – Authorities of the country of origin(Council Directive 77/(as amended by Directives 91/683, 92/and 98/2), Annex IV, Part A, Section 1, items 16.to 16.4) On a proper interpretation of Directive 77/on protective measures against the introduction into the Community of organisms
         harmful to plants or plant products and against their spread within the Community, as amended, inter alia, by Directives 91/683,
         92/and 98/2, the special requirement that an appropriate origin mark be affixed to the plants' packaging, laid down in
         item 16.of Annex IV, Part A, Section I, to that directive, can be fulfilled only in the country of origin of the plants
         concerned. In so far as the affixing of an appropriate origin mark enables exporters to be exempted from the requirements for an official
         statement in the country of origin, laid down in items 16.to 16.4, it would be paradoxical if such a mark, which is intended
         to certify the origin of products, could be issued outside the country of origin, after the plants have been exported. The
         simple fact that item 16.requires the mark to be affixed to the packaging confirms that that requirement must be fulfilled
         at the time of the initial packaging of the products with a view to their dispatch, necessarily before they are transported
         to a non-member country other than the country of origin.Furthermore, the fact that the affixing of the mark exempts exporters from the requirements for an official statement laid
         down in items 16.to 16.precludes the mark from being affixed by the producer of the plants alone, without any possible
         involvement of the authorities empowered to make those official statements.This interpretation of item 16.is not called into question by the amendments which Directive 98/made to items 16.and
         16.and which were designed to render the requirements for an official statement mandatory in every case, including where
         the non-member country of origin is recognised as free from the harmful organisms in question.The phytosanitary certificate required in order to bring those plants into the Community must, therefore, be issued in their
         country of origin by, or under the supervision of, the competent authorities of that country.see paras 60-61, 66-67, 75, operative part
      
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Full Court)September (1)
((Approximation of laws – Protection of plant health – Directive 77/93/EEC – Import into the Community of plants originating in non-member countries and subject to special requirements – Special requirements which cannot be fulfilled at places other than that of origin – Affixing of an appropriate origin mark to plant packaging – Official statement that plants originate in an area known to be free from the relevant harmful organism))
 In Case C-140/02, 
             REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the House of Lords (United Kingdom) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings
            pending before that court between
            
Regina on the application of  
            S.P. Anastasiou (Pissouri) Ltd and Others
and
Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, interveners:Cypfruvex (UK) Ltd   and Cypfruvex Fruit and Vegetable (Cypfruvex) Enterprises Ltd,
 on the interpretation of Council Directive 77/93/EEC of December on protective measures against the introduction into
            the Community of organisms harmful to plants or plant products and against their spread within the Community (OJ L 26,
            p. 20), as amended,  
            inter alia, by Council Directive 91/683/EEC of December (OJ L 376, p. 29) and Commission Directive 92/103/EEC of December
            (OJ L 363, p. 1), and as subsequently amended,  
            inter alia, by Commission Directive 98/2/EC of January (OJ L 15, p. 34),
THE COURT (Full Court),,
 composed of: G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias, President, J.-P. Puissochet (Rapporteur), M. Wathelet, R. Schintgen and C.W.A. Timmermans (Presidents of Chambers), C. Gulmann, D.A.O. Edward, A. La Pergola, P. Jann, V. Skouris, F. Macken, N. Colneric, S. von Bahr, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues and A. Rosas, Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: C. Stix-Hackl, Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
 S.P. Anastasiou (Pissouri) Ltd and Others, by D. Vaughan QC and M. Hoskins, barrister, instructed by P. Clough, solicitor,
               
               
─
 Cypfruvex (UK) Ltd and Cypfruvex Fruit and Vegetable (Cypfruvex) Enterprises Ltd, by M.J. Beloff QC and R. Millett, barrister,
               instructed by M. Kramer and S. Sheppard, solicitors, 
               
─
 the United Kingdom Government, by K. Manji, acting as Agent, P.M. Roth QC and J. Skilbeck, barrister, 
               
─
 the Greek Government, by K. Samoni-Rantou, N. Dafniou and V. Kontolaimos, acting as Agents, 
               
─
 the Commission of the European Communities, by M. Niejahr and K. Fitch, acting as Agents, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of S.P. Anastasiou (Pissouri) Ltd and Others, Cypfruvex (UK) Ltd and Cypfruvex Fruit and
               Vegetable (Cypfruvex) Enterprises Ltd, the United Kingdom Government, the Greek Government and the Commission, at the hearing
               on April 2003,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on June 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By order of December 2001, received at the Court on April 2002, the House of Lords referred to the Court for a preliminary
         ruling under Article EC two questions on the interpretation of Council Directive 77/93/EEC of December on protective
         measures against the introduction into the Community of organisms harmful to plants or plant products and against their spread
         within the Community (OJ L 26, p. 20), as amended,  
         inter alia, by Council Directive 91/683/EEC of December (OJ L 376, p. 29) and Commission Directive 92/103/EEC of December
         (OJ L 363, p. 1) (hereinafter  
         Directive 77/93), and as subsequently amended,  
         inter alia, by Commission Directive 98/2/EC of January (OJ L 15, p. 34). 
         
            
 Those questions were raised in proceedings between a number of producers and exporters of citrus fruit, including S.P. Anastasiou
         (Pissouri) Ltd, established in the part of Cyprus to the south of the United Nations Buffer Zone (hereinafter  
         Anastasiou and Others) and the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (hereinafter  
         the Minister), concerning the importation into the United Kingdom by Cypfruvex (UK) Ltd and Cypfruvex Fruit and Vegetable (Cypfruvex)
         Enterprises Ltd (hereinafter together referred to as  
         Cypfruvex) of citrus fruit originating in the part of Cyprus to the north of the Buffer Zone (hereinafter  
         the northern part of Cyprus), shipped to the Community after a port call in Turkey and accompanied by phytosanitary certificates issued by the Turkish
         authorities. 
         
Relevant provisions
            
 Directive 77/93, in the version in force at the time of the imports at issue, provides as follows in Article 12(1): Member States shall lay down, at least as regards the introduction into their territory of the plants, plant products and
         other objects listed in Annex V, Part B, and coming from non-member countries:
         
(a)
 that these plants, plant products and other objects and their packaging shall be meticulously inspected on an official basis,
         either in their entirety or by representative sample, and that, if necessary, the vehicles transporting them shall also be
         inspected meticulously on an official basis in order to make sure as far as can be determined: 
         
─
 that they are not contaminated by the harmful organisms listed in Annex I, Part A, 
               
 that they are not contaminated by the harmful organisms listed in Annex I, Part A, 
         
─
 in the case of the plants and plant products listed in Annex II, Part A, that they are not contaminated by the relevant harmful
                  organisms listed in that part of the Annex, 
               
 in the case of the plants and plant products listed in Annex II, Part A, that they are not contaminated by the relevant harmful
         organisms listed in that part of the Annex, 
         
─
 in the case of the plants, plant products and other objects listed in Annex IV, Part A, that they comply with the relevant
                  special requirements indicated in that part of the Annex; 
               
 in the case of the plants, plant products and other objects listed in Annex IV, Part A, that they comply with the relevant
         special requirements indicated in that part of the Annex; 
         
(b)
 that they must be accompanied by the certificates prescribed in Article or and that a phytosanitary certificate may not
         be made out more than days before the date on which the plants, plant products or other objects leave the consignor country.
          The certificates prescribed in Articles or ... shall be issued by authorities empowered for this purpose under the International
         Plant Protection Convention, or, in the case of non-contracting countries, on the basis of laws or regulations of the country.
         ... ...
         
            
 Article of Directive 77/93, a provision relating to the import of products from non-member countries, thus refers to Articles
         and which, like Article 6, concern in principle plants, plant products and other objects originating within the Community.
         
         
            
 By virtue of Article 7(1) of Directive 77/93, a phytosanitary certificate may be issued where it is considered, on the basis
         of the examination laid down in Article 6(1) and (2), that the conditions laid down in those two paragraphs are fulfilled.
         
         
            
 According to Article 8(1) of Directive 77/93, Member States shall lay down that the plants, plant products and other objects
         listed in Annex V, Part A, which are to be introduced into their territory from another Member State must be exempted from
         a further inspection complying with Article of that directive if they are accompanied by a phytosanitary certificate from
         a Member State. 
         
            
 Article 6(1) of Directive 77/provides: Member States shall lay down, at least in respect of the introduction into another Member State of the plants, plant products
         and other objects listed in Annex V, Part A, that the latter and their packaging shall be meticulously examined on an official
         basis, either in their entirety or by representative sample, and that, if necessary, the vehicles transporting them shall
         also be officially examined in order to make sure:
         
(a)
 that they are not contaminated by the harmful organisms listed in Annex I, Part A; 
         
(b)
 in the case of the plants and plant products listed in Annex II, Part A, that they are not contaminated by the relevant harmful
         organisms listed in that part of the Annex; 
         
(c)
 in the case of the plants, plant products and other objects listed in Annex IV, Part A, that they comply with the relevant
         special requirements indicated in that part of the Annex.
         
            
 Article 6(4) of Directive 77/adds that the official examinations referred to,  
         inter alia, in Article 6(1) are to be made regularly on the producer's premises, preferably at the place of production, and must extend
         to the plants or plant products grown, produced or used by the producer or otherwise present on his premises as well as to
         the growing medium used there. 
         
            
 Article 9(1) of Directive 77/states: In the case of plants, plant products or other objects to which special requirements laid down in Annex IV, Part A, apply,
         the official phytosanitary certificate required pursuant to Article shall have been issued in the country in which the plant,
         plant products and other objects originate, save:
         
─
 in the case of wood, if ... 
          in the case of wood, if ... 
         
─
 in other cases, to the extent that the special requirements laid down in Annex IV, Part A, can be fulfilled also at places
            other than that of origin.
          in other cases, to the extent that the special requirements laid down in Annex IV, Part A, can be fulfilled also at places
         other than that of origin.
         
            
 The citrus fruit at issue in the main proceedings, which originates in the northern part of Cyprus, falls within the category
         of  
         fruits of  
         Citrus   L.,  
         Fortunella Swingle,  
         Poncirus Raf., and their hybrids, originating in third countries.  Those products are among the plants, plant products and other objects originating in third countries listed in Annex V,
         Part B, to Directive 77/93.  As such, they must undergo a phytosanitary inspection.  They are also at risk of contamination
         by harmful organisms listed in Annexes I and II to Directive 77/93. 
         
            
 Furthermore, they are referred to in Annex IV, Part A, Section I, to Directive 77/93.  Their introduction into, and movement
         within, the entire territory of the Member States are therefore conditional upon compliance with the relevant special requirements
         within the meaning of Article of that directive. 
         
            
 Those special requirements are set out in items 16.to 16.of Annex IV, Part A, Section I, to Directive 77/93, of which
         the version in force at the time of the imports at issue in the main proceedings was laid down by Directive 92/(hereinafter
          
         items 16.to 16.4). 
         
            
 Item 16.provides  that fruits of  
         Citrus   L.,  
         Fortunella   Swingle,  
         Poncirus   Raf. and their hybrids originating in third countries must be  
         free from peduncles and leaves and that the packaging must bear  
         an appropriate origin mark. 
         
            
 Items 16.2(a), 16.3(a) and 16.4(a) provide that, if those products originate in third countries where the harmful organisms
         covered by the items are known to occur, they must, in addition, be covered by an  
         official statement ... that the fruits originate in areas known to be free from [those organisms].  If that first requirement cannot be met, items 16.2(b) and (c), 16.3(b) and (c) and 16.4(b), (c) and (d) require the products
         to be covered by an  
         official statement that no symptoms of those organisms have been observed at the place of production or in its immediate vicinity during a defined
         period or, if that condition cannot be satisfied either, that the fruits have been subjected to appropriate treatment against
         the relevant organisms. 
         
            
 After the time of the facts at issue in the main proceedings, Directive 98/amended items 16.to 16.3, in particular replacing
         item 16.with two items, 16.and 16.3a (hereinafter  
         items 16.to 16.3a as amended).  An official statement that fruits of  
         Citrus   L.,  
         Fortunella   Swingle,  
         Poncirus   Raf. and their hybrids originating in third countries are free from the harmful organisms referred to in those items is now
         required prior to all imports into the Community, even where the products originate in a country recognised as being free
         from those organisms ─ which is the case with Cyprus by virtue of Commission Decision 98/83/EC of January recognising
         certain third countries and certain areas of third countries as being free of  
         Xanthomonas campestris (all strains pathogenic to Citrus),  
         Cercospora angolensis Carv. and Mendes and  
         Guignardia citricarpa Kiely (all strains pathogenic to Citrus) (OJ L 15, p. 41). 
         
            
 Council Directive 2000/29/EC of May on protective measures against the introduction into the Community of organisms
         harmful to plants or plant products and against their spread within the Community (OJ L 169, p. 1) has replaced Directive
         77/93, essentially consolidating it, without affecting the content of items 16.to 16.as amended. 
         The main proceedings and the questions submitted for a preliminary ruling
            
 By judgment of July in Case C-432/Anastasiou and Others [1994] ECR I-3087, the Court, ruling on questions referred to it by the High Court of Justice of England and Wales (Queen's
         Bench Division), held that Directive 77/precludes acceptance by the national authorities of a Member State, when citrus
         fruit is imported from the northern part of Cyprus, of phytosanitary certificates issued by authorities other than the competent
         authorities of the Republic of Cyprus. 
         
            
 Following that judgment, exporters, who were shipping citrus fruit originating in the northern part of Cyprus to the United
         Kingdom under cover of phytosanitary certificates issued by officials of the  
         Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus rather than by the competent authorities of the Republic of Cyprus, concluded an agreement with a company established in
         Turkey, which provided that citrus fruit originating in the northern part of Cyprus covered by phytosanitary certificates
         issued by officials of the  
         Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus would first be shipped to Turkey.  Under the agreement, the ship was to put in to a Turkish port for less than hours and
         then, without the cargo being unloaded or imported, continue its voyage to the United Kingdom, the cargo covered by a phytosanitary
         certificate issued by the Turkish authorities following its inspection on board the ship. 
         
            
 Anastasiou and Others applied for an order restraining the Minister from allowing into the United Kingdom citrus fruit imported
         in those circumstances. 
         
            
 Following refusal of their application at first instance, by judgment of May 1995, and then on appeal, by order of April
         1996, Anastasiou and Others brought a further appeal before the House of Lords, which referred to the Court for a preliminary
         ruling several questions seeking essentially to establish whether, and if so, under what conditions, Directive 77/permits
         a Member State to accept a phytosanitary certificate drawn up by the authorities of a non-member consignor country which is
         not the plants' country of origin, where those plants are subject to special requirements by virtue of Annex IV, Part A, Section
         I, to that directive. 
         
            
 By judgment of July in Case C-219/Anastasiou and Others [2000] ECR I-5241, the Court ruled that Directive 77/permits Member States to admit into their territory plants originating
         in a non-member country which are subject to the issue of a phytosanitary certificate dealing,  
         inter alia, with compliance with special requirements where, in the absence of a certificate issued by the authorities empowered to
         issue certificates in the plants' country of origin, the plants are accompanied by a certificate issued in a non-member country
         from which they do not originate, provided that: 
         
─
 the plants have been imported into the territory of the country where checks have taken place before being exported to the
            Community; 
          the plants have been imported into the territory of the country where checks have taken place before being exported to the
         Community; 
         
─
 the plants have remained in that country for such time and under such conditions as to enable the proper checks to be completed,
            and 
          the plants have remained in that country for such time and under such conditions as to enable the proper checks to be completed,
         and 
         
─
 the plants are not subject to special requirements that can only be satisfied in their place of origin. 
          the plants are not subject to special requirements that can only be satisfied in their place of origin. 
         
            
 The Court also held in that judgment that it is not for the Member State concerned to take account of the reasons for which
         a phytosanitary certificate has not been issued in the country of origin of the plants in determining whether the certificate
         complies with the requirements of Directive 77/93. 
         
            
 When the House of Lords resumed its consideration of the case, Anastasiou and Others argued before it that the citrus fruit
         at issue in those proceedings was indeed subject to the special requirement, laid down in item 16.1, that its packaging must
         bear an appropriate origin mark which, in their submission, could be satisfied only in the country of origin, so that the
         Minister was not entitled to accept the phytosanitary certificate issued by the Turkish authorities.  The parties then made
         submissions concerning the effects on the interpretation of item 16.of the amendment of items 16.and 16.by Directive
         98/2. 
         
            
 The House of Lords took the view that the judgment in Case C-219/Anastasiou and Others did not help it to answer the question, decisive for the outcome of the main proceedings, whether the appropriate origin
         mark referred to in item 16.could be affixed at a place other than the plants' place of origin, while observing that the
         Advocate General had proposed in his Opinion that the Court should hold that not to be permissible.  It therefore decided
         to stay proceedings once more and to refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
         
1.
 Whether, where citrus fruit originating in one third country has been shipped to another third country, the special requirement
         that the packaging shall bear an appropriate origin mark pursuant to item 16.of [Annex IV, Part A, Section I, to] Directive
         77/93/EEC, now Directive 2000/29/EC, can only be fulfilled in the country of origin or whether it may alternatively be fulfilled
         in such other third country. 
         
2.
 Whether the official statement required by items 16.to 16.of [Annex IV, Part A, Section I, to] Directive 2000/29/EC as
         to the country of origin must be made by an official in the country of origin or whether it may be made by an official in
         such other third country.
         
Consideration of the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 By the questions submitted, which it is appropriate to consider together, the national court seeks to ascertain, first, whether
         Directive 77/may be interpreted as allowing a phytosanitary certificate to be issued by the authorities of a non-member
         country which is not the plants' country of origin when the plants are subject to the special requirement that their packaging
         is to bear an appropriate origin mark, in accordance with item 16.1, and second, whether the amendments made to items 16.and 16.of Directive 77/by Directive 98/affect that interpretation. 
          Observations submitted to the Court
         
            
 Anastasiou and Others, the Greek Government and the Commission submit that the special requirement that the plants' packaging
         is to bear an appropriate origin mark, just as the special requirement prescribing an official statement as to their origin,
         is intended to provide a greater degree of protection than that resulting from the mere issue of a phytosanitary certificate
         by the authorities of the non-member country from which the plants are dispatched by making it possible to trace contamination
         back to its source and facilitating cooperation between the importing Member State and the non-member country of origin. 
         Those requirements can therefore be satisfied only if the formalities which they prescribe are carried out by the official
         authorities of the products' country of origin, and not by authorities of another non-member country, which would rely solely
         on invoices or transport documents. 
         
            
 Anastasiou and Others, the Greek Government and the Commission argue that, even after Directive 98/amended items 16.and
         16.and thereby widened the cases in which an  
         official statement is required, the special requirement prescribing an official statement as to the products' origin, laid down by items 16.to 16.3a as amended, does not duplicate the special requirement relating to an origin mark, laid down by item 16.as amended.
          That widening provides additional protection by ensuring that the phytosanitary certificate accompanying the plants provides
         a permanent record of their origin, whereas the origin mark affixed to the packaging may be lost if the packaging is damaged.
          Therefore, it is not possible to conclude from the amendments made by Directive 98/2, in effect by contrary inference, that
         the requirement laid down in item 16.may be satisfied at a place other than that of origin. 
         
            
 The Greek Government points out that, in any event, the Court held in paragraph of the judgment in Case C-432/Anastasiou and Others that administrative cooperation was excluded with the authorities of an entity such as that established in the northern part
         of Cyprus, which is recognised neither by the Community nor by the Member States.  In those circumstances, phytosanitary certificates
         issued by the authorities of that entity cannot be accepted by the Member States. 
         
            
 Cypfruvex and the United Kingdom Government contend, on the other hand, that the special requirements referred to in the questions
         submitted for a preliminary ruling may be satisfied in any non-originating third country, as the Court held in Case C-219/Anastasiou and Others. 
         
            
 That is quite common in international trade, in accordance with an established practice which, moreover, conforms with Article
         12(1)(b) of Directive 77/93.  Under that provision, where plants have left the country of origin more than days before
         they leave the consignor country, the phytosanitary certificate must be issued by the authorities of the consignor country.
         
         
            
 In the submission of Cypfruvex and the United Kingdom Government, the words  
         can be fulfilled in Article 9(1) of Directive 77/should be interpreted as meaning that an inspector in a non-member country other than
         the country of origin must be able to carry out the required checks.  There is no doubt that such an inspector is capable
         of verifying that a consignment bears an origin mark.  The check is carried out under the same conditions as for the other
         special requirement referred to in item 16.1, relating to the absence of peduncles and leaves. 
         
            
 It is for the authorities of the non-member country issuing the phytosanitary certificate to determine how that check is to
         be carried out and to determine whether or not a mark is appropriate.  While the Member States admittedly may not rely directly
         on the involvement of the authorities of the  
         Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus in the phytosanitary procedure, they may, on the other hand, cooperate with the Turkish authorities which, for their part,
         can certify in point of fact that the special requirements have been satisfied in the northern part of Cyprus. 
         
            
 The fact that no official involvement of the inspector in the affixing of the mark is necessary is reinforced by the new requirements
         introduced by Directive 98/2, which has laid down that an  
         official statement as to the origin of the products must, in all cases, be provided, in addition to the requirement set out in item 16.1, whose
         wording was not changed.  The alteration made by that new directive confirms that the two special requirements, origin mark
         and official statement, serve different purposes. 
         
            
 With regard to the special requirement prescribing an official statement as to the products' origin, Cypfruvex and the United
         Kingdom Government state that Cyprus, as a geographical and not a political entity, is a country recognised as being free
         from the diseases referred to in Directive 77/and that accordingly only items 16.2(a), 16.3(a) and 16.4(a) are to be examined
         for the purposes of the question referred.  Those items, unlike items 16.2(b) and (c), 16.3(b) and (c) and 16.4(b) to (d),
         do not require the official statement to be made in the country of origin.  They merely require that the country to which
         the official statement relates be one which is recognised as being disease-free.  Such a statement may therefore be made in
         a non-member country other than the country of origin, and that can be done all the more easily because, since 1998, the Commission
         has been formally declaring certain areas to be recognised as free from diseases or harmful organisms. 
         
            
 The United Kingdom Government submits that the answer to the second question should therefore be that the official statement
         referred to in items 16.to 16.may be made by authorities of a non-member country other than the country of origin where
         the country of origin has been declared free from the pests or diseases referred to in those items by a Commission decision
         adopted in accordance with Article 16a of Directive 77/93. 
          The request that the oral procedure be reopened
         
            
 By letter of June 2003, Cypfruvex asked for the oral procedure to be reopened, stating that, if the Court were to follow
         the Opinion of the Advocate General, the case would be dealt with on the basis of an argument not debated between the parties.
          Cypfruvex submits in particular that in considering, at points to of her Opinion, that the most appropriate place for
         verification of the special requirements applicable to the citrus fruit at issue in the main proceedings was its place of
         production, the Advocate General failed to deal with the question whether that verification may be carried out at places other
         than that of origin, the sole question debated by the parties. 
         
            
 The Court may of its own motion, on a proposal from the Advocate General or at the request of the parties, order that the
         oral procedure be reopened, in accordance with Article of its Rules of Procedure, if it considers that it lacks sufficient
         information, or that the case must be dealt with on the basis of an argument which has not been debated between the parties
         (see Joined Cases C-270/and C-271/Deutsche Post [2000] ECR I-929, paragraph 30, and Case C-299/Philips [2002] ECR I-5475, paragraph 20). 
         
            
 That is not the position here.  The question whether the special requirements applicable to the citrus fruit at issue in the
         main proceedings may be satisfied at places other than their place of origin was fully debated between the parties during
         both the written procedure and the oral procedure. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Court, after hearing the Advocate General, finds that Cypfruvex's request discloses no reason
         rendering it appropriate or necessary to reopen the oral procedure.  The request must accordingly be rejected. 
          The Court's answer
         
            
 The Court held in Case C-219/Anastasiou and Others that Directive 77/permits Member States to admit into their territory plants originating in a non-member country which
         are subject to the issue of a phytosanitary certificate dealing,  
         inter alia, with compliance with special requirements where, in the absence of a certificate issued by the authorities empowered to
         issue certificates in the plants' country of origin, the plants are accompanied by a certificate issued in a non-member country
         from which they do not originate, provided, in particular, that the plants are not subject to special requirements that can
         only be satisfied in their place of origin. 
         
            
 In so deciding, the Court did not rule on the question whether the special requirements applicable to the citrus fruit at
         issue in the main proceedings, that is to say those laid down in item 16.1, could be fulfilled at places other than the fruit's
         place of origin. 
         
            
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling by the House of Lords in the present case, stated by it to require answering
         in order for it to dispose of the main proceedings, are therefore new for the Court and should accordingly be examined. 
         
            
 First, the questions submitted must be analysed in the light of the objectives pursued by Directive 77/and the importance
         which it attributes to the issue of phytosanitary certificates when plants subject to that formal requirement come from non-member
         countries. 
         
            
 It is stated in the first three recitals in the preamble to Directive 77/that  
         plant production is very important to the Community, that  
         plant production yields are consistently reduced through the effects of harmful organisms and that  
         the protection of plants against such organisms is absolutely necessary.  The 10th recital in the preamble adds that  
         the presence of some of these harmful organisms, when plants or plant products are introduced from countries in which these
         organisms occur, cannot be effectively checked [and that] it is therefore necessary ... to provide for special checks to be
         made in the producer countries.  The 16th to 20th recitals state that plant-health checks carried out in the Member State of destination must be gradually
         limited so far as concerns plants from other Member States, whereas the introduction of plants from non-member countries will
         have to remain subject to plant-health checks. 
         
            
 Directive 77/is thus designed, in particular, to ensure a high level of phytosanitary protection against the bringing into
         the Community of harmful organisms in produce imported from non-member countries.  The common system of protection established
         in this regard by Directive 77/is based essentially on a system of checks which are carried out by experts lawfully empowered
         for that purpose by the government of the exporting country and guaranteed by the issue of the appropriate phytosanitary certificate.
          Checks carried out by importing Member States at the border have significant limitations and, in any event, cannot take the
         place of phytosanitary certification (see Case C-432/Anastasiou and Others, paragraphs and 62, and Case C-219/Anastasiou and Others, paragraph 22). 
         
            
 The issue of phytosanitary certificates, which is prescribed by Article 12(1) of Directive 77/for the bringing into the
         Community of plants listed in Annex V, Part B, to that directive coming from non-member countries, thus constitutes the fundamental
         procedural requirement enabling the objectives of the directive to be met with regard to those products. 
         
            
 Since that procedural requirement is fundamental in nature, the Member States may accept phytosanitary certificates issued
         by a non-member country which is not the products' country of origin under certain conditions only (Case C-219/Anastasiou and Others, paragraphs and 37).  Those conditions, compliance with which can be checked by the importing Member State by reference
         to the shipping documents, have the effect of restricting the possibilities for issue of phytosanitary certificates by non-member
         countries other than the country of origin, and ensure cooperation between the exporting State and the importing Member State
         (Case C-219/Anastasiou and Others, paragraph 37). 
         
            
 It follows from those initial considerations that phytosanitary certificates issued by a non-member country other than the
         country of origin do not benefit from a presumption of accuracy comparable to that attaching to certificates issued in the
         plants' country of origin. 
         
            
 Second, it is apparent from the provisions of Article 9(1) of Directive 77/93, which are applicable to the citrus fruit at
         issue in the main proceedings, that that directive seeks to secure an additional level of protection, identical throughout
         the territory of the Member States, for certain categories of plants potentially affected by harmful organisms. 
         
            
 Article 9(1) of Directive 77/imposes specific requirements for the categories of plants listed in Annex IV, Part A to that
         directive, seeking to ensure, in their regard, a level of protection additional to that resulting from Article 12(1) of the
         directive. 
         
            
 Directive 92/103, which enacted the version of Annex IV to Directive 77/in force at the time of the facts of the main proceedings,
         thus states in the third recital in its preamble that that annex lists  
         special requirements which are to be met in order to have better guarantees of freedom from the abovementioned harmful organisms. 
         
            
 In contrast to Article 12(1) of Directive 77/93, which allows a non-member country other than the country of origin to issue
         a phytosanitary certificate, Article 9(1) of that directive provides that phytosanitary certificates required for plants listed
         in Annex IV, Part A, to the directive must in principle be issued in the plants' country of origin. 
         
            
 Article 9(1) of Directive 77/does not constitute an exception to a general rule laid down in Article 12(1), but a separate
         rule, applicable to certain plant categories listed in an annex other than Annex V, Part B, to the directive.  This rule is
         intended to ensure that the special requirements prescribed in Annex IV, Part A, will be checked and fulfilled, at the time
         of issue of the phytosanitary certificate, in the country of origin of the plants concerned.  A restrictive interpretation
         of Article 9(1) of Directive 77/and of the special requirements in Annex IV, Part A, to which it refers would therefore
         be contrary to that objective. 
         
            
 On the other hand, the provision of Article 9(1) of Directive 77/stating that the official phytosanitary certificate required
         must be issued in the country of origin  
         save ... to the extent that the special requirements laid down in Annex IV, Part A, can be fulfilled also at places other
         than that of origin constitutes an exception to the rule requiring the certificate to be issued in the country of origin.  It must therefore
         be interpreted restrictively. 
         
            
 It follows from this second set of considerations that the only special requirements that may be fulfilled at places other
         than that of origin, within the meaning of the foregoing provision of Article 9(1) of Directive 77/93, are requirements which
         may be met under conditions for ensuring plant health as satisfactory as those at the plants' place of origin. 
         
            
 Third, analysis of items 16.to 16.4, which relate to the special requirements applicable to citrus fruit originating in
         non-member countries, highlights the special importance of the requirement to affix an appropriate origin mark to the packaging
         of products where they come from a country known to be free from the harmful organisms specified. 
         
            
 It is clear from the documents before the Court and not in dispute that, even before Directive 98/entered into force, Cyprus
         was a non-member country known to be free from the harmful organisms referred to in items 16.to 16.liable to contaminate
         that fruit.  Consequently, the only special requirements applicable to the citrus fruit as issue in the main proceedings are
         those, laid down in item 16.1, that it be  
         free from peduncles and leaves and that an  
         appropriate origin mark be affixed to its packaging. 
         
            
 As all the parties to the main proceedings and the national court have pointed out, the first of those requirements can be
         satisfied on the basis of a visual inspection which may be carried out in a non-member country other than that from which
         the products originate under the same conditions as in the country of origin. 
         
            
 Thus, the only way of establishing that the citrus fruit in fact comes from a country or area known to be free from the harmful
         organisms referred to in items 16.to 16.is to check that the second requirement, relating to the affixing of an appropriate
         origin mark to the packaging, has been fulfilled.  This special requirement constitutes the only guarantee, for the Member
         State importing the plants, that they are  
         a priori free from those harmful organisms and that they may accordingly be exempted from the requirements for an official statement
         in the country of origin, laid down in items 16.to 16.4.  It therefore does not have the same objective or import as the
         special requirement relating to the absence of peduncles and leaves and consequently cannot be interpreted like the latter
         on the sole ground that they are both laid down in the same item (16.1). 
         
            
 In so far as the affixing of an appropriate origin mark enables exporters to be exempted from the requirements for an official
         statement in the country of origin, laid down in items 16.to 16.4, it would be paradoxical if such a mark, which is intended
         to certify the origin of products, could be issued outside the country of origin, after the plants have been exported.  The
         simple fact that item 16.requires the mark to be affixed to the packaging confirms that that requirement must be fulfilled
         at the time of the initial packaging of the products with a view to their dispatch, necessarily before they are transported
         to a non-member country other than the country of origin. 
         
            
 Furthermore, the fact that the affixing of the mark exempts exporters from the requirements for an official statement laid
         down in items 16.to 16.precludes the mark from being affixed by the producer of the plants alone, without any possible
         involvement of the authorities empowered to make those official statements.  This interpretation is borne out by Article 9(1)
         of Directive 77/93, in so far as it establishes a link between issue of the  
         official phytosanitary certificate and fulfilment of the special requirements laid down in Annex IV, Part A, to that directive. 
         
            
 The arguments of the United Kingdom Government and Cypfruvex that the special requirement relating to an appropriate origin
         mark could be fulfilled in a non-member country other than the country of origin, on the basis of a check as to the mark's
         validity by the inspector empowered in that other country to draw up the phytosanitary certificate, cannot be upheld. 
         
            
 First, such an analysis of item 16.1, interpreting it as requiring merely a subsequent check that the packaging bears an appropriate
         origin mark, is contrary to the purpose of that item, which requires actual performance of that marking requirement.  Second,
         the inspector responsible for issuing the phytosanitary certificate in that other country is not in the same situation as
         his counterpart in the country of origin for the purpose of detecting any falsification of the origin mark designed to derive
         improper advantage from a satisfactory phytosanitary finding as to the country of origin, inasmuch as he will be able to act
         on the basis only of invoices or transport or dispatch documents.  Finally, the cooperation which the competent authorities
         of the importing Member State build up with those of a non-member country other than the country from which the imported plants
         originate cannot establish itself under conditions as satisfactory as in the case of direct cooperation with the competent
         authorities of the country of origin.  Effective cooperation with the latter authorities is especially important, particularly
         in the case of contamination (see, to this effect, Case C-432/Anastasiou and Others, paragraph 63). 
         
            
 Those arguments of the United Kingdom and Cypfruvex are therefore not compatible with the strict interpretation required for
         exceptions to Article 9(1) of Directive 77/and do not allow compliance with the objective pursued by the certification
         of origin envisaged in item 16.1. 
         
            
 Accordingly, the requirement to affix an  
         appropriate origin mark, which alone is capable of reliably certifying the products' origin and exempting the exporter from the special
         requirements laid down in items 16.to 16.4, can be fulfilled only in the products' country of origin, by, or under the supervision
         of, the authorities empowered to issue the phytosanitary certificates required by Directive 77/93.  The question of the quality
         of the cooperation which may be established by the authorities of the importing Member States and those, in the present case,
         of Turkey therefore does not have to be raised. 
         
            
 This interpretation of item 16.is not invalidated, by contrary inference, by the amendments which Directive 98/made to
         items 16.and 16.3. 
         
            
 As stated in the first recital in its preamble, the aim of that directive is  
         to have a better protection for the Community against [the] harmful organisms which are already listed in Council Directive
         77/93/EEC.  The amendments which it introduced were designed to render mandatory in every case the requirements for an official statement
         set out in items 16.to 16.3a as amended, including where the non-member country of origin is recognised as free from the
         harmful organisms in question. 
         
            
 As Anastasiou and Others, the Greek Government and the Commission correctly submit, those new provisions ensure that the phytosanitary
         certificate accompanying the plants can provide a permanent record of their origin, whereas the origin mark affixed to the
         packaging may be lost if the packaging is damaged.  Those amendments are also intended to lay down in more express terms that
         certification of the plants' origin by official authorities is required in all circumstances. 
         
            
 It would be contrary to the objective thereby pursued of strengthening phytosanitary safeguards to construe the official statements
         required by items 16.to 16.3a as amended as capable of being made in a non-member country other than the products' country
         of origin, when those new provisions are designed to extend the requirements for certification of origin laid down by Directive
         77/93.  The wording of each of those items, which have in common that they require an  
         official statement, before indicating, in subparagraph (a), (b) (c) or (d), the various situations to which the statement relates, confirms
         that that requirement must, in all events, be fulfilled in the plants' country of origin. 
         
            
 The fact that Directive 98/also introduced, in items 16.2(a), 16.3(a) and 16.3a(a) as amended, the provision that the country
         of origin is to be recognised as being free from the harmful organisms in question  
         in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 16a of Directive 77/does not alter this conclusion in the slightest.  That new provision is designed to limit the possibility
         of relying on items 16.2(a), 16.3(a) and 16.3a(a) as amended solely to cases where the Community has declared a country free
         from the harmful organisms.  It therefore has neither the aim nor the effect of allowing a non-member country other than the
         country of origin of the products to declare that they in fact originate in such-and-such a country and does not affect the
         requirement that the official statement be made in the country of origin. 
         
            
 It follows from the foregoing that while Directive 98/2, from its entry into force, deprives the requirement for an appropriate
         origin mark of much of its practical significance, it does not provide arguments supporting a different legal interpretation
         of that requirement. 
         
            
 Nor can the other arguments relied upon by the United Kingdom Government and Cypfruvex invalidate the analysis that the affixing
         of an appropriate origin mark and the official statement are requirements whose fulfilment is a matter for the competent authorities
         of the products' country of origin. 
         
            
 First, Article 12(1) of Directive 77/93, which in certain cases allows a consignor country other than the country of origin
         to issue a phytosanitary certificate, by providing that  
         a phytosanitary certificate may not be made out more than days before the date on which the plants ... leave the consignor
         country, is intended solely to shape the conditions governing issue of a phytosanitary certificate by the authorities of the consignor
         country and does not have the effect of enabling those authorities to derogate from the special requirements prescribed by
         Article 9(1) of that directive. 
         
            
 Second, the examples cited of trade practices relating to the importation of wood, allegedly showing that an origin mark may
         validly be affixed by authorities other than those of the country of origin, are not relevant.  Article 9(1) of Directive
         77/lays down for products of that type special requirements other than those before the Court for interpretation. 
         
            
 It follows from all the foregoing considerations that the answer to the questions asked by the national court should be that,
         on a proper interpretation of Directive 77/93, the special requirement that an appropriate origin mark be affixed to the plants'
         packaging, laid down in item 16.1, can be fulfilled only in the country of origin of the plants concerned.  The amendments
         which Directive 98/made to items 16.and 16.of Directive 77/do not affect that interpretation.  The phytosanitary
         certificate required in order to bring those plants into the Community must, therefore, be issued in their country of origin
         by, or under the supervision of, the competent authorities of that country. 
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the United Kingdom and Greek Governments and by the Commission, which have submitted observations to
         the Court, are not recoverable.  Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action
         pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Full Court),
 in answer to the questions referred to it by the House of Lords by order of December 2001, hereby rules: 
         On a proper interpretation of Council Directive 77/93/EEC of December on protective measures against the introduction
            into the Community of organisms harmful to plants or plant products and against their spread within the Community, as amended,
             
            inter alia, by Council Directive 91/683/EEC of December and Commission Directive 92/103/EEC of December 1992, the special
            requirement that an appropriate origin mark be affixed to the plants' packaging, laid down in item 16.of Annex IV, Part
            A, Section I, to that directive, can be fulfilled only in the country of origin of the plants concerned.  The amendments which
            Commission Directive 98/2/EC of January made to items 16.and 16.do not affect that interpretation.  The phytosanitary
            certificaterequired in order to bring those plants into the Community must, therefore, be issued in their country of origin
            by, or under the supervision of, the competent authorities of that country.
Rodríguez Iglesias
Puissochet 
Wathelet 
Schintgen
Timmermans 
Gulmann 
Edward
La Pergola 
Jann 
Skouris
Macken 
Colneric 
von Bahr
Cunha Rodrigues 
Rosas 
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on September 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: English.
Top  
 