
Case C-63/Virginie Pontin
v
T-Comalux SA
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the tribunal du travail d’Esch-sur-Alzette)
(Social policy – Protection of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding – Directive 92/85/EEC – Articles and – Prohibition of dismissal from the beginning of pregnancy until the end of maternity leave – Judicial protection of rights enjoyed by individuals under Community law – Equal treatment for men and women − Directive 76/207/EEC − Article 2(7), third subparagraph – Less favourable treatment of a woman related to pregnancy or maternity leave – Restriction of remedies available to women dismissed during pregnancy)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Social policy – Protection of the safety and health of workers – Pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth
            or are breastfeeding – Directive 92/– Prohibition of dismissal
(Council Directive 92/85, Arts and 12)
2.        Social policy – Male and female workers – Access to employment and working conditions – Equal treatment – Protection of the
            safety and health of workers – Pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding – Directives
            76/and 92/(Council Directives 76/207, as amended by directive 2002/73, Arts and 3, and 92/85, Art. 10)
1.        Articles and of Directive 92/on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health at
         work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding must be interpreted as not precluding
         legislation of a Member State which provides a specific remedy concerning the prohibition of dismissal of pregnant workers
         or workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding laid down in Article 10, exercised according to procedural rules
         specific to that remedy, provided however that those rules are no less favourable than those governing similar domestic actions
         (principle of equivalence) and are not framed in such a way as to render practically impossible the exercise of rights conferred
         by Community law (principle of effectiveness). A fifteen-day limitation period applicable to an action for a declaration of
         nullity and for reinstatement does not appear to meet that condition, but that is a matter for the referring court to determine.
      
(see paras 62, 69, operative part 1)
2.        Article 2, in conjunction with Article 3, of Directive 76/on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for
         men and women as regards access to employment, vocational training and promotion, and working conditions, as amended by Directive
         2002/73, must be interpreted as precluding legislation of a Member State, specific to the protection provided for in Article
         of Directive 92/on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health at work of pregnant
         workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding in the event of their dismissal, which denies a pregnant
         employee who has been dismissed during her pregnancy the option to bring an action for damages whereas such an action is available
         to any other employee who has been dismissed, where such a limitation on remedies constitutes less favourable treatment of
         a woman related to pregnancy. That would be the case, in particular, if the procedural rules relating to the only action available
         in the case of dismissal of such workers did not comply with the principle of effective judicial protection of an individual’s
         rights under Community law, a matter which it is for the referring court to determine. 
      
(see para. 76, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Social policy – Protection of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding – Directive 92/85/EEC – Articles and – Prohibition of dismissal from the beginning of pregnancy until the end of maternity leave – Judicial protection of rights enjoyed by individuals under Community law – Equal treatment for men and women − Directive 76/207/EEC − Article 2(7), third subparagraph – Less favourable treatment of a woman related to pregnancy or maternity leave – Restriction of remedies available to women dismissed during pregnancy)
In Case C‑63/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the tribunal du travail d’Esch-sur-Alzette (Luxembourg), made
         by decision of February 2008, received at the Court on February 2008, in the proceedings
      
Virginie Pontin
v
T-Comalux SA,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, President of the Second Chamber, acting as President of the Third Chamber, P. Lindh, A. Rosas,
         U. Lõhmus and A. Ó Caoimh (Rapporteur), Judges,
      
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: B. Fülöp, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on January 2009,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Ms Pontin, by L. Dupong, avocat, 
–        T‑Comalux SA, by A. Kronshagen and V. Tutak, avocats,
–        the Luxembourg Government, by C. Schiltz, acting as Agent, 
–        the Italian Government, by I. Bruni, acting as Agent, and by W. Ferrante, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by M. van Beek, acting as Agent,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2009,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles and of Council Directive 92/85/EEC of
         October on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health at work of pregnant workers
         and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding (10th individual directive within the meaning of Article 16(1)
         of Directive 89/391/EEC) (OJ L 348, p. 1) and Article of Council Directive 76/207/EEC of February on the implementation
         of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment, vocational training and promotion,
         and working conditions (OJ L 39, p. 40), as amended by Directive 2002/73/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
         of September (OJ L 269, p. 15), (‘Directive 76/207’).
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between Ms Pontin, and her former employer, T-Comalux SA (‘T-Comalux’)
         following Ms Pontin’s dismissal in January 2007.
      
 Legal context
 Community law
 Directive 92/The ninth recital in the preamble to Directive 92/states that the protection of the safety and health of pregnant workers,
         workers who have recently given birth or workers who are breastfeeding must not result in women being treated unfavourably
         on the labour market nor work to the detriment of directives concerning equal treatment for men and women.
      
The purpose of that directive, as stated in Article 1(1) thereof, is to implement measures to encourage improvements in the
         safety and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or who are breastfeeding.
      
A pregnant worker is defined in Article 2(a) of Directive 92/as ‘a pregnant worker who informs her employer of her condition,
         in accordance with national legislation and/or national practice’.
      
Article 8(1) of that directive provides that Member States are to take the necessary measures to ensure that workers within
         the meaning of Article of the directive are entitled to a continuous period of maternity leave of a least weeks allocated
         before and/or after confinement in accordance with national legislation and/or practice.
      
Article of Directive 92/85, headed ‘Prohibition of dismissal’, reads:
      
‘In order to guarantee workers, within the meaning of Article 2, the exercise of their health and safety protection rights
         as recognised under this Article, it shall be provided that:
      
1.      Member States shall take the necessary measures to prohibit the dismissal of workers, within the meaning of Article 2, during
         the period from the beginning of their pregnancy to the end of the maternity leave referred to in Article 8(1), save in exceptional
         cases not connected with their condition which are permitted under national legislation and/or practice and, where applicable,
         provided that the competent authority has given its consent;
      
2.      if a worker, within the meaning of Article 2, is dismissed during the period referred to in point 1, the employer must cite
         duly substantiated grounds for her dismissal in writing;
      
3.      Member States shall take the necessary measures to protect workers, within the meaning of Article 2, from consequences of
         dismissal which is unlawful by virtue of point 1.’
      
Article of Directive 92/provides:
      
‘Member States shall introduce into their national legal systems such measures as are necessary to enable all workers who
         [consider] themselves wronged by failure to comply with the obligations arising from this Directive to pursue their claims
         by judicial process (and/or, in accordance with national laws and/or practices) by recourse to other competent authorities.’
      
 Directive 76/As is stated in Article 1(1) of Directive 76/207, the purpose of that directive is to put into effect in the Member States
         the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment, including promotion, vocational training
         and working conditions.
      
Article 2(1) of Directive 76/provides that that principle means that ‘there shall be no discrimination whatsoever on grounds
         of sex either directly or indirectly by reference in particular to marital or family status’.
      
The first subparagraph of Article 2(7) of that directive provides that the latter ‘shall be without prejudice to provisions
         concerning the protection of women, particularly as regards pregnancy and maternity’. The third subparagraph of Article 2(7)
         states that ‘[l]ess favourable treatment of a woman related to pregnancy or maternity leave within the meaning of Directive
         [92/85] shall constitute discrimination within the meaning of this Directive’.
      
According to Article 3(1)(c) of Directive 76/207, application of the principle of equal treatment means that there is to be
         no direct or indirect discrimination on the grounds of sex in the public or private sectors, including public bodies, in relation
         in particular to employment and working conditions, including dismissals. Under Article 3(2)(a), Member States are required
         to take the necessary measures to ensure that any laws, regulations and administrative provisions contrary to the principle
         of equal treatment are abolished.
      
 National law
Article L. 124-11(1) and (2) of the Luxembourg Code du travail (‘Labour Code’) provides:
      
‘(1)      A dismissal which is contrary to law or is not based on genuine and serious grounds related to the capacity or the conduct
         of the employee or based on the operational requirements of the undertaking, the establishment or the service is wrongful
         and constitutes a socially and economically unacceptable measure.
      
The same applies with regard to a dismissal which is contrary to the general criteria laid down in Article L. 423-1(3).
(2)      Legal proceedings for compensation in respect of the wrongful termination of a contract of employment shall be brought before
         the court having jurisdiction in employment matters within three months of notification of dismissal or communication of the
         reasons, or else be time-barred. If no reasons are given, time shall run from the expiry of the period laid down in Article
         L. 124-5(2).
      
That period shall be validly suspended where a written complaint is submitted to the employer by the employee, his legal representative
         or his trade union. That complaint shall cause a new period of one year to commence and proceedings shall be time-barred at
         the end of that period.’ 
      
Article L. 124-12(4) of that code states:
      
‘In cases in which as a matter of law a dismissal is regarded as null and void the court having jurisdiction in employment
         matters shall order the reinstatement of an employee within his undertaking if he so requests. …
      
In actions for nullity the provisions of Article L. 124-shall apply.’
Book III, Title III, of the Labour Code contains Chapter VII, headed ‘Prohibition of dismissal’, Article L. 337-of which
         reads:
      
‘(1)      An employer may not inform a female employee of the termination of her employment relationship or, where relevant, call her
         to attend a preliminary interview where she has been medically certified as being pregnant or within weeks of her giving
         birth. 
      
Where notice of termination of employment is given before the pregnancy has been medically certified, the female employee
         may, within eight days of notification of the dismissal, supply evidence of her condition in the form of a certificate sent
         by registered post.
      
Any dismissal notified contrary to the prohibition of dismissal as set out in the preceding two paragraphs − and, where relevant,
         any notification to attend a preliminary interview − shall be deemed null and void.
      
Within days of the termination of the contract, the female employee may, by ordinary application, request the president
         of the court exercising jurisdiction in employment matters, as a matter of urgency and in summary proceedings, after the parties
         have been heard or have been duly summoned to attend, to declare the dismissal null and void and order her continued employment,
         and, where appropriate, her reinstatement in accordance with the provisions of Article L. 124-12(4).
      
…’
Article L. 337-of that code reads:
      
‘A female employee who has been dismissed on the ground of her marriage may claim that her dismissal is null and void and
         apply for the employment relationship to continue, in a letter sent by registered post to her employer within two months following
         notification of such dismissal. In that case, the contract of employment shall continue and the worker shall continue to be
         entitled to receive her pay in full.
      
If the female employee has not claimed that her dismissal should be declared null and void and applied for the employment
         relationship to continue within the period specified above, she shall be entitled to the allowances [a severance allowance
         after a minimum of five years’ continuous service for the same employer] referred to in Article L. 124-7(1). She may also
         bring legal proceedings for compensation in respect of the wrongful termination of her contract of employment under Articles
         L. 124-and L. 124-12.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Ms Pontin was recruited by T-Comalux under a full-time contract for an indefinite period starting in November 2005.
      
By registered letter of January 2007, which she received on January 2007, Ms Pontin was informed of her dismissal and
         given a period of notice beginning January and ending March 2007. The reasons for the dismissal with notice are not
         apparent from the order of the referring court.
      
Ms Pontin claims before that court that on January she sent a medical certificate to T‑Comalux by ordinary post. The
         company denies before that court that it received any such certificate.
      
On January 2007, Ms Pontin sent T‑Comalux an e-mail informing it that her ‘health [had] hardly improved’, that she would
         not be able to return to the office the following day and that she would send a medical certificate as soon as possible. 
      
By registered letter dated January 2007, T‑Comalux informed Ms Pontin that she was dismissed with immediate effect ‘on
         grounds of serious misconduct’ consisting of ‘unauthorised absence for more than three days’.
      
By registered letter of January 2007, received by T‑Comalux on January 2007, Ms Pontin stated that she was pregnant.
         She claimed that, as a result, the dismissal of which she had been notified by T‑Comalux was null and void. 
      
As she had not received a reply from T‑Comalux to that letter, on February Ms Pontin brought proceedings before the
         referring court seeking a declaration that her dismissal was null and void.
      
By judgment of March 2007, that court, in a different composition from that in which it delivered the present order for
         reference, held that it did not have jurisdiction to hear Ms Pontin’s application for a declaration that her dismissal of
         January was null and void. According to the court thus composed, Article L. 337-of the Labour Code gives the president
         of the court dealing with labour matters, that is to say, the tribunal du travail (Labour Court), special jurisdiction to
         annul, as a matter of urgency and as a protective measure, a dismissal that has occurred at a time when the female worker
         is pregnant. Thus, Ms Pontin should have applied to the president of that court for a declaration that her dismissal was null
         and void. It is apparent from the case-file lodged at the Court of Justice that Ms Pontin, who does not appear to have been
         represented at that time by a lawyer, had sent her application, in the form of a letter, to the ‘Tribunal du travail – For
         the attention of the President and his fellow Judges’, and had begun her written observations with the salutation ‘Mr President’.
         
      
Ms Pontin did not appeal against that judgment. At the hearing before the Court of Justice, she stated in that connection
         that she had chosen to avoid the risks associated with such an appeal. At the same time, she did not wish to allow the period
         of three months within which an employee may bring an action for damages for wrongful dismissal as provided for in Article
         L. 124-11(1) and (2) of the Labour Code (‘the action for damages’) to expire.
      
By a second action, brought on April 2007, Ms Pontin claimed that the referring court should order T‑Comalux to pay her
         damages. In support of that claim, she argues, inter alia, that both her dismissal with notice of January and her
         subsequent dismissal with immediate effect are contrary to law and thus wrongful under Article L. 124-11. 
      
T‑Comalux contends that ordinary Luxembourg law relating to actions for damages does not apply to a pregnant worker. Under
         Article L. 337‑of the Labour Code, such a worker does not have a choice between an action for nullity and reinstatement
         as provided for in that provision (‘an action for nullity and reinstatement’) and an action for damages, but must provide
         her employer with a medical certificate as evidence of her pregnancy within eight days of the dismissal being notified, as
         required by the second subparagraph of Article L. 337‑1(1) (‘the eight-day period’), and bring the action for nullity and
         reinstatement before the president of the tribunal du travail within days of the contract being terminated, which is the
         period laid down in the fourth subparagraph of Article L. 337‑1(1) (‘the 15-day period’). 
      
According to the referring court, it is to be inferred from the relevant Luxembourg law in this case that a pregnant employee
         who, for whatever reason, even one beyond her control, has allowed the periods of days and days to expire no longer has
         available a legal remedy to challenge her dismissal, so that once those periods have expired the dismissal of such a pregnant
         employee is neither null and void nor wrongful, but is perfectly valid. The order for reference also alludes to case-law of
         the Luxembourg courts, according to which the period within which an action for nullity must be brought begins to run not
         from the receipt of the letter of dismissal but from the time that letter is posted.
      
Against that background, the tribunal du travail d’Esch-sur-Alzette, uncertain whether that national legislation is in compliance
         with Community law and, in particular, with Directives 92/and 76/207, decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the
         following questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Are Articles and of [Directive 92/85] to be interpreted as not precluding the national legislature from making a legal
         action brought by a pregnant employee who has been dismissed during her pregnancy subject to time-limits fixed in advance,
         such as the eight-day period laid down in the second subparagraph of Article [L.] 337-1(1) of the [Luxembourg] Code du travail
         or the 15-day period laid down in the fourth subparagraph of [Article L. 337-1(1)]? 
      
(2)      If the answer to the first question is in the affirmative, are the 8- and 15-day periods to be regarded as being too short
         to allow a pregnant employee who has been dismissed during her pregnancy to take legal proceedings to safeguard her rights?
      
(3)      Is Article of [Directive 76/207] to be interpreted as not precluding the national legislature from denying a pregnant employee
         who has been dismissed during her pregnancy the right to bring an action for damages for wrongful dismissal, which is reserved,
         under Article L. 124-11(1) and (2) of the Code du travail, to other employees who have been dismissed?’
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
It is apparent from the case-file lodged at the Court that, by its three questions, the referring court asks in essence whether
         Directives 92/and/or 76/preclude national legislation such as Article L. 337‑of the Labour Code, which, specifically
         in connection with the prohibition of dismissal of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding
         laid down in Article of Directive 92/85, restricts the remedies available to them to an action for nullity and reinstatement,
         subject to time-limits such as those applying in the main proceedings, and excludes in particular an action for damages. 
      
In that context, the first two questions concern the preliminary point of whether procedural rules such as those contained
         in Article L. 337-comply with the requirements of Articles and of Directive 92/and, in particular, enable all workers
         who consider themselves wronged by failure to comply with the obligations arising from Article to pursue their claims by
         judicial process. The answer to those two questions will affect the answer to the third question, which is in essence whether
         restriction of the legal remedies available in the event of dismissal during pregnancy solely to an action for nullity and
         reinstatement constitutes discrimination within the meaning of Directive 76/207.
      
 Observations submitted to the Court
Ms Pontin contends that a pregnant employee’s entitlement under Luxembourg law to exercise her rights does not meet the criteria
         laid down by Directive 92/in order to ensure genuine and effective protection of the rights of such an employee. So far
         as Directive 76/is concerned, she contends that a difference in treatment as regards dismissal, which denies a pregnant
         employee the option to bring an action for damages, has no reasonable justification and constitutes discrimination between
         a dismissed pregnant woman and other dismissed employees.
      
T‑Comalux submits that Directive 92/does not preclude time-limits such as the eight-day and 15-day periods. Moreover, in
         its view, Directive 76/does not preclude a national legislature from denying a pregnant employee the option to bring an
         action for damages during her pregnancy. A pregnant employee dismissed during her pregnancy, who enjoys protective measures
         specific to her condition, is not subject to discrimination; on the contrary, she enjoys special protection through an action
         for annulment of her dismissal. 
      
The Luxembourg Government contends that the present reference for a preliminary ruling is based on an incorrect interpretation
         of the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings, namely that a female employee who allows the eight-day- and
         15-day periods to expire no longer has the option to bring an action before a court to challenge her dismissal. According
         to that government, where a female employee does not exercise that special right, or is unable to do so after the time-limits
         laid down in that law have expired, she may bring an action for damages. In that context, the time-limits within which an
         action for nullity and reinstatement must be brought are not too short. 
      
The Italian Government submits that periods such as those of and days must be regarded as too short to enable a pregnant
         worker dismissed during her pregnancy to exercise her rights effectively through legal proceedings. It also submits that Directive
         76/precludes a national legislature from introducing discrimination against pregnant workers dismissed during their pregnancy
         by denying them the possibility of bringing an action for damages, even though such an action is available for other workers
         who are dismissed.
      
The Commission of the European Communities submits that Articles and of Directive 92/do not in principle preclude
         national legislation that makes the bringing of an action based on Community law subject to time-limits fixed in advance,
         provided the principles of equivalence and effectiveness are observed. In that regard, it maintains that the 15-day period,
         since it is so short, infringes those principles and hence Articles and 12. Moreover, the Commission contends that Directive
         76/precludes national legislation denying a pregnant employee who has been dismissed during her pregnancy the option to
         bring an action for damages for wrongful dismissal where such an action is available to other employees who are dismissed.
      
 Answer of the Court
 First two questions
As a preliminary point, it should be noted that, unlike the 15-day period, the eight-day period does not appear to constitute
         a procedural time-limit within which a court must be seised. It is, where relevant, for the referring court to determine whether
         it is such a time-limit. As for the first two questions, these relate in essence to the principle of effective judicial protection
         of an individual’s rights under Community law, as reflected in Articles 10(3) and of Directive 92/85. Therefore the application
         of that principle in circumstances such as those at issue in the main proceedings should be examined in the light of a period
         such as the 15-day period. If the referring court were to consider that the eight-day period also constitutes a time-limit
         whose expiry is likely to prejudice the exercise of an individual’s rights, it would be for it to apply, mutatis mutandis, the indications stemming from the present judgment concerning a 15-day period.
      
It should also be noted that the Court must take account, under the division of jurisdiction between the Community judicature
         and the national courts, of the factual and legislative context in which the questions put to it are set, as described in
         the order for reference (see, in particular, Case C‑330/Jobra [2008] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 17, and case-law cited). Therefore, irrespective of the criticism expressed by the Luxembourg
         Government in regard to the interpretation of national law adopted by the national court, this reference for a preliminary
         ruling must be considered in the light of that court’s interpretation of that law (see, by analogy, Case C‑346/Chateignier [2006] ECR I‑10951, paragraph 22, and Joined Cases C‑378/to C-380/Angelidaki and Others [2009] ECR I-0000, paragraph 51). The Court’s answer to the first two questions must therefore be based on the premiss that
         an employee dismissed during her pregnancy has no remedy under Luxembourg law apart from an action for nullity and reinstatement.
         
      
In that regard, it should be noted, first of all, that Article 10(1) of Directive 92/provides that Member States must take
         the necessary measures to prohibit the dismissal of workers coming under that provision during the period from the beginning
         of their pregnancy to the end of the maternity leave referred to in Article 8(1) of that directive, save in exceptional cases
         not connected with their condition which are permitted under national legislation and/or practice and, where applicable, provided
         that the competent authority has given its consent. 
      
In accordance with Article of Directive 92/85, Member States are also required to introduce into their national legal systems
         such measures as are necessary to enable all workers who consider themselves wronged by failure to comply with the obligations
         arising from that directive, including those arising from Article of the directive, to pursue their claims by judicial
         process. Article 10(3) of that directive specifically states that Member States must take the necessary measures to protect
         pregnant workers or those who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding from the consequences of dismissal which is unlawful
         by virtue of paragraph of that article (see Case C‑460/Paquay [2007] ECR I‑8511, paragraph 47).
      
Those provisions, and in particular Article of Directive 92/85, constitute a specific expression, in the context of that
         directive, of the principle of effective judicial protection of an individual’s rights under Community law.
      
It is also apparent from case-law that, although the Member States are not bound under Article of Directive 92/to adopt
         a specific measure, nevertheless the measure chosen must be such as to ensure effective and efficient legal protection, must
         have a genuine dissuasive effect with regard to the employer and must be commensurate with the injury suffered (see Paquay, paragraphs and 49).
      
As regards the principle of effective judicial protection of an individual’s rights under Community law, it is settled case-law
         that the detailed procedural rules governing actions for safeguarding an individual’s rights under Community law must be no
         less favourable than those governing similar domestic actions (principle of equivalence) and must not render practically impossible
         or excessively difficult the exercise of rights conferred by Community law (principle of effectiveness) (see, in particular,
         Case C‑268/Impact [2008] ECR I‑2483, paragraph 46, and case-law cited).
      
Those requirements of equivalence and effectiveness embody the general obligation on the Member States to ensure judicial
         protection of an individual’s rights under Community law. They apply both as regards the designation of the courts and tribunals
         having jurisdiction to hear and determine actions based on Community law and as regards the definition of detailed procedural
         rules (see Impact, paragraphs and 48).
      
The principle of equivalence requires that the national rule at issue be applied without distinction, whether the infringement
         alleged is of Community law or national law, where the purpose and cause of action are similar (Case C-326/Levez [1998] ECR I-7835, paragraph 41). However, that principle is not to be interpreted as requiring Member States to extend their
         most favourable rules to all actions brought in the field of employment law (see Levez, paragraph 42). In order to establish whether the principle of equivalence has been complied with, it is for the national
         court, which alone has direct knowledge of the procedural rules governing actions in the field of domestic law, to determine
         whether the procedural rules intended to ensure that the rights derived by individuals from Community law are safeguarded
         under domestic law comply with that principle and to consider both the purpose and the essential characteristics of allegedly
         similar domestic actions (see Levez, paragraphs and 43, and Case C‑78/Preston and Others [2000] ECR I‑3201, paragraph 49). For that purpose, the national court must consider whether the actions concerned are similar
         as regards their purpose, cause of action and essential characteristics (see, to that effect, Preston and Others, paragraph 57).
      
It is apparent from case-law that in order to decide whether procedural rules are equivalent the national court must establish
         objectively, in the abstract, whether the rules at issue are similar taking into account the role played by those rules in
         the procedure as a whole, the conduct of that procedure and any special features of those rules (see, to that effect, Preston and Others, paragraphs to 63). 
      
As regards the principle of effectiveness, it is apparent from the Court’s case-law that cases which raise the question whether
         a national procedural provision renders the exercise of an individual’s rights under the Community legal order practically
         impossible or excessively difficult must similarly be analysed by reference to the role of that provision in the procedure,
         its conduct and its special features, viewed as a whole, before the various national instances. In that context, it is necessary
         to take into consideration, where relevant, the principles which lie at the basis of the national legal system, such as the
         protection of the rights of the defence, the principle of legal certainty and the proper conduct of the proceedings (see Case
         C‑426/TeleTelecommunication [2008] ECR I‑685, paragraph 55, and case-law cited). 
      
The Court has thus recognised that it is compatible with Community law to lay down reasonable time-limits for bringing proceedings
         in the interests of legal certainty, since such time-limits are not liable to render practically impossible or excessively
         difficult the exercise of rights conferred by Community law (see Case C‑255/Grundig Italiana [2002] ECR I‑8003, paragraph 34, and Case C‑2/Kempter [2008] ECR I‑411, paragraph 58, and case-law cited). As regards limitation periods, the Court has also held that, in respect
         of national legislation which comes within the scope of Community law, it is for the Member States to establish those periods
         in the light of, inter alia, the significance for the parties concerned of the decisions to be taken, the complexities of
         the procedures and of the legislation to be applied, the number of persons who may be affected and any other public or private
         interests which must be taken into consideration (see, to that effect, Case C‑349/Sopropé [2008] ECR I-0000, paragraph 40).
      
Lastly, as is apparent from settled case-law, it is not for the Court to rule on the interpretation of national law, that
         being exclusively for the national court, which must, in the present case, determine whether the requirements of equivalence
         and effectiveness are met by the provisions of the relevant national legislation (see Angelidaki and Others, paragraph 163). However, the Court, when giving a preliminary ruling, may, where appropriate, provide clarification designed
         to give the national court guidance in its interpretation (see Case C‑53/Marrosuand Sardino [2006] ECR I‑7213, paragraph 54; Case C‑180/Vassallo [2006] ECR I‑7251, paragraph 39; and the order of June in Case C‑364/Vassilakis and Others, paragraph 143).
      
It is by reference to those considerations that the referring court’s first two questions must be answered.
      
In that regard, it is apparent from the order for reference that Article L. 337‑of the Labour Code was adopted pursuant
         to Article in conjunction with Article of Directive 92/85.
      
As both the Italian Government and the Commission maintain, and as follows from paragraph above, Articles and of
         Directive 92/do not in principle preclude a national legislature from providing, in respect of the dismissal of pregnant
         workers and workers having recently given birth or breastfeeding, specific legal proceedings that must be brought within time-limits
         laid down in advance. 
      
However, since Member States are responsible for ensuring that rights which individuals derive from Community law are effectively
         protected in each case (see, in particular, Impact, paragraph 45, and case-law cited), the rules governing such proceedings must comply with the requirements laid down in the
         case-law cited in paragraphs to above. 
      
That conclusion is not weakened by the argument put forward by T‑Comalux at the hearing that, unlike an action for damages,
         available where the dismissal is considered ‘wrongful’ within the meaning of the national legislation, or an action available
         in the event of dismissal ‘on account of’ marriage, introduced by Article L. 337‑of the Labour Code (‘action available in
         the event of dismissal on account of marriage’), an action for nullity and reinstatement is available almost automatically,
         irrespective of whether there is wrongful conduct on the part of the employer. Contrary to what that company appears to claim,
         the mere fact that, when implementing Articles and of Directive 92/through the introduction of a specific remedy
         for pregnant workers, a Member State decides – under the option provided for in Article 10(1) – not to provide for exceptions
         to the principle of prohibition of dismissal not connected with the condition of being pregnant, having recently given birth
         or breastfeeding, cannot result in the procedural rules governing that remedy being exempt from the requirements of the principle
         of effective judicial protection of an individual’s rights under Community law. 
      
With regard, first, to whether the principle of equivalence is complied with in the present case, it is apparent from the
         order for reference that both actions in employment law matters mentioned by the referring court, that is to say, an action
         for damages and an action available in the event of dismissal on account of marriage, appear at first sight to be comparable
         to an action for nullity and reinstatement. As stated in paragraph above, it is for the national court to determine whether
         this is so as regards their purpose, cause of action and essential characteristics. 
      
If it emerges that one or more of the actions referred to in the order for reference, or even other national remedies that
         have not been put before the Court, are similar to an action for nullity and reinstatement, it would also be for the referring
         court to consider whether such actions involve more favourable procedural rules. 
      
In that regard, it would be necessary to take into account the fact that an action for nullity and reinstatement appears to
         require the matter to be referred to a specific forum, the ‘president of the court exercising jurisdiction in employment matters’.
         It is apparent from paragraph above that that particular requirement seems to be given a literal and particularly strict
         interpretation. As appears from the facts in the main proceedings, such a requirement is apt to have unfavourable consequences
         for the individuals concerned, particularly in view of the especially short time-limit for bringing the action, making it
         difficult to obtain advice or assistance from a specialist legal adviser.
      
In the event that an action for damages and an action for nullity and reinstatement are regarded as similar, it should be
         noted that the 15-day limitation period applying to the latter action is substantially shorter than the three-month limitation
         period applying to an action for damages. As regards the action available in the case of dismissal on grounds of marriage,
         the relevant period within which a national court must be seised is not apparent from the case-file lodged with the Court.
         That being so, it should be observed that, under Article L. 337-of the Labour Code, a female employee has two months within
         which to request her employer to continue the employment relationship and, if she has not within that period claimed that
         her dismissal is null and void and requested that her employment relationship continue, she is entitled to severance allowances
         and may also bring an action for damages.
      
In the light of the evidence brought before the Court, it does not at first sight appear that procedural rules such as those
         concerning an action for nullity and reinstatement laid down in the fourth subparagraph of Article L. 337‑1(1) of the Labour
         Code comply with the principle of equivalence, although that is a matter for the referring court to determine, taking into
         account the case-law cited in paragraphs 43, and above.
      
As regards, secondly, the principle of effectiveness, it should be observed that, as the Italian Government and the Commission
         have in essence submitted and as is apparent from paragraphs and above, a relatively short period for bringing an action
         seeking reinstatement of an unlawfully dismissed female employee within the undertaking concerned might in principle be regarded
         as legitimate. As T‑Comalux and the Luxembourg Government point out, it may be in the interests of legal certainty, both for
         the dismissed pregnant worker and for the employer, that the opportunity for bringing such actions before a court should be
         subject to a time-bar, particularly in view of the consequences for all of the parties concerned of reinstatement taking place
         after a significant period of time.
      
Hence, in the light of the principle of legal certainty in particular, the requirements of the principle of effectiveness
         do not preclude, in principle, with regard to an action seeking reinstatement of a dismissed pregnant woman with her employer,
         the introduction of a shorter limitation period than that laid down for an action for damages. 
      
However, it should be noted in that regard that, as is apparent from paragraph above, the 15-day period for bringing an
         action for nullity and reinstatement must be regarded as being particularly short, in view inter alia of the situation in
         which a woman finds herself at the start of her pregnancy.
      
In addition, it appears from the case-file that some of the days included in that 15-day period may expire before the pregnant
         woman receives her letter of dismissal and is thus notified of the dismissal. According to an opinion expressed by an association
         of private sector employees on the draft law that inserted Article L. 337‑into the Labour Code, the terms of which are reproduced
         in the order for reference, the 15-day period begins to run, according to the case-law of the Luxembourg courts, from the
         time the letter of dismissal is posted. 
      
The Luxembourg Government, it is true, has pointed out that under Article of the Law of December on restoring rights
         that have been lost as a result of the expiry of a time-limit for bringing legal proceedings (Mémorial A 1986, p. 2745), limitation periods do not start to run if the female employee has not been in a position to act. 
      
However, even if that provision were to limit the effects of that case-law relating to the posting of the letter of dismissal,
         which, where necessary, it is for the referring court to decide, it would however be very difficult for a female worker dismissed
         during her pregnancy to obtain proper advice and, if appropriate, prepare and bring an action within the 15-day period. 
      
Moreover, since, as was noted in paragraph above, the requirement to refer the matter to the ‘president of the court having
         jurisdiction in employment matters’ seems to be given a particularly strict interpretation, a pregnant worker who, for whatever
         reason, has allowed the 15-day period to expire, ceases – as was noted by the referring court – to have a legal remedy available
         in order to assert her rights following her dismissal.
      
In those circumstances, it appears that rules such as those laid down in Article L. 337-1(1) of the Labour Code relating to
         an action for nullity and reinstatement, by giving rise to procedural problems likely to make exercise of the rights that
         pregnant women derive from Article of Directive 92/excessively difficult, do not comply with the requirements of the
         principle of effectiveness. However, that is a matter for the referring court to determine.
      
As follows from paragraphs and above, if that court were to find that the rules at issue in the main proceedings fail
         to comply with the principles of equivalence and/or effectiveness, those rules would not be considered to meet the requirement
         of effective judicial protection of an individual’s rights under Community law, and in particular those conferred by Articles
         and of Directive 92/85.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the first two questions must be that Articles and of Directive 92/must
         be interpreted as not precluding legislation of a Member State which provides a specific remedy concerning the prohibition
         of dismissal of pregnant workers or workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding laid down in that Article 10,
         exercised according to procedural rules specific to that remedy, provided however that those rules are no less favourable
         than those governing similar domestic actions (principle of equivalence) and are not framed in such a way as to render practically
         impossible the exercise of rights conferred by Community law (principle of effectiveness). A 15-day limitation period, such
         as that laid down in the fourth subparagraph of Article L. 337-1(1) of the Labour Code, does not appear to meet that condition,
         but that is a matter for the referring court to determine. 
      
 Third question
By its third question, the referring court asks in essence whether Article of Directive 76/precludes legislation of
         a Member State, such as that introduced by Article L. 337-1(1) of the Labour Code, which denies pregnant workers and workers
         who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding, who are dismissed during their pregnancy, the option to bring an action
         for damages, whereas such an action is available to any other employee who has been dismissed.
      
In that regard, it should be noted that, under the third subparagraph of Article 2(7) of Directive 76/207, inserted in that
         directive by Article 1(2) of Directive 2002/73, any less favourable treatment of a woman related to pregnancy constitutes
         discrimination within the meaning of that directive. 
      
Moreover, it has not been suggested in the context of the present reference for a preliminary ruling that an action for damages
         does not comply with the principle of effective judicial protection of an individual’s rights under Community law.
      
However, according to the referring court, the only remedy open to a pregnant woman dismissed during pregnancy is an action
         for nullity and reinstatement, to the exclusion of all other remedies under employment law, such as an action for damages.
         
      
Therefore, if it emerges, after verification by the referring court on the basis of the information provided in response to
         the first two questions, that an action for nullity and reinstatement does not comply with the principle of effectiveness,
         such an infringement of the requirement to provide effective judicial protection laid down in particular in Articles of
         Directive 92/would constitute ‘[l]ess favourable treatment of a woman related to pregnancy’, within the meaning of the
         third subparagraph of Article 2(7) of Directive 76/207, and should therefore be regarded as discrimination within the meaning
         of Directive 76/207.
      
If the referring court were thus to find there had been such an infringement of the principle of equal treatment, within the
         meaning of Article 3(1) of Directive 76/207, it would have to interpret the domestic jurisdictional rules in such a way that,
         wherever possible, they contribute to the attainment of the objective of ensuring effective judicial protection of a pregnant
         woman’s rights under Community law (see, by analogy, Case 222/Johnston [1986] ECR 1651, paragraph 17; Case C‑185/Coote [1998] ECR I‑5199, paragraph 18; and Impact, paragraph 54). 
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the third question must be that Article 2, in conjunction with Article 3, of
         Directive 76/is to be interpreted as precluding legislation of a Member State, such as that introduced by Article L. 337‑1(1)
         of the Labour Code, which is specific to the protection provided for in Article of Directive 92/in the event of the
         dismissal of a pregnant worker or of a worker who has recently given birth or is breastfeeding, and which denies a pregnant
         employee who has been dismissed during her pregnancy the option to bring an action for damages whereas such an action is available
         to any other employee who has been dismissed, where such a limitation on remedies constitutes less favourable treatment of
         a woman related to pregnancy. That would be the case in particular if the procedural rules relating to the only action available
         in the case of dismissal of such workers do not comply with the principle of effective judicial protection of an individual’s
         rights under Community law, a matter which it is for the referring court to determine. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Articles and of Council Directive 92/85/EEC of October on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements
            in the safety and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding (10th
            individual directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC) must be interpreted as not precluding legislation
            of a Member State which provides a specific remedy concerning the prohibition of dismissal of pregnant workers or workers
            who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding laid down in that Article 10, exercised according to procedural rules specific
            to that remedy, provided however that those rules are no less favourable than those governing similar domestic actions (principle
            of equivalence) and are not framed in such a way as to render practically impossible the exercise of rights conferred by Community
            law (principle of effectiveness). A 15-day limitation period, such as that laid down in the fourth subparagraph of Article
            L. 337-1(1) of the Luxembourg Labour Code, does not appear to meet that condition, but that is a matter for the referring
            court to determine. 
2.      Article 2, in conjunction with Article 3, of Council Directive 76/207/EEC of February on the implementation of the
            principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment, vocational training and promotion, and working
            conditions, as amended by Directive 2002/73/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of September 2002, must be
            interpreted as precluding legislation of a Member State, such as that introduced by Article L. 337-1(1) of the Luxembourg
            Labour Code, which is specific to the protection provided for in Article of Directive 92/in the event of the dismissal
            of a pregnant worker or of a worker who has recently given birth or is breastfeeding, and which denies a pregnant employee
            who has been dismissed during her pregnancy the option to bring an action for damages whereas such an action is available
            to any other employee who has been dismissed, where such a limitation on remedies constitutes less favourable treatment of
            a woman related to pregnancy. That would be the case in particular if the procedural rules relating to the only action available
            in the case of dismissal of such workers do not comply with the principle of effective judicial protection of an individual’s
            rights under Community law, a matter which it is for the referring court to determine.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 