
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-334/Glencore Grain Rotterdam BVvBundesanstalt für Landwirtschaft und Ernährung(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Verwaltungsgericht Frankfurt am Main)
         
«(Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets in cereals – Standing invitation to tender – Cereal products for export to ACP States – Event causing time to begin to run for production of proof of entry for consumption into the State of destination – Second indent of the second subparagraph of Article 8(2) of Regulation (EC) No 2372/and Article 47(2) of Regulation (EEC)
               No 3665/87)»
            
Opinion of Advocate General Mischo delivered on January I - Judgment of the Court (Third Chamber), June I - Summary of the Judgment
Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Cereals – Common wheat – System of standing invitation to tender – Release of the security – Condition – Production of proof of entry for consumption into the State of destination – Time-limit – Whether it is possible to exceed the statutory period in the event of force majeure or the grant of further time (Commission Regulations No 3665/87, Art. 47(2), and No 2372/95, second indent of the second subparagraph of Art. 8(2)) The second indent of the second subparagraph of Article 8(2) of Regulation No 2372/on the issuing of standing invitations
         to tender for the sale of common wheat of breadmaking quality held by the French and German intervention agencies for export
         to certain ACP countries in the 1995/marketing year must be interpreted as meaning that proof of importation of the goods
         into the ACP State or States concerned, which is necessary for release of the security of ECU per tonne, must be supplied,
         in accordance with Article 47(2) of Regulation No 3665/laying down common detailed rules for the application of the system
         of export refunds on agricultural products, as amended by Regulation No 2955/94, within months following the date of acceptance
         of the export declaration, except in cases of force majeure or where the exporter, having acted with diligence in seeking
         to obtain that proof, is unable to submit it within that period and the competent authority has granted an extension of the
         deadline.see paras 44, 48-49, 51, operative part
      
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)June (1)
((Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets in cereals – Standing invitation to tender – Cereal products for export to ACP States – Event causing time to begin to run for production of proof of entry for consumption into the State of destination – Second indent of the second subparagraph of Article 8(2) of Regulation (EC) No 2372/and Article 47(2) of Regulation (EEC)
                  No 3665/87))
               
In Case C-334/01, 
            REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Verwaltungsgericht Frankfurt am Main (Germany) for a preliminary ruling
            in the proceedings pending before that court between
            
 Glencore Grain Rotterdam BV
and
 Bundesanstalt für Landwirtschaft und Ernährung,
on the interpretation of the second indent of the second paragraph of Article 8(2) of Commission Regulation (EC) No 2372/of October on the issuing of standing invitations to tender for the sale of common wheat of breadmaking quality held
            by the French and German intervention agencies for export to certain ACP countries in the 1995/marketing year (OJ L 242, p. 3) and of Article 47(2) of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 3665/of November laying down common detailed
            rules for the application of the system of export refunds on agricultural products (OJ L 351, p. 1), as amended by Commission
            Regulation (EC) No 2955/of December (OJ L 312, p. 5),
THE COURT (Third Chamber),,
composed of: J.-P. Puissochet, President of the Chamber, F. Macken (Rapporteur) and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: J. Mischo, Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
Glencore Grain Rotterdam BV, by B. Festge, Rechtsanwältin, 
               
─
the Commission of the European Communities, by M. Niejahr, acting as Agent, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of Glencore Grain Rotterdam BV and the Commission at the hearing on November 2002,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
By order of July 2001, received at the Court on September 2001, the Verwaltungsgericht Frankfurt am Main (Administrative
         Court, Frankfurt am Main) referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC a question on the interpretation
         of the second indent of the second paragraph of Article 8(2) of Commission Regulation (EC) No 2372/of October on
         the issuing of standing invitations to tender for the sale of common wheat of breadmaking quality held by the French and German
         intervention agencies for export to certain ACP countries in the 1995/marketing year (OJ L 242, p. 3) and of Article
         47(2) of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 3665/of November laying down common detailed rules for the application
         of the system of export refunds on agricultural products (OJ L 351, p. 1), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No
         2955/of December (OJ L 312, p. 5), (
         Regulation No 3665/87). 
         
            
That question was raised in proceedings between Glencore Grain Rotterdam BV (
         Glencore) and the Bundesanstalt für Landwirtschaft und Ernährung (Federal Office for Agriculture and Food;  
         the Bundesanstalt) concerning the latter's refusal to release a part of the security provided by Glencore in the context of a tendering procedure
         relating to the export of common wheat to certain African, Caribbean and Pacific States (
         the ACP States). 
         
Legal background
Community rules
         Regulation (EEC) No 1766/Article 4(1) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 1766/of June on the common organisation of the market in cereals (OJ
         L 181, p. 21), as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 3290/of December (OJ L 349, p. 105), provides
         that the intervention agencies designated by the Member States are to buy in certain types of cereals, including common wheat,
         which are offered to them and have been harvested in the Community, provided that the offers comply with the conditions laid
         down, in particular in respect of quality and quantity. 
         
            
In accordance with Articles and of Regulation No 1766/92, the Commission is authorised to lay down detailed rules concerning
         the procedures and conditions for the taking over and sale of cereals by the Member States' intervention agencies. 
         Regulation (EEC) No 2131/Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2131/of July laying down the procedures and conditions for the sale of cereals held
         by intervention agencies (OJ L 191, p. 76), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 120/of January (OJ
         L 21, p. 1), (
         Regulation No 2131/93) establishes two different tendering procedures, one for the sale of cereals on the Community market and the other for sale
         for export. 
         
            
In both cases, Article 13(4) of Regulation No 2131/provides for the lodging of a security. According to that provision,
         once tenders have been submitted, they may not be amended or withdrawn and they are valid only if they are accompanied by
         proof that the tenderer has lodged the necessary security. 
         
            
Article of Regulation No 2131/provides: 
         
1.
 The securities referred to in this regulation shall be lodged in accordance with Title [III] of Commission Regulation (EEC)
         No 2220/85. 
         
2.
 The security provided for in Article 13(4) shall be released where it covers quantities for which: 
         ...
         
─
the selling price has been paid within the period laid down, and in the case of sales for export and where the price paid
            is less than the minimum price for resale on the Community market, in accordance with Article 5(1), (2) and (3), a security
            covering the difference between those two prices has been lodged. 
         
3.
 The security provided for in the second indent of paragraph shall be released where it covers quantities in respect of which:
         
         ...
         
─
the proof referred to in Article of Regulation (EEC) No 3665/has been provided. However, the security shall be released
            where the operator provides proof that a quantity of at least tonnes of cereal products has left the customs territory
            of the Community on a vessel suitable for sea transport. ... 
         
...
         
5.
 Except in cases of force majeure, the security provided for in the second indent of paragraph shall be forfeited in respect
         of quantities for which the proof referred to in the second indent of paragraph has [not] been provided within the period
         laid down in Article of Regulation (EEC) No 3665/87.
         
Regulation No 2372/Article of Regulation No 2372/provides: Subject to the provisions of this Regulation, the sales of common wheat of breadmaking quality referred to in Article shall
         take place in accordance with the procedure and conditions laid down by Regulation (EEC) No 2131/93.
         
            
Article 4(1) of Regulation No 2372/provides that tenders are admissible only if the tenderer provides written proof that
         he has concluded for the quantity in question, a commercial supply contract for common wheat of breadmaking quality for export
         to an ACP State or to several States within one of the groups of ACP States listed in Annex I to that regulation and if the
         tenders are accompanied by an application for an export licence for the destination in question. 
         
            
Under Article 5(3) of Regulation No 2372/95, the export licence obliges the operator to export to the ACP State or States
         for which the licence application was submitted. 
         
            
Article of Regulation No 2372/is worded as follows: 1. The security lodged pursuant to Article 13(4) of Regulation (EEC) No 2131/must be released once the export licences
         have been issued to the successful tenderers.2. The obligation to export and import into one of the countries of destination listed in Annex I shall be covered by a security
         amounting to ECU per tonne of which ECU per tonne shall be lodged upon issue of the export licence, with the balance
         of ECU being lodged before removal of the cereals.Article 15(2) of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 3002/notwithstanding:
         
─
the amount of ECU per tonne must be released within working days of the date on which the successful tenderer supplies
            proof that the wheat removed has left the customs territory of the Community, 
         
─
the amount of ECU per tonne must be released within working days of the date on which the successful tenderer supplies
            proof of entry for consumption into the ACP State or States referred to in Article 5(3). This proof shall be supplied in accordance
            with Articles and of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 3665/87. 
         
...
         Regulation No 3665/Article 18(1) and (2) of Regulation No 3665/provide: 
         
1.
 Proof that the product has been cleared through customs for release for consumption shall, at the exporter's choice, be furnished
         by production of one of the following documents:
         
(a)
the customs document or a copy or photocopy thereof; such copy or photocopy must be certified as being a true copy by the
         body which endorsed the original document, an official agency of the third country concerned, an official agency of a Member
         State in the third country concerned or an agency responsible for paying the refund; 
         
(b)
a certificate of unloading and release for consumption drawn up by an international control and supervisory agency approved
         by a Member State. The date and number of the customs document of release for consumption must appear on the certificate concerned.
         
         
2.
 If the exporter cannot obtain the document chosen in accordance with paragraph (a) or (b) even after taking the appropriate
         steps or if there are doubts as to the authenticity of the document furnished, proof that the product has been cleared through
         customs for release for consumption may be deemed to have been furnished by the production of one or more of the following
         documents: ...
         
            
Article 47(2) and (4) of Regulation No 3665/state: 
         
2.
 Except in cases of force majeure, the documents relating to payment of the refund or release of the security must be submitted
         within months following the date of acceptance of the export declaration.
         ...
         
4.
 Where the documents required under Article cannot be submitted within the period referred to in paragraph 2, although the
         exporter has acted with all due diligence to obtain them and communicate them within such period, he may be granted further
         time for the production of these documents.
         
Regulation (EEC) No 2220/Article of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2220/of July laying down common detailed rules for the application
         of the system of securities for agricultural products (OJ L 205, p. 5), as amended by Commission Regulation (EEC) No
         1181/of April (OJ L 113, p. 31), (
         Regulation No 2220/85) lays down the rules governing securities to be given,  
          inter alia , under the regulations laying down the common organisation of markets in the cereals sector, unless other rules are laid
         down by those regulations. 
         
            
Pursuant to Article 3(a) of Regulation No 2220/85,  
         
         
a
            
security is an assurance that a sum of money will be paid or forfeited to a competent authority if a particular obligation is not
         met
         . 
         
            
Articles 21, and are worded as follows:  Article Once the evidence laid down by the specific regulation has been furnished that all primary, secondary and subordinate requirements
         have been fulfilled, the security shall be released. Article 1.
 A security shall be forfeit in full for the quantity for which a primary requirement is not fulfilled, unless force majeure
         prevented fulfilment.
         
2.
 A primary requirement shall be considered to have been breached if the relevant evidence is not produced within the time-limit
         set for the production of that evidence unless force majeure prevented production of such evidence within that time-limit.
         ...
         
3.
 Where evidence that all primary requirements have been met is produced within months of the deadline in the first subparagraph
         of paragraph 2, 85% of the sum forfeited shall be repaid.
         Where evidence that all primary requirements have been met is produced within months of that deadline in circumstances
         where the relevant secondary requirement has not been met, the sum to be repaid shall be the sum that would have been repayable
         under Article 23(2), less 15% of the relevant part of the sum secured.
         
4.
 No repayment shall be made where evidence that all primary requirements have been respected is produced after the month
         period referred to in paragraph has expired unless force majeure prevented production of this evidence within that period.
         ... Article 1.
 Where no period is laid down for producing the evidence needed to release a sum secured, such period shall be:
         
(a)
months from the time-limit specified for respecting all primary requirements, or 
         
(b)
where no such time-limit is specified, months from the date by which all primary requirements have been met. 
         
2.
 The period laid down in paragraph shall not exceed three years from the time the security was assigned to a particular obligation,
         except in cases of force majeure.
         
The main proceedings and the question referred to the Court
            
Glencore took part in the standing invitation to tender opened by Regulation No 2372/95. It was awarded a total quantity of
         tonnes of common wheat and then furnished the security of ECU per tonne provided for in Article 8(2) of Regulation
         No 2372/95. 
         
            
According to the export licences issued to Glencore, the common wheat was to be delivered to one or more of the ACP States
         listed in the annex to Regulation No 2372/95. The common wheat in question was cleared through customs and left the territory
         of the Community by ship between January and March 1996. 
         
            
In accordance with the first indent of the second subparagraph of Article 8(2) of Regulation No 2372/95, the security of ECU
         per tonne was released by the Bundesanstalt following production of proof that the goods had left the customs territory
         of the Community. 
         
            
However, the documents proving entry of the goods for consumption into the ACP State or States of destination were not lodged
         with the Bundesanstalt until June 1997, that is to say more than months after acceptance of the export declaration.
         
         
            
The Bundesanstalt declared 15% of the security of ECU per tonne to be forfeit, citing as legal basis Article 22(2) and
         (3) and Article of Regulation No 2220/85, in conjunction with the second indent of the second subparagraph of Article 8(2)
         and Article of Regulation No 2372/95, Article 17(5) of Regulation No 2131/93, and Articles and 47(2) of Regulation No 3665/87.
         
         
            
After unsuccessfully contesting the decision on the partial forfeiture of its security, Glencore brought an action before
         the Verwaltungsgericht Frankfurt am Main on April 1998, seeking annulment of that decision. 
         
            
Before the national court, Glencore claimed primarily that the 12-month time-limit laid down by Article 47(2) of Regulation
         No 3665/did not apply in the framework of the second indent of the second subparagraph of Article 8(2) of Regulation No 2372/95.
         It maintained that the 12-month time-limit laid down in Article 28(1)(b) of Regulation No 2220/should instead apply. That
         article, unlike Article 47(2) of Regulation No 3665/87, does not provide that the time-limit starts to run on the day following
         acceptance of the export declaration, but merely that the proof necessary for release of the security is to be furnished within
         months of the date on which the primary requirement has been met. 
         
            
The Bundesanstalt, on the other hand, argues that the second indent of the second subparagraph of Article 8(2) of Regulation
         No 2372/is the legal basis of the decision declaring the security forfeit. Under those provisions, the security of ECU
         per tonne must be released within working days of the date on which the successful tenderer supplies proof of entry
         for consumption into the ACP State or States referred to in Article 5(3) of that regulation. That proof must be supplied in
         accordance with Articles and of Regulation No 3665/87. 
         
            
Taking the view that the outcome of the dispute before it required an interpretation of the second indent of the second subparagraph
         of Article 8(2) of Regulation No 2372/and of Article 47(2) of Regulation No 3665/87, the Verwaltungsgericht Frankfurt am
         Main decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following question to the Court for a preliminary ruling: Must the second indent of the second subparagraph of Article 8(2) of Commission Regulation (EC) No 2372/of October be interpreted as meaning that Article 47(2) of Commission Regulation (EC) No 3665/of November must be simply applied
         by analogy, so that the 12-month time-limit for supplying proof of importation into the ACP State concerned does not begin
         to run until the primary requirement imposed by that regulation, namely the importation into the ACP State, is fulfilled?
         The question referredObservations submitted to the Court
         
            
Glencore submits that on a correct interpretation of the second indent of the second subparagraph of Article 8(2) of Regulation
         No 2372/95, the 12-month time-limit laid down for furnishing proof of importation of the common wheat into the ACP State concerned
         does not begin to run until importation into that State has been accomplished. 
         
            
According to Glencore, that interpretation is consistent with both the spirit and the purpose of Regulation No 2372/95, which
         aims to reduce the significant stocks of common wheat of breadmaking quality held by the French and German intervention agencies
         and to provide regular supplies to the ACP States at stable prices. 
         
            
Glencore submits that, unlike Regulation No 3665/87, Regulation No 2372/lays down only a time-limit within which the goods
         must be exported, but does not expressly set the time-limit within which they must be imported into the ACP State of destination.
         In making those rules, which relate only to exports to ACP States, the legislature intentionally refrained from fixing a time-limit
         for completion of importation into the ACP State concerned, because it is often impossible to comply with the 12-month time-limit.
         As no time-limit was laid down for importation of the common wheat into the ACP State, the necessary implication is that a
         time-limit likewise cannot be imposed for furnishing proof of such importation. 
         
            
The above interpretation of the second indent of the second subparagraph of Article 8(2) of Regulation No 2372/is also
         justified by the fact that Regulation No 2220/falls to be applied. The security to be provided in connection with exports
         under Regulation No 2372/is a security within the meaning of Article 3(a) of Regulation No 2220/85, and the importation
         of the cereals into the ACP States of destination is a primary requirement within the meaning of Article 20(2) of that regulation.
         
         
            
Since no time-limit is laid down for fulfilling the primary requirement either, Glencore submits that the time-limit for furnishing
         proof of importation into the State of destination is, in accordance with Article 28(1)(b) of Regulation No 2220/85, months
         from the fulfilment of the primary requirement, namely importation into the ACP States of destination. 
         
            
Glencore concludes that the second indent of the second subparagraph of Article 8(2) of Regulation No 2372/does not lay
         down a time-limit for producing proof of importation into the State of destination and that the reference to Article of
         Regulation No 3665/can only be interpreted as meaning that that provision may be given a corresponding interpretation adapted
         to Regulation No 2372/95. Therefore, the 12-month time-limit can begin to run only when the primary requirement of importation
         into the ACP State has been met. 
         
            
The Commission maintains that the provisions relating to time-limits set out in Article of Regulation No 3665/are automatically
         applicable by virtue of the second indent of the second subparagraph of Article 8(2) of Regulation No 2372/95. Proof of importation
         of the goods into the ACP State or States concerned, which must be produced before the security can be released, must therefore
         be provided within months of the date of acceptance of the export declaration, except in cases of force majeure. 
         
            
In the Commission's opinion, the wording of the second indent of the second subparagraph of Article 8(2) of Regulation No 2372/is clear and unambiguous. That provision contains nothing to suggest that the reference to Article of Regulation No 3665/should not also extend to the time-limit provided for in paragraph of that article, which sets a time-limit of  
         months following the date of acceptance of the export declaration. 
         
            
The Commission considers that there is no justification for recourse to the time-limits provided for in Article of Regulation
         No 2220/85, as proposed by Glencore. That regulation, pursuant to Article thereof, applies only in so far as other rules
         are not laid down by the regulations governing specific sectors which were adopted in the framework of the common market organisation.
         
         
            
The Commission also submits that there is nothing to permit the inference that the reference to Article of Regulation No
         3665/in the second indent of the second subparagraph of Article 8(2) of Regulation No 2372/is a drafting error on the
         part of the Community legislature. Had such an error occurred, it would have been easy to rectify or amend the latter provision
         accordingly; however, no such rectification or amendment has been made. Moreover, in relation to the time-limit for releasing
         the security, Article of Regulation No 2131/also refers to Article of Regulation No 3665/87. 
         
            
Even though the Commission takes the view that, given the clear and unambiguous provisions of the second indent of the second
         paragraph of Article 8(2) of Regulation No 2372/95, there is no need to examine the regulation's objective in order to interpret
         that article, it submits that that objective does in fact confirm its interpretation. The importation of common wheat into
         the ACP States was the principal requirement made of the successful bidders in the standing invitation to tender opened by
         that regulation, the performance of which was to be ensured by the lodging of the security provided for in Article 8(2). To
         have allowed a more generous time-limit than the comparable time-limit applicable in the context of the general scheme provided
         for in Article 17(5) of Regulation No 2131/for supplying proof of importation of the goods into the ACP States in question,
         as Glencore claims, would have jeopardised the important role which that obligation plays in ensuring the success of Regulation
         No 2372/as a whole. 
         
            
Moreover, the Commission submits that, contrary to Glencore's assertions, the second indent of the second paragraph of Article
         8(2) of Regulation No 2372/is not in breach of the principle of proportionality. First, under Article 47(4) of Regulation
         No 3665/87, the time-limit laid down in paragraph of that article for production of the documents necessary to prove that
         the product has been cleared through customs for release for consumption can be extended at the exporter's request should
         he encounter difficulties in complying with it. Second, Article of Regulation No 2220/lays down a graduated system of
         penalties for failure to fulfil the primary requirements within the time-limits allowed. 
         Reply of the Court
         
            
The second indent of the second subparagraph of Article 8(2) of Regulation No 2372/clearly states that the amount of ECU
         per tonne, namely the security whose refund is in dispute in the main proceedings, must be released within working days
         of the date on which the successful tenderer supplies proof of entry for consumption of the common wheat into the ACP State
         or States concerned. 
         
            
That provision makes express reference to the provisions of Articles and of Regulation No 3665/regarding production
         of that proof. 
         
            
Article of Regulation No 3665/lists the documents that an operator must produce to provide proof of clearance through
         customs for release for consumption. 
         
            
Article 47(2) of Regulation No 3665/87, which appears in Title of that regulation, entitled  
         Procedure for payment of the refund, is clear and unambiguous inasmuch as its states that  
         [e]xcept in cases of force majeure, the documents relating to payment of the refund or release of the security must be submitted
         within months following the date of acceptance of the export declaration. 
         
            
There is nothing in the second indent of the second subparagraph of Article 8(2) of Regulation No 2372/to support the contention
         that the reference to Article of Regulation No 3665/should not also apply to paragraph of that provision, which concerns
         the time-limit by which the documents relating to refund of the security must be submitted. 
         
            
Moreover, the reference in the second indent of the second subparagraph of Article 8(2) of Regulation No 2372/to Article
         of Regulation No 3665/for the purpose of determining the time-limit within which the proof of entry for consumption
         must be supplied would be meaningless if it was not intended to refer to the two paragraphs of the latter provision which
         relate to time-limits, namely paragraphs and of Article 47. 
         
            
Therefore, it is clear from the second indent of the second subparagraph of Article 8(2) of Regulation No 2372/and Article
         47(2) of Regulation No 3665/that the 12-month period within which the operator must supply proof of entry for consumption
         of the common wheat into the ACP State or States of destination starts to run on the date of acceptance of the export declaration.
         
         
            
The objective pursued by Regulation No 2372/does not in any way give rise to a different interpretation from that which
         clearly follows from the wording of those provisions; on the contrary, it wholly endorses that interpretation. 
         
            
It is evident from the second and third recitals in the preamble to Regulation No 2372/that its principle objective is
         to ensure that the common wheat actually reaches its destination. To that end, the obligation to export to the ACP State or
         States of destination is subject to a strict time-limit, compliance with which is in part ensured by the security provided
         for in Article 8(2) of that regulation. 
         
            
Finally, contrary to Glencore's contention, the second indent of the second subparagraph of Article 8(2) of Regulation No 2372/is not in breach of the principle of proportionality. 
         
            
The obligation laid down in Article 47(2) of Regulation No 3665/to submit the documents relating to release of the security
         within months following the date of acceptance of the export declaration ceases to apply where the economic operator in
         question supplies proof of force majeure. 
         
            
Moreover, Article 47(4) of that regulation accords the national authorities the possibility of granting the operator an extension
         of the deadline for the submission of the documents required, that is to say the proof that the goods exported have arrived
         at their destination, where he has been unable to produce those documents within the statutory 12-month period, despite having
         acted with diligence in seeking to obtain and communicate them within that period (Case C-54/Germany  v  
          Commission  [1999] ECR I-35, paragraph 146). 
         
            
It is therefore not the purpose of the second indent of the second subparagraph of Article 8(2) of Regulation No 2372/automatically
         to deprive exporters of the refunds provided for under the Community rules or, in a case such as that before the national
         court, of the securities provided at the time of sale of the cereals held by the intervention agencies, where the exporters,
         despite having made every effort required of them, have been prevented, as a result of circumstances beyond their control,
         from producing the requisite documents within the 12-month period (
          Germany  v  
          Commission , cited above, paragraph 148). 
         
            
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the question submitted by the national court must be that the second indent of
         the second subparagraph of Article 8(2) of Regulation No 2372/is to be interpreted as meaning that proof of importation
         of the goods into the ACP State or States concerned, which is necessary for release of the security of ECU per tonne, must
         be supplied, in accordance with Article 47(2) of Regulation No 3665/87, within months following the date of acceptance
         of the export declaration, except in cases of force majeure or where the exporter, having acted with diligence in seeking
         to obtain that proof, is unable to submit it within that period and the competent authority has granted an extension of the
         deadline. 
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the Commission, which has submitted observations to the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings
         are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court, the decision on costs
         is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
in answer to the question referred to it by the Verwaltungsgericht Frankfurt am Main by order of July 2001, hereby rules:
         
         
Puissochet
Macken 
Cunha Rodrigues 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on June 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
J.-P. Puissochet  
Registrar
President of the Third Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: German.
Top  
 