
Case C-294/The Queen, on the application of: 
Ezgi Payir and Others 
v
Secretary of State for the Home Department
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Court of Appeal (England and Wales) (Civil Division))
(EEC-Turkey Association Agreement – Freedom of movement for workers – Decision No 1/of the Association Council – First indent of Article 6(1) – Worker duly registered as belonging to the labour force – Leave to enter as a student or as an au pair – Effect on the right to remain)
Summary of the Judgment
International agreements – EEC-Turkey Association Agreement – Freedom of movement for persons – Workers – Right of Turkish
            nationals to an extension of their leave to remain
(EEC-Turkey Association Council Decision No 1/80, Art. 6(1))
The fact that a Turkish national was granted leave to enter the territory of a Member State as an au pair or as a student
         cannot deprive him of the status of ‘worker’ and prevent him from being regarded as ‘duly registered as belonging to the labour
         force’ of that Member State within the meaning of Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/of the EEC-Turkey Association Council.
         Accordingly, that fact cannot prevent that national from being able to rely on that provision for the purposes of obtaining
         renewed permission to work and a corollary right of residence.
      
In order to determine whether Turkish nationals meet the conditions laid down in Article 6(1) of the decision in question,
         no account is to be taken of the aim pursued in permitting the persons concerned to enter the Member State in question, since
         that article does not make recognition of the rights which it confers on Turkish workers subject to any condition connected
         with the reason for which the right to enter, work or reside was initially granted.
      
If those Turkish nationals succeed, objectively, in fulfilling the conditions laid down in the three indents of Article 6(1)
         of Decision No 1/80, they cannot be deprived of the rights which that provision progressively grants them on the basis of
         the duration of their paid employment.
      
In those circumstances, it cannot be accepted that a student or au pair could circumvent the legislation of the host Member
         State, in order progressively to obtain an unlimited right of access to the labour market of that State, since they are merely
         exercising a right expressly provided for in Decision No 1/80. It would only be otherwise if they had fraudulently obtained
         a right of entry into the territory of a Member State by falsely claiming that they intended to study or act as an au pair.
         On the contrary, provided that (i) the genuineness of their intention is confirmed by their actual pursuit of a course of
         studies or by acting as an au pair, (ii) they obtain work lawfully in the host Member State, and (iii) they satisfy the conditions
         laid down in Article 6(1) of the decision in question, the persons concerned can fully rely on the rights which that provision
         confers upon them.
      
(see paras 40, 45-46, 49, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
January (*)
      
(EEC-Turkey Association Agreement – Freedom of movement for workers – Decision No 1/of the Association Council – First indent of Article 6(1) – Worker duly registered as belonging to the labour force – Leave to enter as a student or as an au pair – Effect on the right to remain)
In Case C‑294/06,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Court of Appeal (England and Wales) (Civil Division) (United
         Kingdom), made by decision of June 2006, received at the Court on June 2006, in the proceedings
      
The Queen, on the application of:
      
Ezgi Payir,
Burhan Akyuz,
Birol Ozturk,
v
Secretary of State for the Home Department,
 
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of A. Rosas, President of the Chamber, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, J. Klučka, P. Lindh (Rapporteur) and A. Arabadjiev,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: C. Strömholm, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on April 2007,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Ms Payir, by S. Cox, Barrister, and R. Despicht, Solicitor,
–        Mr Akyuz and Mr Ozturk, by N. Rogers, Barrister,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by C. Gibbs, acting as Agent, assisted by P. Saini, Barrister,
–        the German Government, by M. Lumma and C. Schulze-Bahr, acting as Agents,
–        the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by W. Ferrante, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster and C. Wissels, acting as Agents,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by G. Rozet and N. Yerrell, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on July 2007,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/of the Association
         Council of September on the development of the Association (‘Decision No 1/80’). The Association Council was set up
         by the Agreement establishing an Association between the European Economic Community and Turkey, signed at Ankara on September
         by the Republic of Turkey and by the Member States of the EEC and the Community and concluded, approved and confirmed
         on behalf of the Community by Council Decision 64/732/EEC of December (OJ C 113, p. 1).
      
The reference was made in the context of two separate actions, the first brought by Ms Payir, and the second by Mr Akyuz and
         Mr Ozturk, against the Secretary of State for the Home Department (‘the Secretary of State’) in respect of the Secretary of
         State’s decision to refuse to extend their leave to remain. 
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/provides as follows:
      
‘1.      Subject to Article on free access to employment for members of his family, a Turkish worker duly registered as belonging
         to the labour force of a Member State:
      
–        shall be entitled in that Member State, after one year’s legal employment, to the renewal of his permit to work for the same
         employer, if a job is available;
      
–        shall be entitled in that Member State, after three years of legal employment and subject to the priority to be given to workers
         of Member States of the Community, to respond to another offer of employment, with an employer of his choice, made under normal
         conditions and registered with the employment services of that State, for the same occupation;
      
–        shall enjoy free access in that Member State to any paid employment of his choice, after four years of legal employment.’
 National legislation
The relevant provisions relating to au pairs are contained in particular in paragraphs to of the immigration rules adopted
         by the United Kingdom Parliament in (United Kingdom Immigration Rules, House of Commons Paper 395; ‘the Immigration Rules’)
         and provide as follows:
      
‘Definition of an “au pair” placement 
88.      For the purposes of these Rules an “au pair” placement is an arrangement whereby a young person:
(a)      comes to the United Kingdom for the purpose of learning the English language; ...
(b)      lives for a time as a member of an English speaking family with appropriate opportunities for study; and 
(c)      helps in the home for a maximum of hours per day in return for a reasonable allowance and with two free days per week.
Requirements for leave to enter as an “au pair”
89.      The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter the United Kingdom as an “au pair” are that he:
(i)       is seeking entry for the purpose of taking up an arranged placement which can be shown to fall within the definition set out
         in paragraph 88; ...
      
(ii)  is aged between 17-inclusive or was so aged when first given leave to enter in this capacity; ...
(iii)  is unmarried; ...
(iv)  is without dependants; ...
(v)       is a national of one of the following countries: … Turkey; ...
(vi)  does not intend to stay in the United Kingdom for more than years as an “au pair”; ...
(vii)  intends to leave the United Kingdom on completion of his stay as an “au pair”; ...
(viii)  if he has previously spent time in the United Kingdom as an “au pair”, is not seeking leave to enter to a date beyond years
         from the date on which he was first given leave to enter the United Kingdom in this capacity, and
      
(ix)  is able to maintain and accommodate himself without recourse to public funds.
Leave to enter as an “au pair”
90.      A person seeking leave to enter the United Kingdom as an “au pair” may be admitted for a period not exceeding years with
         a prohibition on employment except as an “au pair” provided the Immigration Officer is satisfied that each of the requirements
         of paragraph is met. …’.
      
The immigration provisions concerning students are contained in particular in paragraphs to of the Immigration Rules:
      
‘Requirements for leave to enter as a student 
57.      The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter the United Kingdom as a student are that he: 
(i)      has been accepted for a course of study at:
(a)      a publicly funded institution of further or higher education; or [there follow references to private educational institutions];
         ...
      
(ii)  is able and intends to follow either:
(a)      a recognised full-time degree course at a publicly funded institution of further or higher education; or [there follow references
         to other classes of full-time education]; ...
      
…
(iv)  intends to leave the United Kingdom at the end of his studies; ...
(v)       does not intend to engage in business or take employment, except part-time or vacation work undertaken with the consent of
         the Secretary of State for Employment, and
      
(vi)      is able to meet the costs of his course and accommodation and the maintenance of himself and any dependants without taking
         employment or engaging in business or having recourse to public funds. 
      
Leave to enter as a student 
58.      A person seeking leave to enter the United Kingdom as a student may be admitted for an appropriate period depending on the
         length of his course of study and his means, and with a condition restricting his freedom to take employment …’.
      
Under paragraph of Annex A to Chapter 3, Section 1, of the instructions of the Immigration Directorate of the Secretary
         of State (‘the Immigration Directorate’s Instructions’):
      
‘Students over the age of who are on Code conditions [which include a condition restricting freedom to take up employment]
         may take part-time or vacation work without needing to seek the permission of the local Jobcentre. Similarly they will be
         able to take up work placements which are part of a sandwich course or to undertake internship placements without the need
         to obtain permission from the [competent authorities of the United Kingdom]. Students should not work for more than hours
         a week during term time, …’ 
      
 The actions in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
The actions concern, respectively, a young woman au pair, Ms Payir, and two students, Mr Akyuz and Mr Ozturk.
      
Ms Payir, then aged years, obtained United Kingdom entry clearance, after which, in April 2000, she was granted leave to
         enter valid until April 2002. Her leave to enter was subject to the condition that she did not enter employment, paid or unpaid,
         other than as an au pair.
      
As soon as Ms Payir arrived in the United Kingdom, she was engaged as an au pair by a family. Then, from March 2001, she was
         engaged as an au pair by a second family, for whom she worked between and hours per week in return for bed and board,
         and payment of GBP (approximately EUR 103) per week.
      
In April 2002, before her leave to enter expired, Ms Payir applied to the Secretary of State for leave to remain in the United
         Kingdom, in reliance upon Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80. She submitted that she had been engaged by the same employer for
         more than one year and that she wished to continue to be employed by that employer. Her application was refused by decision
         of August 2004. 
      
Ms Payir brought an action for judicial review of that decision before the High Court of Justice (England and Wales), Queen’s
         Bench Division (Administrative Court). Allowing her claim, that court quashed the decision of August and directed
         the Secretary of State to extend Ms Payir’s leave to enter and to remove the initial condition restricting her access to the
         labour market. Ms Payir’s leave to enter was extended until August 2006. In October 2005, she took up employment as a shop
         assistant. 
      
The Secretary of State appealed against the decision of the High Court, on the ground that Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/does not apply to au pairs. 
      
Mr Akyuz and Mr Ozturk entered the United Kingdom in and respectively, with leave to enter as students. They were
         subsequently granted leave to remain (as students), with permission to work, subject to a term-time limit of hours per
         week.
      
During their studies, Mr Akyuz and Mr Ozturk worked part-time as waiters in a restaurant and were offered an extension of
         their contracts by their employers. Before their leave to enter or remain as students expired, Mr Akyuz and Mr Ozturk applied
         to the Secretary of State, in July and January respectively, for leave to remain on the basis of Article 6(1) of
         Decision No 1/80. The Secretary of State refused their applications on August 2004, whereupon Mr Akyuz and Mr Ozturk commenced
         actions for judicial review in the High Court, which were allowed. Contending that Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/does not
         apply to students, the Secretary of State appealed against the decisions of the High Court.
      
The Court of Appeal (England and Wales) (Civil Division) heard the cases of Ms Payir and of Mr Akyuz and Mr Ozturk together.
         
      
The Court of Appeal points out that the three Turkish nationals were regarded by the High Court as workers within the meaning
         given to that concept by the Court of Justice, in particular in Case C-1/Birden [1998] ECR I-7747, paragraph 24. 
      
While fully accepting that finding on the part of the High Court, the Court of Appeal (England and Wales) (Civil Division)
         takes the view that it is also necessary to take into account the case-law of the Court of Justice according to which Member
         States may introduce schemes with a social purpose. It follows from that case-law that, even though such schemes involve the
         carrying out of an activity as a worker, they do not necessarily imply integration of the persons concerned in the labour
         force of those States. 
      
In the main proceedings, the Court of Appeal (England and Wales) (Civil Division) is not certain whether the Turkish nationals
         concerned may rely on Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80. In those circumstances, that court decided to stay the proceedings
         and to refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘1.      In a case in which:
–        a Turkish national was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom for two years in order to take up a placement in that country
         as an “au pair” as defined in the … Immigration Rules; ... 
      
–        her leave to enter included permission to be employed in that capacity; ...
–        she was continuously employed in that capacity by the same employer for a period exceeding one year during her leave to enter;
         ...
      
–        that employment was a genuine and effective economic activity, and
–        that employment was in accordance with national laws relating to employment and immigration;
then, was the Turkish national concerned, during that employment:
–        a worker within the meaning of Article of Decision No 1/...?
–        duly registered as belonging to the labour force of the United Kingdom within the meaning of that Article?
2.      In a case in which:
–        a Turkish national was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom under the Immigration Rules in order to follow a course of
         study in that country; ...
      
–        his leave to enter included permission to be employed in any occupation with a limit during term time of hours work per
         week; ...
      
–        he was continuously employed by the same employer for a period exceeding one year during his leave to enter;
–        that employment was a genuine and effective economic activity, and
–        that employment was in accordance with national laws relating to employment and immigration;
then, was the Turkish national concerned, during that employment:
–        a worker within the meaning of Article of Decision No 1/...?
–        duly registered as belonging to the labour force of the United Kingdom within the meaning of that Article?’
 Questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 Preliminary remarks
The same questions are asked in both cases and relate, respectively, to au pairs and to students.
      
By those questions, the national court is essentially asking whether the fact that a Turkish national was granted permission
         to enter the territory of a Member State as an au pair or as a student deprives that national of the status of ‘worker’ and
         prevents him from being regarded as ‘duly registered as belonging to the labour force’ of that Member State within the meaning
         of Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80, with the result that he cannot rely on that provision for the purposes of obtaining renewed
         permission to work and a corollary right of residence.
      
 Observations submitted to the Court
Ms Payir, Mr Akyuz and Mr Ozturk, and the Commission of the European Communities share the view that Turkish nationals, such
         as those concerned by the main proceedings, satisfy the prerequisite conditions for being regarded as ‘workers’ within the
         meaning of Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80. They have performed, under the direction of another person, genuine and effective
         services of some economic value, in return for which they received remuneration.
      
Those Turkish nationals are duly registered as belonging to the labour force of the host Member State. They entered the territory
         of that State lawfully and, equally lawfully, joined the labour force of that State. In particular, they did not commit any
         form of fraud in order to obtain or take up work. Their situation as part of the labour force is therefore stable and secure.
      
In so far as those Turkish nationals fulfil the conditions laid down in Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80, they can rely on
         that provision for the purposes of obtaining renewed permission to work and a corollary right of residence. It is neither
         necessary nor relevant to examine the reasons for which the United Kingdom granted them leave to enter and to remain, that
         is to say, leave for a limited period, as young persons with au pair or student status.
      
The United Kingdom Government and the German, Italian and Netherlands Governments contend that, on the contrary, the reasons
         underlying the grant of leave to remain are important. Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/concerns the right of access to employment
         of Turkish nationals who have been permitted to enter the territory of a Member State as workers. Turkish nationals who have
         not entered the United Kingdom in that capacity, such as Ms Payir or Mr Akyuz and Mr Ozturk, cannot rely on that provision.
         Consequently, even if they have performed an activity that can be regarded as genuine and effective economic activity, it
         does not follow that those nationals are workers or that they are duly registered as belonging to the labour force of the
         host Member State, within the meaning of that provision. 
      
If it were to be held that Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/may be relied upon by Turkish nationals who have been permitted
         to enter the territory of a Member State as au pairs or as students, there would be serious consequences. First and foremost,
         the Member States would no longer be free to determine the conditions governing the entry of Turkish nationals into their
         territory. Second, it would encourage the circumvention of national legislation, since the persons concerned would have an
         interest in presenting themselves as students or as au pairs in order to integrate in the labour force of the Member State
         into whose territory they enter. Lastly, it would lead the Member States to restrict their policy of admitting Turkish students
         and au pairs, to the detriment of those two groups. 
      
The German and Netherlands Governments add that assimilation of the situation of a student or au pair performing part-time
         work with the situation of an ordinary worker is inconsistent with the approach taken by the Community legislature in Council
         Directive 2004/114/EC of December on the conditions of admission of third-country nationals for the purposes of studies,
         pupil exchange, unremunerated training or voluntary service (OJ L 375, p. 12). According to those governments, that directive
         clearly distinguishes between student and worker.
      
 Reply of the Court
In order to reply to the questions referred – as reformulated in paragraph of the present judgment – it is appropriate
         to note the three conditions laid down in Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80.
      
The first of those conditions concerns the status of worker. It is settled case-law that, in order to satisfy that condition,
         the Turkish national must perform activities which are real and genuine, to the exclusion of activities which are on such
         a small scale as to be regarded as purely marginal and ancillary. The essential feature of an employment relationship is that,
         for a certain period of time, a person performs services for and under the direction of another person, in return for which
         he receives remuneration (see Birden, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
The second condition concerns the concept of being duly registered as belonging to the labour force. The Court has held that
         this concept embraces all workers who have met the conditions laid down by law or regulation in the host Member State and
         who are thus entitled to pursue an occupation in its territory (see Birden, paragraph 51).
      
The third condition laid down in Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/is that of legal employment, that is to say, a stable and
         secure situation as a member of the labour force of the host Member State and, by virtue of that situation, an undisputed
         right of residence (see Case C-188/Kurz [2002] ECR I‑10691, paragraph 48).
      
According to the order for reference, Ms Payir offered services which constitute genuine and effective economic activities,
         as did Mr Akyuz and Mr Ozturk. According to the case-file, they all worked under the direction of an employer and received
         remuneration in return for their services. Ms Payir worked between and hours per week, Mr Akyuz and Mr Ozturk a maximum
         of hours per week. It is not contended that their activities were purely marginal. According to the description given,
         those activities display the characteristics necessary to enable, in principle, those who perform them to be regarded as ‘workers’
         within the meaning of Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80.
      
As regards the other two conditions, the national court explains that Ms Payir, Mr Akyuz and Mr Ozturk complied with national
         immigration legislation and thus entered the United Kingdom lawfully. The national court adds that the jobs held by Ms Payir,
         Mr Akyuz and Mr Ozturk were in conformity with requirements not only under the rules on immigration but also under employment
         law and, in particular, that those jobs were fully in line with the conditions attaching to the form of leave granted in those
         three cases to enter the national territory. It is common ground that Ms Payir, Mr Akyuz and Mr Ozturk enjoyed an undisputed
         right of residence.
      
It follows that the characteristics of the jobs held by the three Turkish nationals concerned in the main proceedings, as
         presented by the national court, also satisfy the other two conditions laid down in Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80: being
         duly registered as belonging to the labour force, and being in legal employment.
      
The question nevertheless arises whether, in cases where Turkish nationals – whose activities otherwise satisfy the three
         conditions laid down in Article 6(1) – have au pair or student status, they are thereby precluded from the status of workers
         and from being duly registered as belonging to the labour force of a Member State, within the meaning of that provision.
      
In that regard, it should first be pointed out that a social objective pursued through granting leave to enter as students
         or as au pairs, together with the related right to work, does not, of itself, take away the lawful character of the activities
         performed by the persons concerned and, consequently, does not prevent them from being regarded as ‘duly registered as belonging
         to the labour force’ of the host Member State. The Court held in paragraph of Birden that the concept of being duly registered as belonging to the labour force cannot be interpreted as applying to the labour
         market in general as opposed to a specific market with a social objective supported by the public authorities.
      
It should also be recalled that Decision No 1/does not encroach upon the competence retained by the Member States to regulate
         both the entry into their territory of Turkish nationals and the conditions under which they may take up their first employment,
         but merely regulates (in Article 6) the situation of Turkish workers who are already integrated into the labour force of the
         host Member State (Case C-98/Ertanir [1997] ECR I‑5179, paragraph 23). 
      
According to settled case-law, the aim of Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/is to consolidate progressively the position of
         Turkish workers in the host Member State (see, inter alia, Case C-230/Sedef [2006] ECR I‑157, paragraph 34).
      
Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/thus covers Turkish nationals who have the status of workers in the host Member State without,
         however, requiring that they have entered the Community as workers. They can have acquired that status after their entry into
         the Community. Thus, in the case leading to the judgment in Birden, Mr Birden, who had been permitted to enter the territory of a Member State, found himself at the outset unemployed in that
         State and only later found paid employment there. In the case which led to the judgment in Kurz, the Turkish national concerned had been authorised to enter the Community at the age of 15, not as a worker but in order
         to train to be a plumber.
      
It is on the expiry of his first year of work that the Turkish national may, if he meets the conditions laid down in the first
         indent of Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80, claim renewal of permission to work for the same employer and a corollary right
         of residence.
      
In order to determine whether Turkish nationals meet those conditions, no account is taken of the aim pursued in permitting
         the persons concerned to enter the Member State in question. The Court has consistently held that Article 6(1) of Decision
         No 1/does not make recognition of the rights which it confers on Turkish workers subject to any condition connected with
         the reason for which the right to enter, work or reside was initially granted (see Case C-36/Günaydin [1997] ECR I-5143, paragraphs and and the case-law cited). Accordingly, the Court has held that the intention expressed
         by a Turkish national to return to his country of origin after spending a number of years in the host Member State cannot
         prevent him from being able to rely on the rights conferred by Article 6(1). It would only be otherwise if the person in question
         had set out to deceive the competent authorities by making a false declaration with the sole intention of inducing them to
         issue the requisite authorisation (see, to that effect, Günaydin, paragraphs and 60). 
      
As is clear from Günaydin, neither the fact that the Turkish national in question was permitted to enter the territory of the Member State in order
         to follow a course of study nor the fact that, initially, he was allowed to remain on condition that he did not take up remunerated
         activities prevents him from being able to rely on Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80, provided that he then lawfully obtains
         paid employment and works for the same employer for at least one year.
      
Nor can the fact that the employment contract is of fixed duration preclude the application of Article 6(1) of Decision No
         1/80. The Court has held that, if the temporary nature of the employment contract could suffice to call into question the
         legality of the employment of the person concerned, Member States would be able wrongly to deprive Turkish migrant workers
         whom they have permitted to enter their territory and who have lawfully pursued an economic activity there for an uninterrupted
         period of at least one year of rights on which they are entitled to rely directly under Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/(see
         Birden, paragraph 64).
      
Thus, in order to determine whether a Turkish national who has entered the territory of a Member State lawfully may, after
         working for a year in that territory, rely on the rights conferred by Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80, it must be determined
         whether he meets the objective conditions laid down in that provision, without it being necessary to take into account the
         reasons for which he was first granted the right to enter that territory or any temporal limitations attached to his right
         to work. According to settled case-law, it is not open to the national authorities to attach conditions to such rights or
         to restrict their application, as they would otherwise undermine the effect of Decision No 1/(see Günaydin, paragraphs to 40, and 50; Birden, paragraph 19; Kurz, paragraph 26; Joined Cases C-317/and C-369/Abatay and Others [2003] ECR I‑12301, paragraph 78; and Sedef, paragraph 34).
      
Consequently, in cases such as those before the referring court, the reasons for which leave to enter was granted to the Turkish
         nationals concerned – to enable them to pursue studies or gain experience as an au pair – cannot in themselves prevent the
         persons concerned from being able to rely on Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80. The same applies to statements of intention
         made by those nationals to the effect that they do not wish to remain in the host Member State for more than two years or
         that they intend to leave it on completion of their studies, and to temporal limitations attaching to their leave to remain.
         
      
Provided that the conditions referred to in paragraphs to of the present judgment are met and provided, in particular,
         that the genuineness of the work performed by the Turkish nationals in question is confirmed, the fact that they have entered
         as students in order to pursue a course of studies or as au pairs with the aim of mastering the language of the host Member
         State is immaterial. If those Turkish nationals succeed, objectively, in fulfilling the conditions laid down in the three
         indents of Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80, they cannot be deprived of the rights which that provision progressively grants
         them on the basis of the duration of their paid employment (see, to that effect, Günaydin, paragraph 37).
      
In those circumstances, the argument put forward by the Member States who submitted observations to the effect that a student
         or au pair could circumvent the legislation of the host Member State, in order progressively to obtain an unlimited right
         of access to the labour market of that State, cannot be accepted. There can be no question of that legislation being circumvented
         so long as the persons concerned are merely exercising a right expressly provided for in Decision No 1/80. It would only be
         otherwise if they had fraudulently obtained a right of entry into the territory of a Member State by falsely claiming that
         they intended to study or act as an au pair. On the contrary, provided that (i) the genuineness of their intention is confirmed
         by their actual pursuit of a course of studies or by acting as an au pair, (ii) they obtain work lawfully in the host Member
         State, and (iii) they satisfy the conditions laid down in Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80, the persons concerned can fully
         rely on the rights which that provision confers upon them. 
      
The German and Netherlands Governments refer finally to Directive 2004/114. They infer from the scheme of that directive that
         the Community legislature intended to permit students to take up employment and to work for a certain number of hours without,
         however, being regarded as paid workers and, in consequence, without being able by that means to join the labour market of
         the host Member State. 
      
However, Directive 2004/is not relevant. Under Article 4(1)(a) thereof, Directive 2004/applies without prejudice to
         more favourable provisions of bilateral or multilateral agreements between, on the one hand, the Community or the Community
         and its Member States and, on the other, one or more third States. Consequently, as the Advocate General pointed out in point
         of her Opinion, Directive 2004/cannot justify a narrow construction of Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/and no interpretation
         of that provision can be inferred from it. 
      
The answer to the question referred must therefore be that the fact that a Turkish national was granted leave to enter the
         territory of a Member State as an au pair or as a student cannot deprive him of the status of ‘worker’ and prevent him from
         being regarded as ‘duly registered as belonging to the labour force’ of that Member State within the meaning of Article 6(1)
         of Decision No 1/80. Accordingly, that fact cannot prevent that national from being able to rely on that provision for the
         purposes of obtaining renewed permission to work and a corollary right of residence. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
The fact that a Turkish national was granted leave to enter the territory of a Member State as an au pair or as a student
            cannot deprive him of the status of ‘worker’ and prevent him from being regarded as ‘duly registered as belonging to the labour
            force’ of that Member State within the meaning of Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/of the Association Council of September
            on the development of the Association. Accordingly, that fact cannot prevent that national from being able to rely on
            that provision for the purposes of obtaining renewed permission to work and a corollary right of residence. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 