
ORDER OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
June (*)
      
(Appeal — Arbitration clause — Contract relating to European Union financial support for a project in the context of the ‘eContent’ programme — Termination of the contract by the European Commission — Payment of amounts not paid and compensation for loss allegedly suffered by the applicant — Distortion of evidence in the file — Appeal manifestly inadmissible in part and manifestly unfounded as to the remainder — Application to amend the decision of the General Court of the European Union on costs — Manifest inadmissibility)
In Case C‑575/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on December 2014,
Evropaïki Dynamiki — Proigmena Systimata Tilepikoinonion Pliroforikis kai Tilematikis AE, established in Athens (Greece), represented by M. Sfyri and I. Ampazis, dikigoroi,
      
applicant,
the other party to the proceedings being:
European Commission, represented by L. Cappelletti and S. Delaude, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of R. Silva de Lapuerta, President of the Chamber, K. Lenaerts (Rapporteur), Vice-President of the Court, and J.-C. Bonichot,
         A. Arabadjiev and J.L. da Cruz Vilaça, Judges,
      
Advocate General: N. Jääskinen,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to give a decision by reasoned order, in accordance with Article of
         the Rules of Procedure of the Court, 
      
makes the following
Order
By its appeal, Evropaïki Dynamiki — Proigmena Systimata Tilepikoinonion Pliroforikis kai Tilematikis AE (‘Evropaïki Dynamiki’)
         asks the Court to set aside the judgment of the General Court of the European Union in Evropaïki Dynamiki v Commission (T‑340/RENV, EU:T:2014:847) (‘the judgment under appeal’), in so far as, by that judgment, the General Court dismissed
         its action for an order that the European Commission make good damage suffered as a result of its failure to comply with contractual
         obligations in the performance of the EDC‑EEBO/contract relating to the ‘e-Content Exposure and Business Opportunities’
         project. 
      
The judgment under appeal was delivered by the General Court following the judgment of the Court in Evropaïki Dynamiki v Commission (C‑200/P, EU:C:2011:281), by which the latter set aside in part the judgment of the General Court in Evropaïki Dynamiki v Commission (T‑340/07, EU:T:2010:33).
      
As regards the legal framework of the case, the facts of the dispute and procedure before the General Court and the Court,
         reference should be made to paragraphs to of the judgment in Evropaïki Dynamiki v Commission (T‑340/07, EU:T:2010:33), to paragraphs to of the judgment in Evropaïki Dynamiki v Commission (C‑200/P, EU:C:2011:281) and to paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal. 
      
For the purposes of supplementing that information, it should be noted that Article of the general conditions of the EDC‑EEBO/contract (‘the general conditions’) describes Evropaïki Dynamiki’s obligations relating to the reports and supporting
         evidence it is required to submit to the Commission. Article 4(2) of that contract makes provision, more specifically, for
         Evropaïki Dynamiki’s obligations relating to the cost statements that it is required to provide to the Commission. 
      
 Forms of order sought by the parties
Evropaïki Dynamiki claims that the Court should: 
      
–        set aside the judgment under appeal;
–        order the Commission to pay it the amount of EUR 588.62, corresponding to the eligible costs it incurred, as compensation
         for the loss suffered as a result of the Commission’s failure to comply with its contractual obligations in the context of
         the EDC‑EEBO/contract;
      
–        in the alternative, order the Commission to pay it at least the amount of EUR 016.representing all the expenses incurred
         or engaged by it before May 2003, and the amount of EUR 503.in respect of certain costs incurred after May 2003,
         and 
      
–        order the Commission to pay the costs relating to the proceedings at first instance, even on the assumption that the appeal
         is dismissed, and to pay the costs of the appeal if it is upheld. 
      
The Commission contends that the Court should:
      
–        dismiss the appeal and 
–        order Evropaïki Dynamiki to pay the costs incurred in the appeal and leave undisturbed the order as to costs of the General
         Court. 
      
 The appeal 
Under Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, where the appeal is, in whole or in part, clearly inadmissible
         or clearly unfounded, the Court may at any time, acting on a report from the Judge-Rapporteur and after hearing the Advocate
         General, dismiss the appeal in whole or in part by reasoned order. 
      
 Arguments of the parties
In its single plea, Evropaïki Dynamiki complains that the General Court distorted the evidence in the file. More specifically,
         the General Court distorted that evidence by ruling, first, in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, concerning
         the first and second cost statements referred to in paragraph of that judgment, that the documents produced by the applicant
         were not sufficient to prove that the costs stated had actually been incurred for the purpose of the implementation of the
         project. Secondly, concerning the third cost statement, also referred to in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the
         General Court erred in holding, in paragraphs 50, 52, and of that judgment, that Evropaïki Dynamiki had not supplied
         the supporting evidence which it was required to produce and that, consequently, all the personnel costs and overheads incurred
         should be disregarded. 
      
In support of those arguments, Evropaïki Dynamiki claims first that the General Court distorted the meaning of the general
         conditions and consequently did not carry out a correct assessment of the probative value of the cost statements produced.
         Instead of referring solely to Articles and of those conditions, the General Court should have taken into consideration
         Article thereof. It follows from the general conditions, taken as a whole, that the documents described in Article thereof
         must be certified only by the co-contractor and that the only obligation of the latter is to maintain them at its premises.
         The only documents to be sent to the Commission in order to justify the costs incurred are the cost statements referred to
         in Article of the general conditions. 
      
Evropaïki Dynamiki claims, moreover, that, in the letters it sent to it, and in particularly in a letter of October 2004,
         the Commission never contested the use of those cost statements as evidence and never requested the production of the time
         sheets provided for in Article of the general conditions. As the General Court itself noted in paragraph of the judgment
         under appeal, certain costs were, moreover, accepted by the Commission solely on the basis of the cost statements. 
      
Next, paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal are vitiated by a distortion due to a confusion between the cost statements
         provided for in Article of the general conditions and the time sheets provided for in Article 14(1) of those conditions.
         That distortion of the general conditions led the General Court to apply incorrectly the requirements and formalities laid
         down under those conditions concerning those different statements, and therefore wrongly to reject Evropaïki Dynamiki’s arguments
         relating to the reimbursement of personnel costs and overheads, in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal. 
      
Finally, Evropaïki Dynamiki claims that it could produce the time sheets that always remain available in its premises for
         audit, in accordance with the requirements of the general conditions. The General Court should have exercised its discretion
         to request the production of additional evidence, by way of a measure of organisation of procedure under Article of its
         Rules of Procedure. 
      
The Commission considers that the single plea is inadmissible in part and manifestly unfounded in its entirety in any event.
      
 Findings of the Court
It should first of all be noted that although the cost statements provided for in Article of the general conditions are
         indeed the only evidence relating to costs which the co-contractor is required systematically to produce to the Commission
         within specified time limits, that fact, emphasised by Evropaïki Dynamiki, nevertheless does not mean that the cost statements
         presented by a co-contractor are sufficient, in themselves, to establish that the costs stated therein are genuine, that they
         were in fact necessary and that they were incurred in order to perform the contract during its duration, in accordance with
         Article of the general conditions. 
      
Therefore, contrary to Evropaïki Dynamiki’s arguments, the General Court did not distort the evidence in the file by holding,
         in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, that the first and second cost statements referred to in paragraph of the judgment under appeal do not, in themselves, allow it to be established that the conditions laid down in Article of the general conditions were satisfied in the present case. 
      
The fact that the Commission ‘already accepted’ certain costs on the basis of the cost statements considered, noted by the
         General Court in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, does not rebut the finding made in the previous paragraph, since
         the Commission remains free to request its co-contractor to prove that the conditions laid down in Article of the general
         conditions are satisfied with respect to other costs which it has not definitively accepted. Likewise, the fact, relied upon
         by Evropaïki Dynamiki, that the Commission never raised, in its correspondence with it, the question of the adequacy of those
         statements as evidence is also irrelevant in that regard. 
      
In so far as the General Court held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the documents produced by Evropaïki
         Dynamiki do not suffice to show that the costs stated therein were in fact incurred in the performance of the project, it
         suffices to note that Evropaïki Dynamiki fails to identify any specific evidence that the General Court distorted in reaching
         that conclusion. 
      
Moreover, concerning the third cost statement referred to in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, Evropaïki Dynamiki
         has not shown any distortion of the evidence in the file concerning the application made by the General Court, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, of the general conditions. In particular, the General Court was correct to point out,
         in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, that Evropaïki Dynamiki had to prove that it certified the time sheets
         at least once a month, in accordance with Article 14(1) of the general conditions, and that, since that requirement had not
         been fulfilled, the personnel costs declared were not eligible costs within the meaning of Article 13(1) of those conditions.
         
      
It follows from the above that Evropaïki Dynamiki has not established, in the present case, a distortion of the evidence in
         the file capable of calling into question the rejection by the General Court, in paragraphs and of the judgment under
         appeal, of the personnel costs and overheads considered. 
      
It should be added, in so far as Evropaïki Dynamiki claims that the General Court distorted the evidence establishing the
         veracity of the costs declared by it, that the General Court held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that ‘it
         [was] sufficient to note’ — in order to hold that the personnel costs charged to the EDC‑EEBO/contract were not
         eligible costs — that Evropaïki Dynamiki had not certified at least once a month the working hours at issue. It is thus ‘in
         any event’ and, therefore, for the sake of completeness, that the General Court held, in paragraph of the judgment under
         appeal, that the other documents provided by Evropaïki Dynamiki do not establish that the hours stated were ‘actually [worked]
         by the persons directly carrying out the scientific and technical work under the project’, in accordance with Article 14(1)
         of the general conditions. According to the settled case-law of the Court of Justice, complaints directed against grounds
         included in a judgment of the General Court purely for the sake of completeness cannot lead to the judgment being set aside
         and are therefore ineffective (judgment in Commission v IPK International, C‑336/P, EU:C:2015:83, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Finally, regarding Evropaïki Dynamiki’s argument that the General Court should have adopted a measure of organisation of procedure
         seeking the production of documents held by Evropaïki Dynamiki itself, it should be noted that it is for the latter to produce
         before the General Court the evidence it has at its disposal establishing, as the case may be, that the costs presented in
         its cost statements were genuine and eligible, in accordance with the requirements of the general conditions. 
      
Therefore, as the Commission contends, that argument constitutes, in essence, an offer of evidence submitted for the first
         time before the Court of Justice. Such an offer of evidence, which Evropaïki Dynamiki could have presented before the General
         Court, must be regarded as being out of time and, therefore, manifestly inadmissible, at the stage of the appeal. 
      
In the light of all the foregoing, the single plea is manifestly inadmissible, in part, and manifestly unfounded as to the
         remainder. 
      
 Costs
Article 184(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice provides that, where the appeal is unfounded, the Court is
         to make a decision as to costs. Under Article 138(1) of those rules, applicable to the procedure on appeal by virtue of Article 184(1)
         thereof, the unsuccessful party must be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings.
         Since the Commission has applied for costs and Evropaïki Dynamiki has been unsuccessful, Evropaïki Dynamiki must be ordered
         to pay the costs in the present appeal proceedings. 
      
Evropaïki Dynamiki also asks the Court to order the Commission to pay the costs incurred at first instance, in accordance
         with the second subparagraph of Article 87(3) of the Rules of Procedure of the General Court, although the General Court dismissed
         its action and even assuming that its appeal is dismissed. The General Court did not rule on its request put forward before
         it in that way. 
      
In that regard, it is settled case-law that, where all the other pleas put forward in an appeal have been rejected, any plea
         challenging the decision of the General Court on costs must be rejected as inadmissible by virtue of the second paragraph
         of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, which provides that no appeal is to lie regarding
         only the amount of the costs or the party ordered to pay them (judgment in Edwin v OHIM, C‑263/P, EU:C:2011:452, paragraph and the case-law cited). 
      
Since the single plea put forward by Evropaïki Dynamiki has been rejected in the present case, its application concerning
         the apportionment of costs at first instance is manifestly inadmissible. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Dismisses the appeal.
2.      Orders Evropaïki Dynamiki — Proigmena Systimata Tilepikoinonion Pliroforikis kai Tilematikis AE to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
*Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 