
Case C-83/Proceedings brought by 
Bernd Voigt
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Amtsgericht Freiburg)
(Completion of the internal market – Approximation of laws – Motor vehicles – Community type-approval procedure – Directive 70/156/EEC – Scope – Classification according to the technical characteristics of vehicle types – Effect on vehicle classification of a national regulation governing road traffic)
Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), July Summary of the Judgment
Approximation of laws – Motor vehicles – Community type-approval procedure – Directive 70/(Council Directive 70/156)
Directive 70/on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the type-approval of motor vehicles and
         their trailers, as amended by Directive 92/53, is to be interpreted as meaning that it does not preclude national rules which
         provide that a vehicle is not subject to the national speed limits for passenger cars, even where that vehicle has been registered
         as a passenger car on the basis of a Community type-approval granted pursuant to that directive. 
      
Directive 70/applies to the technical characteristics of a type of vehicle. Neither the wording of the directive nor its
         object or its purpose show that the Community legislature intended to attach to Community type-approval by vehicle types,
         introduced by that directive in order to eliminate obstacles to the completion of the internal market, consequences in relation
         to the application of national road traffic rules governing the speed limits applying to different categories of motor vehicles.
      
(see paras 18, 20-21, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Completion of the internal market – Approximation of laws – Motor vehicles – Community type-approval procedure – Directive 70/156/EEC– Scope – Classification according to the technical characteristics of vehicle types – Effect on vehicle classification of a national regulation governing road traffic)
In Case C-83/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Amtsgericht Freiburg (Germany), made by decision of January
         2005, received at the Court on February 2005, in proceedings brought by 
      
Bernd Voigt,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
composed of J. Malenovský, President of the Chamber, J.-P. Puissochet and A. Borg Barthet (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: A. Tizzano,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       the German Government, by U. Forsthoff, acting as Agent,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by X. Lewis and M. Heller, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Council Directive 70/156/EEC of February on the
         approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the type‑approval of motor vehicles and their trailers (OJ, English
         Special Edition (I), p. 96), as amended by Council Directive 92/53/EEC of June (OJ L 225, p. 1) (‘Directive 70/156’).
      
That question was raised in proceedings brought by Mr Voigt concerning an administrative fine imposed on him by the Regierungspräsidium
         Karlsruhe‑Bretten (Karlsruhe Regional Administration).
      
 Legal framework
 Community legislation
The reasons which led the Community legislature to adopt Directive 70/are set out in the recitals in its preamble, where
         it is stated:
      
‘… in each Member State motor vehicles intended for the carriage of goods or passengers must comply with certain mandatory
         technical requirements; … such requirements differ from one Member State to another and consequently hinder trade within the
         European Economic Community ;
      
… such hindrances to the establishment and proper functioning of the common market can be reduced and even eliminated if all
         Member States adopt the same requirements, either in addition to or in place of their existing laws;
      
… it is the established practice of the Member States to check that vehicles comply with the relevant technical requirements
         before they are placed on the market;
      
… 
… at Community level it is necessary to introduce a Community type‑approval procedure for each vehicle type in order that
         compliance with the above requirements can be checked and that each Member State may recognise checks carried out by other
         Member States;
      
… that procedure must enable each Member State to ascertain whether a vehicle type has been submitted to the checks laid down
         by separate Directive and listed in a type-approval certificate; … that procedure must enable manufacturers to complete a
         certificate of conformity for all vehicles which conform to an approved type; … a vehicle accompanied by such a certificate
         must be considered by all Member States as conforming to their own laws; … each Member State should inform the other Member
         States of its findings by sending a copy of the type approval certificate completed for each vehicle type which has been approved.
      
…’
The first paragraph of Article of Directive 70/states:
‘This Directive applies to the type-approval of motor vehicles and their trailers built in one or more stages, of systems,
         components and separate technical units intended for use on such vehicles and trailers.’
      
Under Article of the directive:
–       ‘type-approval’ is defined as ‘the procedure whereby a Member State certifies that a type of vehicle, system, component or
         separate technical unit satisfies the relevant technical requirements of this Directive or a separate Directive contained
         in the exhaustive  list set out in Annex IV or XI’; 
      
–       ‘vehicle’ is defined as ‘any motor vehicle intended for use on the road, being complete or incomplete, having at least four
         wheels and a maximum design speed exceeding km/h, and its trailers, with the exception of vehicles which run on rails and
         of  agricultural and forestry tractors and all mobile machinery’, and
      
–       ‘type’ means ‘vehicles of one category which do not differ in at least the essential respects specified in Annex II.B. A type
         of vehicle may contain variants and versions (see Annex II.B)’.
      
Annex II to Directive 70/provides that category ‘M 1’ covers vehicles used for the carriage of passengers and comprising
         no more than eight seats in addition to the driver’s seat. 
      
 National legislation
The German rules relating to road traffic are contained in various enactments and regulations. The legislation that is relevant
         to the main proceedings is: the Road Traffic Law (Strassenverkehrsgesetz) (‘the StVG’), the highway code (Strassenverkehrsordnung)
         (‘the StVO’) and the Law on the Carriage of Persons (Personenbeforderungsgesetz) (‘the PBefG’). Directive 70/was implemented
         in German law by the Regulation on Community Type-approval of Vehicles and Vehicle Components (Verordnung über die EG-Typgenehmigung
         für Fahrzeuge und Fahrzeugteile of December 1994, most recently amended on February 2004). The rules concerning the procedure
         for registration and compulsory insurance are now set out exclusively in the Regulation on the Entry into Service of Motor
         Vehicles (Strassenverkehrszulassungsordnung) (‘the StVZO’), which also contains rules applicable to the construction and use
         of motor vehicles. 
      
The rules governing the driving of motor vehicles are set out in the StVO. As regards speed, it lays down different rules
         for passenger cars to those which apply to other motor vehicles. That distinction arises from Paragraph 18(1), second sentence,
         sub-item 1, of the StVO, which is the relevant provision in the main proceedings and which limits the maximum speed on motorways
         of vehicles other than passenger cars to km/h. The latter are not subject to any general speed limit. 
      
The StVO contains no definition of ‘passenger car’. Paragraph 4(4) of the PBefG defines passenger cars as motor vehicles which
         ‘by their design and equipment, are suitable and intended for carrying no more than nine persons (including the driver)’.
         
      
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
On October 2003, while driving on a federal motorway, outside a built-up area, a motor vehicle of the ‘Sprinter’ type manufactured
         by DaimlerChrysler AG, with a maximum permitted weight of 4.tonnes, Mr Voigt was subject to a speed check. As the speed
         of the car, minus the permitted margin of tolerance, was km/h, the Regierungspräsidium Karlsruhe-Bretten, by decision
         of November 2003, imposed on Mr Voigt an administrative fine of EUR for exceeding the maximum permitted speed of km/h applicable inter alia to goods vehicles by km/h. An order was also made suspending Mr Voigt’s driving licence for
         two months and imposing four penalty points in the central traffic register. The registration documents record that the vehicle
         driven by Mr Voigt, which was granted Community type-approval in category ‘M 1’ is registered as a passenger car.
      
mr Mr Voigt brought an appeal against those measures on November 2003. Under reference to the registration certificate of
         the vehicle in question, which states that it is classified as a passenger car, he contended that the speed limit of km/h
         on motorways, outside a built-up area, which concerns inter alia goods vehicles did not apply to such a vehicle, which is
         subject to the limits relating to passenger cars.  
      
By decision of March 2004, the Freiburg Public Prosecutor’s Office referred Mr Voigt’s case to the Amstgericht Freiburg
         (Freiburg Local Court) in order for the appropriate fine to be set. On April 2004, that court gave a decision of acquittal.
         The Freiburg Public Prosecutor’s Office appealed against that decision before the Oberlandsgericht Karlsruhe (Karlsruhe Higher
         Regional Court). On August 2004, the Oberlandsgericht Karlsruhe annulled the decision of acquittal. It essentially held
         that it was necessary for additional findings of fact to be made in the main proceedings as regards the specific version of
         the ‘Sprinter’ type driven by Mr Voigt, having regard to the differences between the various versions of that vehicle, as
         determined in a decision issued the previous day which related to a similar case, where the court held that a reference to
         ‘passenger car’ in the registration documents was not relevant.
      
In those circumstances, the Amstgericht Freiburg decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the
         Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Is Directive 70/…, implemented in German Law in the EG‑TypV (Verordnung über die EG-Typgenehmigung für Fahrzeuge und Fahrzeugteile
         of December 1994, most recently amended on February 2004), to be interpreted as meaning that the driver of a motor vehicle
         whose vehicle has been registered as a passenger car in accordance with a vehicle authorisation based on Community type-approval
         is also entitled to use that vehicle, as an authorised vehicle type, on the public highway, and, in particular, is the driver
         of such a motor vehicle subject only to the speed limits applicable to passenger cars?
      
2.      May the authorities responsible for prosecuting road traffic offences declare that vehicle authorisations in accordance with
         Community type-approval issued by the Federal Office for Motor Vehicles and registrations issued by the German registration
         authorities based on those Community type‑approvals are not decisive as regards the classification of the vehicle for the
         purposes of the speed limits to be observed by the driver of such a vehicle type?’
      
 The questions referred
By its two questions, which fall to be considered together, the national court essentially asks whether Directive 70/is
         to be interpreted as meaning that it precludes national rules which provide that a vehicle such as the one in question in
         the main proceedings is not subject to the national speed limits for passenger cars, but to those applying to goods vehicles,
         even where that vehicle has been registered as a passenger car on the basis of a Community type-approval granted pursuant
         to that directive.
      
It should be observed at the outset, first, that Directive 70/156, which refers expressly only to the international classification
         of motor vehicles in categories M, N and O set out in Annex II, contains no provision regarding the classification of motor
         vehicles as ‘passenger cars’. Secondly, it was found by the national court that, while the manufacturer of the vehicle in
         question in the main proceedings possessed a Community type-approval as type ‘M 1’ for that vehicle, it was only on registration
         by the German authorities that the vehicle was classified as a passenger car.
      
Directive 70/contains provisions the purpose of which, according to the recitals in its preamble, is to establish and
         implement a Community type-approval procedure for each type of vehicle, to replace the type‑approval procedures previously
         applying in the Member States. The scope of that Community type‑approval can be determined only by reference to the precise
         field of application of Directive 70/156.
      
That directive sets out chronologically the procedure for type-approval, the subsequent procedure for issuing a type-approval
         certificate, the completion by the manufacturer of a certificate of conformity and the duty of Member States to monitor, for
         registration purposes, the conformity of production with the type for which approval was granted. The object of the directive
         is to remove obstacles to the free movement of goods. The harmonisation of the requirements and technical characteristics
         constitutes the means of achieving that object. By contrast, Directive 70/contains nothing which goes beyond that harmonisation.
         In particular, it contains no provision giving guidance to the Member States in relation to the speed limits which should
         apply to the different categories of motor vehicles for which a Community type‑approval has been granted.
      
It must therefore be held that Directive 70/thus applies to the technical characteristics of a type of vehicle and contains
         no other provision relating to the road traffic rules which are to be complied with by the drivers of motor vehicles.
      
It must also be pointed out that Directive 70/is based on Article of the EEC Treaty (which became Article of the
         EC Treaty, now Article EC) and Article 100a of the EEC Treaty (which became Article 100a of the EC Treaty, now, after amendment,
         Article EC), which relate to powers in the field of the approximation of laws with a view to the completion of the common
         market or the internal market.
      
In those circumstances, neither the wording of Directive 70/nor its object or its purpose show that the Community legislature
         intended to attach to Community type-approval by vehicle types, introduced by that directive in order to eliminate obstacles
         to the completion of the internal market, consequences in relation to the application of national road traffic rules governing
         the speed limits applying to different categories of motor vehicles.
      
In the light of the above, the answer to the questions referred by the Amtsgericht Freiburg must be that Directive 70/is to be interpreted as meaning that it does not preclude national rules which provide that a vehicle such as the one in question
         in the main proceedings is not subject to the national speed limits for passenger cars, even where that vehicle has been registered
         as a passenger car on the basis of a Community type-approval granted pursuant to that directive.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Sixth Chamber) hereby rules:
Council Directive 70/156/EEC of February on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the type-approval
            of motor vehicles and their trailers, as amended by Council Directive 92/53/EEC of June 1992, is to be interpreted as meaning
            that it does not preclude national rules which provide that a vehicle such as the one in question in the main proceedings
            is not subject to the national speed limits for passenger cars, even where that vehicle has been registered as a passenger
            car on the basis of a Community type-approval granted pursuant to that directive.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 