
Avis juridique important
|
61994JJudgment of the Court (Fourth Chamber) of February 1995.  -  Criminal proceedings against Jean-Louis Aubertin, Bernard Collignon, Guy Creusot, Isabelle Diblanc, Gilles Josse, Jacqueline Martin and Claudie Normand.  -  References for a preliminary ruling: Tribunal de grande instance de Charleville-Mézières - France.  -  Hairdressers - Council Directive 82/489/EEC.  -  Joined cases C-29/94, C-30/94, C-31/94, C-32/94, C-33/94, C-34/and C-35/94.  
European Court reports Page I-Summary
Parties
Grounds
Decision on costs
Operative part
Keywords
++++Freedom of movement for persons ° Freedom of establishment ° Free movement of services ° Hairdressers ° Member State requiring its own nationals who have been trained in that State to satisfy stricter rules for the pursuit of an occupation than those applicable to nationals from other Member States ° Permissible  (EEC Treaty, Arts and 59; Council Directive 82/489)  
Summary
Since the Treaty provisions on the freedom of movement for persons cannot be applied to activities which are confined in all respects within a single Member State, and Directive 82/laying down measures to facilitate the effective exercise of the right of establishment and freedom to provide services in hairdressing does not aim to harmonize the conditions laid down by national rules for access to the occupation of hairdresser and the pursuit of that occupation, Community law does not preclude national rules whereby a Member State requires its own nationals who have received their training in that State to hold a diploma in order to operate a hairdressing salon, while permitting hairdressers who are nationals of other Member States to operate a hairdressing salon without holding such a diploma and without being obliged to entrust its operation to a manager holding that diploma providing they satisfy certain conditions as to the prior pursuit of that occupation. 
Parties
In Joined Cases C-29/94, C-30/94, C-31/94, C-32/94, C-33/94, C-34/and C-35/94,  REFERENCES to the Court under Article of the EC Treaty by the Tribunal de Grande Instance de Charleville-Mézières (France) for a preliminary ruling in the criminal proceedings before that court against  Jean-Louis Aubertin,  Bernard Collignon,  Guy Creusot,  Isabelle Diblanc,  Gilles Josse,  Jacqueline Martin,  Claudie Normand,  on the interpretation of Council Directive 82/489/EEC of July laying down measures to facilitate the effective exercise of the right of establishment and freedom to provide services in hairdressing (OJ L 218, p. 24),  THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),  composed of: P.J.G. Kapteyn, President of the Chamber, C.N. Kakouris (Rapporteur) and J.L. Murray, Judges,  Advocate General: C.O. Lenz,  Registrar: R. Grass,  after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:  ° the French Government, by C. de Salins, Sub-Director in the Directorate for Legal Affairs of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and P. Martinet, Secretary for Foreign Affairs in the same directorate, acting as Agents,  ° the Commission of the European Communities, by M.-J. Jonczy, Legal Adviser, acting as Agent,  having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,  after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on December 1994,  gives the following  Judgment  
Grounds
By seven judgments of October 1993, received at the Court on January 1994, the Tribunal de Grande Instance (Regional Court), Charleville-Mézières (France), exercising its criminal jurisdiction, referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article of the EC Treaty a question on the interpretation of Council Directive 82/489/EEC of July laying down measures to facilitate the effective exercise of the right of establishment and freedom to provide services in hairdressing (OJ L 218, p. 24).  That question was raised in criminal proceedings instituted by the Public Prosecutor' s Office under Article of Law No 46-of May regulating the conditions of access to the trade of hairdresser (Journal Officiel de la République Française ° JORF of May 1946, p. 4539) against the accused persons, Mr Aubertin, Mr Collignon, Mr Creusot, Ms Diblanc, Mr Josse, Ms Martin and Mr Normand, of French nationality and resident in France, for operating hairdressing salons in France without holding a hairdressing diploma (brevet professionnel de coiffure) or a master' s diploma (brevet de maîtrise) and without a qualified manager being present, as required by Article of that law, which provides that "the operation of a hairdressing salon requires a qualified manager with a registered contract where the owner of that salon does not hold a hairdressing diploma or master' s diploma".  In order to transpose Directive 82/489, Law No 46-was amended by Law No 87-of May supplementing Law No 46-with regard to nationals of the Member States of the European Economic Community (JORF of May 1987, p. 5650).  Law No 87-inserted Article 3-after Article of Law 46-1173. Article 3-is worded as follows:  "Nationals of the Member States of the European Economic Community who have worked as hairdressers in a Member State of the Community other than France are exempt from the requirement of holding a diploma under Article 3, if that activity fulfils the following conditions:  (1) The pursuit of that activity must have been genuine and lawful under the provisions governing the activity of hairdresser in the State where the activity was pursued.  (2) Furthermore, it must have been pursued independently or as a manager of a business during a continuous period of six years. That period shall be reduced to three years if the person concerned proves to the competent French authorities:  ° either that he has had previous training of at least three years for which he has received a diploma recognized by the State or a competent trade organization in accordance with the provisions governing access to the trade in the State where the activity was performed;  ° or he has pursued the trade as an employed person for at least five years.  [...]"  Circular No of July on the application of Law No 87-of May states that "the provisions of the Law of May are also applicable to hairdressers of French nationality where they have fulfilled the conditions in a Member State of the EEC other than France".  The accused persons argued before the national court that Article of Law No 46-1173, under which they were charged, is contrary to Articles and of the Treaty. It discriminates against French nationals, since Article 3-of Law No 87-permits hairdressers who are nationals of other Member States of the Community to operate a hairdressing salon without holding the diploma required of French nationals and without being obliged to employ a manager who holds such a diploma.  Since the Tribunal de Grande Instance de Charleville-Mézières considered that the outcome of the criminal proceedings depended on the interpretation of Directive 82/489, it decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question to the Court for a preliminary ruling:  "Do Articles and 3-of Law No 46-of May constitute discrimination between nationals of the EEC and French nationals having regard to Law No 87-of May adopted in implementation of Council Directive 82/489/EEC of July 1982?"  That question must be understood as meaning that the national court is asking whether Community law, in particular Directive 82/489, must be interpreted as precluding national rules which require nationals of that Member State to hold a diploma in order to operate a hairdressing salon, while permitting hairdressers who are nationals of other Member States to operate a hairdressing salon without holding such a diploma and without being obliged to entrust its operation to a manager who holds that diploma.  It is settled case-law that the Treaty provisions on the freedom of movement for persons cannot be applied to activities which are confined in all respects within a single Member State (see, for example, Joined Cases C-330/and C-331/López Brea and Hidalgo Palacios [1992] ECR I-323, paragraph 7).  It is clear from the judgments of the national court that the criminal proceedings before it concern French nationals working as hairdressers in France who do not claim to have obtained in another Member State the occupational qualifications required to pursue those activities.  There is thus no connecting factor between such situations and any of those contemplated by Community law, so that the Treaty rules on freedom of establishment are inapplicable.  It is evident from the fourth and fifth recitals in the preamble to Directive 82/that the directive does not aim to harmonize the conditions laid down by national rules for access to the occupation of hairdresser and the pursuit of that occupation.  Accordingly, the reply to be given to the national court is that Community law, in particular Directive 82/489, must be interpreted as not precluding national rules which require that nationals of that Member State hold a diploma in order to operate a hairdressing salon, while permitting hairdressers who are nationals of other Member States to operate a hairdressing salon without holding such a diploma and without being obliged to entrust its operation to a manager holding that diploma.  
Decision on costs
Costs  The costs incurred by the Commission of the European Communities and the French Government, which have submitted observations to the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court.  
Operative part
On those grounds,  THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),  in answer to the questions referred to it by the Tribunal de Grande Instance, Charleville-Mézières, by judgments of October 1993, hereby rules:  Community law, in particular Council Directive 82/489/EEC of July laying down measures to facilitate the effective exercise of the right of establishment and freedom to provide services in hairdressing, must be interpreted as not precluding national rules which require that nationals of that Member State hold a diploma in order to operate a hairdressing salon, while permitting hairdressers who are nationals of other Member States to operate a hairdressing salon without holding such a diploma and without being obliged to entrust its operation to a manager holding that diploma.  
Top  
 