
Avis juridique important
|
61986JJudgment of the Court of July 1988.  -  Commission of the European Communities v Italian Republic.  -  Failure by a Member State to fulfil its obligations - Failure to transpose Council Directive 82/470/EEC into national law - Effective exercise of freedom of establishment and freedom to provide services in respect of activities of self-employed persons in certain services incidental to transport and travel agencies and in storage and warehousing.  -  Case 310/86.  
European Court reports Page Summary
Parties
Grounds
Decision on costs
Operative part
Keywords
++++Member States - Obligations - Implementation of directives - Failure - Justification - None admissible  ( EEC Treaty, Art . )  
Summary
A Member State may not plead provisions, practices or circumstances prevailing in its own legal system in order to justify a failure to comply with obligations and time-limits laid down by directives . 
Parties
In Case 310/Commission of the European Communites, represented by Guido Berardis, a member of its Legal Department, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of G . Kremlis, also a member of its Legal Department, Jean Monnet Building, Kirchberg,  applicant,  v  Italian Republic, represented by Luigi Ferrari Bravo, Head of the Department of Contentious Diplomatic Affairs, acting as Agent, assisted by M . Fiumara, Avcocato dello Stato, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Italian Embassy,  defendant,  APPLICATION for a declaration that by failing to notify the laws, regulations and administrative provisions which it deems sufficient to comply with its obligations under Council Directive 82/470/EEC of June ( Official Journal L 2l3, p.) on measures to facilitate the effective exercise of freedom of establishment and freedom to provide services in respect of activities of self-employed persons in certain services incidental to transport and travel agencies ( ISIC Group ) and in storage and warehousing ( ISIC Group ), or by failing to adopt the measures necessary to comply with that directive, the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive and under the third paragraph of Article and the first paragraph of Article of the EEC Treaty,  THE COURT  composed of : Lord Mackenzie Stuart, President, G . Bosco, J . C . Moitinho de Almeida and G . C . Rodgríguez Iglesias, President of Chambers, T . Koopmans, U . Everling, Y . Galmot, C . Kakouris and F . Schockweiler, Judges,  Advocate General : J . Mischo  Registrar : H . A . Ruehl, Principal Administrator  having regard to the Report for the Hearing and further to the hearing on May 1988,  after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General delivered at the sitting on May 1988,  gives the following  Judgment  
Grounds
By an application lodged at the Court Registry on December 1986, the Commission of the European Communities brought proceedings under Article of the EEC Treaty for a declaration that by failing to adopt within the prescribed period the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Council Directive 82/470/EEC of June on measures to facilitate the effective exercise of freedom of establishment and freedom to provide services in respect of activities of self-employed persons in certain services incidental to transport and travel agencies ( ISIC Group ) and in storage and warehousing ( ISIC Group ) ( Official Journal, L 213, p . ), the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty .  Article of Directive 82/requires the Member States to adopt the measures necessary to comply with the directive within months of its notification and forthwith inform the Commission thereof . That period expired on January .  The Commission did not receive within the prescribed period any communication from the Italian Government concerning measures to transpose the directive . Thereupon, the Commission sent the Italian Government formal notice, on April 1985, requesting it to submit its observations on the matter within two months . Since no reply was forthcoming to that letter the Commission delivered a reasoned opinion on April which also remained unanswered and the Commission thereupon brought the present action for failure to fulfil obligations .  Reference is made to the Report for the Hearing for a fuller account of the facts of the case, the course of the procedure and the submissions and arguments of the parties, which are mentioned or discussed hereinafter only in so far as is necessary for the reasoning of the Court .  The Italian Government acknowledges that the measures needed to transpose the directive into national law have not yet been adopted . It submits that the adjournment of the legislature delayed the adoption of such measures .  It should be recalled that the Court has consistently held that a Member State may not plead provisions, practices or circumstances existing in its own legal system in order to justify a failure to comply with obligations and time-limits laid down by directives .  It must therefore be declared that by failing to adopt within the prescribed period the provisions necessary to comply with Council Directive 82/of June the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty .  
Decision on costs
Costs  Under Article ( ) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party must be ordered to pay the costs . As the defendant has failed in its submissions, it must be ordered to pay the costs .  
Operative part
On those grounds,  THE COURT  hereby :  ( ) Declares that by failing to adopt within the prescribed period the provisions necessary to comply with Council Directive 82/470/EEC of June the Italian Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EEC Treaty;  ( ) Orders the Italian Republic to bear the costs .  
Top  
 