
Case C-288/Wamo BVBA
v
JBC NV
and
Modemakers Fashion NV
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
rechtbank van koophandel te Dendermonde)
(First subparagraph of Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure – Directive 2005/29/EC – Unfair commercial practices – National legislation prohibiting announcements of price reductions or announcements suggesting such reductions)
Summary of the Order
Approximation of laws – Unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices – Directive 2005/(European Parliament and Council Directive 2005/29)
Directive 2005/concerning unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices in the internal market must be interpreted as
         precluding a national provision which provides for a general prohibition of announcements of price reductions or announcements
         suggesting such reductions during the period preceding sales, in so far as the provision pursues objectives relating to consumer
         protection and therefore falls well within the scope of that directive, which is for the national court to determine.
      
Since Directive 2005/fully harmonises the rules relating to unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices, Member States
         may not adopt stricter rules than those provided for in the directive, as expressly provided for in Article thereof, even
         in order to achieve a higher level of consumer protection.
      
The same directive establishes, in its Annex I, an exhaustive list of commercial practices which, in accordance with Article
         5(5) of that directive, are regarded as unfair ‘in all circumstances’. Consequently, as recital in the preamble to that
         directive expressly states, only those commercial practices can be deemed to be unfair without a case-by-case assessment against
         the provisions of Articles to of that directive.
      
However, the practices of announcing price reductions to consumers do not appear in Annex I to Directive 2005/29. Therefore,
         they cannot be prohibited in all circumstances, but can be prohibited only following a specific assessment allowing the unfairness
         of those practices to be established.
      
(see paras 28, 33, 37-38, 40, operative part)
  
  
ORDER OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
June (*)
      
(First subparagraph of Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure – Directive 2005/29/EC – Unfair commercial practices – National legislation prohibiting announcements of price reductions or announcements suggesting such reductions)
In Case C-288/10,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the rechtbank van koophandel te Dendermonde (Belgium), made
         by decision of June 2010, received at the Court on June 2010, in the proceedings
      
Wamo BVBA
v
JBC NV,
Modemakers Fashion NV,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of A. Tizzano (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, J.-J. Kasel, A. Borg Barthet, E. Levits and M. Safjan, Judges,
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
the Court proposing to give its decision by reasoned order in accordance with the first subparagraph of Article 104(3) of
         its Rules of Procedure,
      
after hearing the Advocate General,
makes the following
Order
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Directive 2005/29/EC of the European Parliament and
         of the Council of May concerning unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices in the internal market and amending
         Council Directive 84/450/EEC and Directives 97/7/EC, 98/27/EC and 2002/65/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
         and Regulation (EC) No 2006/of the European Parliament and of the Council (‘Unfair Commercial Practices Directive’) (OJ
         L 149, p. 22).
      
The reference has been made in the course of proceedings against Wamo BVBA (‘Wamo’), which runs the ZEB chain of clothes shops,
         brought by JBC NV and Modemakers Fashion NV, two companies which run competing shops, relating to announcements of price reductions
         which Wamo sent to its customers.
      
 Legal context
 European Union law
Recitals 6, and in the preamble to the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive state as follows:
      
‘(6)      This Directive … approximates the laws of the Member States on unfair commercial practices, including unfair advertising,
         which directly harm consumers’ economic interests and thereby indirectly harm the economic interests of legitimate competitors.
         … It neither covers nor affects the national laws on unfair commercial practices which harm only competitors’ economic interests
         or which relate to a transaction between traders; taking full account of the principle of subsidiarity, Member States will
         continue to be able to regulate such practices, in conformity with Community law, if they choose to do so. …
      
…
(8)      This Directive directly protects consumer economic interests from unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices. …
…
(17)      It is desirable that those commercial practices which are in all circumstances unfair be identified to provide greater legal
         certainty. Annex I therefore contains the full list of all such practices. These are the only commercial practices which can
         be deemed to be unfair without a case-by-case assessment against the provisions of Articles to 9. The list may only be modified
         by revision of the Directive.’
      
Article of the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive provides:
      
‘The purpose of this Directive is to contribute to the proper functioning of the internal market and achieve a high level
         of consumer protection by approximating the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States on unfair
         commercial practices harming consumers’ economic interests.’
      
Article of that directive provides:
      
‘For the purposes of this Directive:
…
(d)      “business-to-consumer commercial practices” (hereinafter also referred to as “commercial practices”) means any act, omission,
         course of conduct or representation, commercial communication including advertising and marketing, by a trader, directly connected
         with the promotion, sale or supply of a product to consumers;
      
…’
Article 3(1) of that directive provides:
      
‘This Directive shall apply to unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices, as laid down in Article 5, before, during
         and after a commercial transaction in relation to a product.’
      
According to Article of the same directive:
      
‘Member States shall neither restrict the freedom to provide services nor restrict the free movement of goods for reasons
         falling within the field approximated by this Directive.’
      
Article of the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive, entitled ‘Prohibition of unfair commercial practices’, is in the following
         terms:
      
‘1.      Unfair commercial practices shall be prohibited.
2.      A commercial practice shall be unfair if:
(a)      it is contrary to the requirements of professional diligence,
and
(b)      it materially distorts or is likely to materially distort the economic behaviour with regard to the product of the average
         consumer whom it reaches or to whom it is addressed, or of the average member of the group when a commercial practice is directed
         to a particular group of consumers.
      
…
4.      In particular, commercial practices shall be unfair which:
(a)      are misleading as set out in Articles and 7,
or
(b)      are aggressive as set out in Articles and 9.
5.      Annex I contains the list of those commercial practices which shall in all circumstances be regarded as unfair. The same single
         list shall apply in all Member States and may only be modified by revision of this Directive.’
      
 National law
Article of the Law of July on commercial practices, consumer information and consumer protection (Belgisch Staatsblad, August 1991; ‘the LPPC’) is in the following terms:
      
‘For the purposes of this law, sales shall mean any offer for sale or sale to the consumer for the purpose of seasonally renewing
         the vendor’s stock by selling goods quickly and at reduced prices, under the name “Soldes”, “Opruiming”, “Solden” or “Schlussverkauf”,
         or any other equivalent name.’
      
Article 52(1) of the LPPC provides:
      
‘In the clothing, leather goods, fine leather craft and footwear sectors [sales] may only take place in the period from January to January inclusive and from July to July inclusive. …’
      
Article of the LPPC provides:
      
‘1.      During the pre-sale periods of November to January inclusive and from May to June inclusive, it is prohibited in
         the sectors set out in Article 52(1) to make announcements of price reductions or announcements which suggest a price reduction,
         …, regardless of the place or the methods of communication used.
      
…
Before the commencement of a pre-sale period, it is prohibited to make announcements or suggestions of price reductions which
         would be effective during that pre-sale period.
      
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 48(4), clearance sales which take place during a pre-sale period may not be accompanied
         by an announcement of price reductions except in the cases and under the conditions laid down by the King.
      
2.      The decrees adopted pursuant to Article 52(2) shall specify the pre-sale periods during which the prohibition referred to
         in paragraph is applicable.
      
In the absence of regulations as referred to in Article 52(2), the prohibition referred to in paragraph shall also be applicable
         to the [sales] referred to in Article 52(2).
      
…
4.      The prohibition on announcements of price reductions referred to in paragraphs and is not applicable to sales of goods
         during occasional trade fairs of less than four days, organised not more than once a year by groups of local traders or with
         their participation. 
      
The King may specify the conditions under which such events may be organised.’
The LPPC was repealed by the Law of April on market practices and consumer protection (Belgisch Staatsblad, April 2010, p. 20803). That law entered into force on May and provides, in Article 32, for a similar provision
         to that of Article of the LPPC.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
In the course of December 2009, Wamo sent an invitation to some of its customers regarding a private sale in its shops from
         to December inclusive. In that invitation it was stated that, during those three days, the chosen customers could
         benefit from greatly reduced prices on presentation of their loyalty card.
      
On December 2009, JBC NV and Modemakers Fashion NV applied to the rechtbank van koophandel te Dendermonde (Commercial Court,
         Dendermonde) to have that invitation declared a prohibited announcement under Article of the LPPC. By order granted the
         same day, that court prohibited Wamo from granting any price reduction in its shops up to January on pain of a fine
         of EUR per infringement established.
      
Wamo brought an application to have that order set aside claiming that Article of the LPPC, firstly, does not prohibit
         the granting of reductions but rather the advertisements announcing those reductions, and, secondly, is, in any case, contrary
         to the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive and therefore cannot be applied.
      
Taking the view that the resolution of the dispute before it depends on the interpretation of the aforementioned directive,
         the rechtbank van koophandel te Dendermonde decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question to the Court
         for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Does the [Unfair Commercial Practices Directive] preclude a national provision such as that laid down in Article of the
         [LPPC], which prohibits announcements of price reductions and suggestions of such reductions during defined periods?’
      
 Consideration of the question referred
By its question, the national court asks, in essence, whether the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive must be interpreted
         as precluding a national provision, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which provides for a general prohibition
         of announcements of price reductions or announcements suggesting such reductions during the period preceding sales in specified
         sectors.
      
In accordance with the first subparagraph of Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure, where the answer to a question referred
         for a preliminary ruling may be clearly deduced from existing case-law, the Court may, after hearing the Advocate General,
         at any time give its decision by reasoned order in which reference is made to the relevant case-law.
      
The Court considers that that is true of the present case in so far as the answer to the question referred may be clearly
         deduced in particular from Case C-304/Plus Warenhandelsgesellschaft [2010] ECR I-0000, paragraphs to 51, and Case C-540/Mediaprint Zeitungs- und Zeitschriftenverlag [2010] ECR I-0000, paragraphs to 38.
      
Before replying to the question referred, it is important, as a preliminary point, to establish whether Article 53(1) of the
         LPPC, which constitutes ratione temporis the relevant provision to the facts in the main proceedings, pursues objectives relating to consumer protection so that it
         comes within the scope of the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive.
      
According to recital 8, the directive ‘directly protects consumer economic interests from unfair business-to-consumer commercial
         practices’ and assures, according to Article 1, ‘a high level of consumer protection by approximating the laws, regulations
         and administrative provisions of the Member States on unfair commercial practices harming consumers’ economic interests’ (Mediaprint Zeitungs- und Zeitschriftenverlag, paragraph 24).
      
However, as is evident from recital in the preamble to the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive, national legislation relating
         to unfair commercial practices which harm ‘only’ competitors’ economic interests or which relate to a transaction between
         traders is excluded from the scope of that directive (see Plus Warenhandelsgesellschaft, paragraph 39, and Mediaprint Zeitungs- und Zeitschriftenverlag, paragraph 21).
      
In that regard, it must be observed that the objectives of Article 53(1) of the LPPC are not evident from the order for reference.
      
Firstly, the rechtbank van koophandel te Dendermonde, referring in particular to the judgment of the Arbitragehof (Court of
         Arbitration) of March 1995, which was delivered more than years before the adoption of the Unfair Commercial Practices
         Directive, merely points out that ‘in the past’ the pre-sale period referred to in the aforementioned provision had a twofold
         objective namely, on the one hand, to ensure the transparency of prices applicable immediately before and during the sales
         period for the protection of consumers, and, on the other hand, to guarantee the equality of sales opportunities between traders
         and to protect small traders.
      
Secondly, according to the national court, in order to justify the prohibition provided for in Article 53(1) of the LPPC,
         it is necessary to ascertain whether that measure ‘can actually contribute to consumer protection’.
      
Accordingly, it is not possible to establish from the order for reference whether Article 53(1) of the LPPC actually pursues
         objectives relating to the protection of consumers.
      
It has to be borne in mind that it is not for the Court of Justice, in the context of a reference for a preliminary ruling,
         to rule on the interpretation of national law, as that is exclusively for the national court. The Court must take account,
         under the division of jurisdiction between the courts of the European Union and the national courts, of the factual and legislative
         context in which the questions referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling are set, as described in the order for reference
         (order of April in Case C-519/Koukou, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
It is therefore for the national court and not for this Court to establish whether the national provision at issue in the
         main proceedings actually pursues objectives relating to consumer protection in order to determine whether that provision
         comes within the scope of the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive.
      
Were the national court to reach such a conclusion, it would still be necessary to establish whether the announcements of
         price reductions and the announcements which suggest a price reduction, which are the subject of the prohibition at issue
         in the main proceedings, constitute commercial practices within the meaning of Article 2(d) of the Unfair Commercial Practices
         Directive and are therefore subject to the rules laid down by that directive (see, to that effect, Plus Warenhandelsgesellschaft, paragraph 35, and Mediaprint Zeitungs- und Zeitschriftenverlag, paragraph 16).
      
In that regard, it should be borne in mind that Article 2(d) of the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive gives a particularly
         wide definition to the concept of ‘commercial practices’ as ‘any act, omission, course of conduct or representation, commercial
         communication including advertising and marketing, by a trader, directly connected with the promotion, sale or supply of a
         product to consumers’ (Plus Warenhandelsgesellschaft, paragraph 36, and Mediaprint Zeitungs- und Zeitschriftenverlag, paragraph 17).
      
Promotional campaigns, such as those at issue in the main proceedings, which serve the purpose of attracting consumers to
         the business premises of a trader, clearly form part of an operator’s commercial strategy and relate directly to its promotion
         and sales development. It follows that they constitute commercial practices within the meaning of Article 2(d) of the directive
         and, consequently, come within its material scope (see, to that effect, Mediaprint Zeitungs- und Zeitschriftenverlag, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
That being the case, it must be verified whether the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive precludes a prohibition on announcing
         price reductions, as provided for in Article 53(1) of the LPPC.
      
In this respect, it is important to bear in mind, firstly, that since the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive fully harmonises
         the rules relating to unfair business‑to-consumer commercial practices, Member States may not adopt stricter rules than those
         provided for in the directive, as expressly provided for in Article thereof, even in order to achieve a higher level of
         consumer protection (Plus Warenhandelsgesellschaft, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
Next, it must also be borne in mind that Article of the aforementioned directive sets out the criteria which determine the
         circumstances in which a commercial practice must be considered to be unfair and therefore prohibited.
      
Accordingly, pursuant to Article 5(2), a commercial practice is unfair if it is contrary to the requirements of professional
         diligence and it materially distorts or is likely to materially distort the economic behaviour of the average consumer with
         regard to the product.
      
Moreover, Article 5(4) of the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive defines two precise categories of unfair commercial practices,
         that is to say, ‘misleading practices’ and ‘aggressive practices’ corresponding to the criteria set out in Articles and
         and in Articles and of that directive respectively.
      
Lastly, the same directive establishes, in its Annex I, an exhaustive list of commercial practices which, in accordance
         with Article 5(5) of that directive, are regarded as unfair ‘in all circumstances’. Consequently, as recital in the preamble
         to that directive expressly states, only those commercial practices can be deemed to be unfair without a case-by-case assessment
         against the provisions of Articles to of the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive (Plus Warenhandelsgesellschaft, paragraph 45, and Mediaprint Zeitungs- und Zeitschriftenverlag, paragraph 34).
      
As regards the national provision at issue in the main proceedings, it is undisputed that the practices of announcing price
         reductions to consumers do not appear in Annex I to the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive. Therefore, they cannot be prohibited
         in all circumstances, but can be prohibited only following a specific assessment allowing the unfairness of those practices
         to be established (see, to that effect, Mediaprint Zeitungs- und Zeitschriftenverlag, paragraph 35).
      
However, the fact remains that Article 53(1) of the LPPC prohibits in a general manner announcements of price reductions or
         announcements which suggest a price reduction, without any need to determine, having regard to the facts of each particular
         case, whether the commercial transaction at issue is ‘unfair’ in the light of the criteria set out in Articles to of the
         Unfair Commercial Practices Directive (see, to that effect, Plus Warenhandelsgesellschaft, paragraph 48, and Mediaprint Zeitungs- und Zeitschriftenverlag, paragraph 36).
      
In those circumstances, the answer to the question referred is that the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive must be interpreted
         as precluding a national provision, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which provides for a general prohibition
         of announcements of price reductions or announcements suggesting such reductions during the period preceding sales, in so
         far as the provision pursues objectives relating to consumer protection. It is for the national court to determine whether
         that is the situation in the case in the main proceedings.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
Directive 2005/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of May concerning unfair business-to-consumer commercial
            practices in the internal market and amending Council Directive 84/450/EEC and Directives 97/7/EC, 98/27/EC and 2002/65/EC
            of the European Parliament and of the Council and Regulation (EC) No 2006/of the European Parliament and of the Council
            (‘Unfair Commercial Practices Directive’) must be interpreted as precluding a national provision, such as that at issue in
            the main proceedings, which provides for a general prohibition of announcements of price reductions or announcements suggesting
            such reductions during the period preceding sales, in so far as the provision pursues objectives relating to consumer protection.
            It is for the national court to determine whether that is the situation in the case in the main proceedings.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 