
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-216/Budějovický Budvar, národní podnikvRudolf Ammersin GmbH(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Handelsgericht Wien (Austria))
         
«(Protection of geographical indications and designations of origin – Bilateral convention between a Member State and a non-member country protecting indications of geographical source from that
               non-member country – Articles EC and EC – Regulation (EEC) No 2081/– Article EC – Succession of States in respect of treaties)»
            
Opinion of Advocate General Tizzano delivered on May Judgment of the Court, November Summary of the Judgment
1..
Agriculture – Uniform laws – Protection of geographical indications and designations of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs – Matters covered by Regulation No 2081/– Provision of a bilateral agreement between a Member State and a non-member country protecting a simple and indirect indication
                     of geographical origin – Not covered
                   ( Council Regulation No 2081/92, Art. 2(2)(b)) 
2..
Free movement of goods – Quantitative restrictions – Measures having equivalent effect – Provision of a bilateral agreement between a Member State and a non-member country protecting a simple and indirect indication
                     of geographical origin – Justification – Condition – Lack of generic nature
                   ( Arts EC and EC) 
3..
Free movement of goods – Quantitative restrictions – Measures having equivalent effect – Provision of a bilateral agreement between a Member State and a non-member country protecting a name without direct or indirect
                     connection to the country of geographical origin – Not permissible
                   (Art. EC) 
4..
International agreements – Agreements concluded by Member States – Agreements predating the EC Treaty – Provision of bilateral agreements concluded between a Member State and a non-member country contrary to the Treaty – Application by the court of the Member State – Whether permissible – Obligation to eliminate any incompatibilities between a prior agreement and the Treaty (Art. 307, first and second paras, EC) 
1.
 Regulation No 2081/on the protection of geographical indications and designations of origin for agricultural products and
         foodstuffs, as amended by Regulation No 535/97, does not preclude the application of a provision of a bilateral agreement
         between a Member State and a non-member country under which a simple and indirect indication of geographical origin from that
         non-member country is accorded protection in the importing Member State, whether or not there is any risk of consumers being
         misled, and the import of a product lawfully marketed in another Member State may be prevented. see paras 78, 103, operative part 2.
 Articles EC and EC do not preclude the application of a provision of a bilateral agreement between a Member State and
         a non-member country, under which a simple and indirect indication of geographical origin from that non-member country is
         accorded protection in the importing Member State, whether or not there is any risk of consumers being misled, and the import
         of a product lawfully marketed in another Member State may be prevented, provided that the protected name has not, either
         at the date of the entry into force of that agreement or subsequently, become generic in the State of origin. see paras 102-103, operative part 3.
 Article EC precludes the application of a provision of a bilateral agreement between a Member State and a non-member country
         under which a name which in that country does not directly or indirectly refer to the geographical source of the product that
         it designates is accorded protection in the importing Member State, whether or not there is any risk of consumers being misled,
         and the import of a product lawfully marketed in another Member State may be prevented. see para. 111, operative part 4.
 The first paragraph of Article EC is to be interpreted as permitting a court of a Member State, subject to the findings
         to be made by that court having regard inter alia as to whether the Member State and the non-member country showed that they
         intended to apply the principle of the continuity of treaties to the bilateral instruments at issue, to apply the provisions
         of bilateral agreements concluded between that State and a non-member country and according protection to a name from the
         non-member country, even where those provisions prove to be contrary to the Treaty rules, on the ground that they concern
         an obligation resulting from agreements concluded before the date of the accession of the Member State concerned to the European
         Union. Pending the success of one of the methods referred to in the second paragraph of Article EC in eliminating any
         incompatibilities between an agreement predating that accession and the Treaty, the first paragraph of that article permits
         that State to continue to apply such an agreement in so far as it contains obligations which remain binding on that State
         under international law. see paras 164, 173, operative part JUDGMENT OF THE COURTNovember (1)
((Protection of geographical indications and designations of origin – Bilateral convention between a Member State and a non-member country protecting indications of geographical source from that
                  non-member country – Articles EC and EC – Regulation (EEC) No 2081/– Article EC – Succession of States in respect of treaties))
               
In Case C-216/01, 
 REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Handelsgericht Wien (Austria) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings
            pending before that court between
            
 Budějovický Budvar, národní podnik
and
 Rudolf Ammersin GmbH,
 on the interpretation of Articles EC, EC and EC, and Council Regulation (EEC) No 2081/of July on the
            protection of geographical indications and designations of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs (OJ L 208,
            p. 1), as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 535/of March (OJ L 83, p. 3),
THE COURT,,
 composed of: V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans (Rapporteur), C. Gulmann and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Presidents of Chambers), D.A.O. Edward, A. La Pergola, J.-P. Puissochet, R. Schintgen, N. Colneric and S. von Bahr, Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: A. Tizzano, Registrar: H. von Holstein, Deputy Registrar, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
 Budějovický Budvar, národní podnik, by S. Kommar, Rechtsanwalt, 
               
─
 Rudolf Ammersin GmbH, by C. Hauer, Rechtsanwalt, 
               
─
 the Austrian Government, by C. Pesendorfer, acting as Agent, 
               
─
 the German Government, by W.-D. Plessing and A. Dittrich, acting as Agents, 
               
─
 the French Government, by G. de Bergues and L. Bernheim, acting as Agents, 
               
─
 the Commission of the European Communities, by A.-M. Rouchaud, acting as Agent, and B. Wägenbaur, Rechtsanwalt, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of Budějovický Budvar, národní podnik, represented by S. Kommar; Rudolf Ammersin GmbH,
               represented by C. Hauer, D. Ohlgart and B. Goebel, Rechtsanwälte; and the Commission, represented by A.-M. Rouchaud and B.
               Wägenbaur, at the hearing on November 2002,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By order of February 2001, received at the Court on May 2001, the Handelsgericht Wien (Commercial Court, Vienna) referred
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC four questions on the interpretation of Articles EC, EC and
         EC, and Council Regulation (EEC) No 2081/of July on the protection of geographical indications and designations
         of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs (OJ L 208, p. 1), as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 535/of March (OJ L 83, p. 3) (
         Regulation No 2081/92). 
         
            
 Those questions were raised in proceedings between Budějovický Budvar, národní podnik (
         Budvar), a brewery established in the town of České Budějovice (Czech Republic), and Rudolf Ammersin GmbH (
         Ammersin), a company established in Vienna (Austria) which runs a drink distribution business, concerning Budvar's application for
         an injunction prohibiting Ammersin from marketing beer produced by the brewery Anheuser-Busch Inc. (
         Anheuser-Busch), established in Saint Louis (United States), under the name American Bud on the ground that, pursuant to various bilateral
         agreements between the Czech Republic and the Republic of Austria, in that Member State the name  
         Bud is reserved for beer produced in the Czech Republic. 
         
Legal background
 International law
         
            
 Article 34(1) of the Vienna Convention on Succession of States in respect of Treaties of August provides: When a part or parts of the territory of a State separate to form one or more States, whether or not the predecessor State
         continues to exist:
         
(a)
 any treaty in force at the date of the succession of States in respect of the entire territory of the predecessor State continues
         in force in respect of each successor State so formed; 
         
(b)
 any treaty in force at the date of the succession of States in respect only of that part of the territory of the predecessor
         State which has become a successor State continues in force in respect of that successor State alone.
         
 Community law
         
            
 The first and second paragraphs of Article EC state: The rights and obligations arising from agreements concluded before January or, for acceding States, before the date
         of their accession, between one or more Member States on the one hand, and one or more third countries on the other, shall
         not be affected by the provisions of this Treaty.To the extent that such agreements are not compatible with this Treaty, the Member State or States concerned shall take all
         appropriate steps to eliminate the incompatibilities established. Member States shall, where necessary, assist each other
         to this end and shall, where appropriate, adopt a common attitude.
         
            
 The seventh recital in the preamble to Regulation No 2081/states that  
         there is diversity in the national practices for implementing registered designations o[f] origin and geographical indications;
         ... a Community approach should be envisaged; ... a framework of Community rules on protection will permit the development
         of geographical indications and designations of origin since, by providing a more uniform approach, such a framework will
         ensure fair competition between the producers of products bearing such indications and enhance the credibility of the products
         in the consumers' eyes. 
         
            
 Article 1(1) and (2) of Regulation No 2081/provides: 
         
1.
 This Regulation lays down rules on the protection of designations of origin and geographical indications of agricultural products
         intended for human consumption referred to in Annex II to the Treaty and of the foodstuffs referred to in Annex I to this
         Regulation and agricultural products listed in Annex II to this Regulation.
         ...
         
2.
 This Regulation shall apply without prejudice to other specific Community provisions.
         
            
 Annex I to that regulation, headed  
         Foodstuffs referred to in Article 1(1), mentions  
         Beer in its first indent. 
         
            
 Article 2(1) and (2) of Regulation No 2081/provides: 
         
1.
 Community protection of designations of origin and of geographical indications of agricultural products and foodstuffs shall
         be obtained in accordance with this Regulation.
         
2.
 For the purposes of this Regulation:
         
(a)
 designation of origin : means the name of a region, a specific place or, in exceptional cases, a country, used to describe an agricultural product
         or a foodstuff: 
         
─
 originating in that region, specific place or country, and 
               
─
 the quality or characteristics of which are essentially or exclusively due to a particular geographical environment with its
                  inherent natural and human factors, and the production, processing and preparation of which take place in the defined geographical
                  area; 
               
(b)
 geographical indication : means the name of a region, a specific place or, in exceptional cases, a country, used to describe an agricultural product
         or a foodstuff: 
         
─
 originating in that region, specific place or country, and 
               
─
 which possesses a specific quality, reputation or other characteristics attributable to that geographical origin and the production
                  and/or processing and/or preparation of which take place in the defined geographical area.
               
            
 Articles to of Regulation No 2081/lay down the procedure, known as the  
         normal procedure, for the registration of geographical indications and designations of origin referred to in Article of the regulation.
         According to Article 5(4) of that regulation, the application for registration is to be sent to the Member State in which
         the geographical area is located. In accordance with the first subparagraph of Article 5(5) of the regulation, the Member
         State is to check that the application is justified and forward it to the Commission of the European Communities. 
         
            
 Since examination of an application for registration by the Commission takes a certain amount of time and since, pending a
         decision on the registration of a name, a Member State must be allowed to confer transitional national protection, Regulation
         No 535/inserted the following text after the first subparagraph of Article 5(5) of Regulation No 2081/92: That Member State may, on a transitional basis only, grant on the national level a protection in the sense of the present
         Regulation to the name forwarded in the manner prescribed, and, where appropriate, an adjustment period, as from the date
         of such forwarding; ...Such transitional national protection shall cease on the date on which a decision on registration under this Regulation is
         taken. ...The consequences of such national protection, where a name is not registered under this Regulation, shall be the sole responsibility
         of the Member State concerned.The measures taken by Member States under the second subparagraph shall produce effects at national level only; they shall
         have no effect on intra-Community trade.
         
            
 Article of Regulation No 2081/provides: 
         
1.
 Without prejudice to international agreements, this Regulation may apply to an agricultural product or foodstuff from a third
         country provided that:
         
─
 the third country is able to give guarantees identical or equivalent to those referred to in Article 4, 
         
─
 the third country concerned has inspection arrangements equivalent to those laid down in Article 10, 
         
─
 the third country concerned is prepared to provide protection equivalent to that available in the Community to corresponding
            agricultural products [or] foodstuffs coming from the Community. 
         
2.
 If a protected name of a third country is identical to a Community protected name, registration shall be granted with due
         regard for local and traditional usage and the practical risks of confusion.
          Use of such names shall be authorised only if the country of origin of the product is clearly and visibly indicated on the
         label.
         
            
 Article of Regulation No 2081/sets up a registration procedure, known as the  
         simplified procedure, applicable to the registration of names already in existence on the date of entry into force of that regulation. It provides,
         inter alia, that within six months of the entry into force of Regulation No 2081/92, Member States are to inform the Commission
         of the names they wish to register under that procedure. 
         
            
 In order to take account inter alia of the fact that the first proposal for registration of geographical indications and designations
         of origin which the Commission was to draw up pursuant to Article 17(2) of Regulation No 2081/was not submitted to the
         Council of the European Union until March 1996, when most of the transitional period of five years provided for by Article
         13(2) of that regulation had already elapsed, Regulation No 535/97, which entered into force on March 1997, replaced Article
         13(2) with the following: By way of derogation from paragraph 1(a) and (b), Member States may maintain national systems that permit the use of names
         registered under Article for a period of not more than five years after the date of publication of registration, provided
         that:
         
─
 the products have been marketed legally using such names for at least five years before the date of publication of this Regulation,
            
         
─
 the undertakings have legally marketed the products concerned using those names continuously during the period referred to
            in the first indent, 
         
─
 the labelling clearly indicates the true origin of the product. 
         
 However, this derogation may not lead to the marketing of products freely within the territory of a Member State where such
         names were prohibited.
          National law
         
            
 On June 1976, the Republic of Austria and the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic concluded an agreement on the protection
         of indications of source, designations of origin and other designations referring to the source of agricultural and industrial
         products (
         the bilateral convention). 
         
            
 Following approval and ratification, the bilateral convention was published in the  
          Bundesgesetzblatt für die Republik Österreich  of February (BGBl. No 1981/75). Pursuant to Article 16(2) thereof, the bilateral convention came into force on February for an indefinite period. 
         
            
 Article of the bilateral convention provides: Each of the contracting States undertakes to take all the necessary measures to ensure effective protection against unfair
         competition in the course of trade for indications of source, designations of origin and other designations referring to the
         source of the agricultural and industrial products in the categories referred to in Article and listed in the agreement
         provided for in Article 6, and the names and illustrations referred to in Articles 3, and 8(2).
         
            
 Under Article of the bilateral convention, Indications of source, designations of origin and other designations referring to the source within the meaning of this agreement
         mean all indications which relate directly or indirectly to the source of a product. Such an indication generally consists
         of a geographical designation. However, it may also consist of other information, if in the relevant consumer circles of the
         country of origin this is perceived, in connection with the product thus designated, as a reference to the country of production.
         In addition to the indication of source from a particular geographical area, the abovementioned designations may also contain
         information on the quality of the product concerned. These particular features of the product shall be determined solely or
         predominantly by geographical or human influences.
         
            
 Article 3(1) of the bilateral convention provides: ... the Czechoslovak designations listed in the agreement provided for in Article shall in the Republic of Austria be reserved
         exclusively for Czechoslovak products.
         
            
 Point of Article 5(1)B of the bilateral convention refers to beers as one of the categories of Czech products concerned
         by the protection established by that convention. 
         
            
 Article of the bilateral convention states: Designations of the individual products meeting the conditions laid down in Articles and which enjoy protection under
         the agreement and which are therefore not generic names will be listed in an agreement to be concluded between the Governments
         of the two contracting States.
         
            
 Article of the bilateral convention is worded as follows: 
         
1.
 If the names and designations protected under Articles 3, 4, 6, and 8(2) of this agreement are used contrary to those provisions
         commercially for products, in particular for their presentation or packaging, or on invoices, waybills or other business documents
         or in advertisements, then all judicial and administrative measures for acting against unfair competition or otherwise suppressing
         prohibited designations which are available under the legislation of the contracting State in which protection is claimed
         shall be applied in accordance with the conditions laid down in that legislation and with Article 9.
         
2.
 Where a risk of confusion in commerce exists, paragraph is also to be applied if the designations protected under the agreement
         are used in modified form or for products other than those to which they are allocated in the agreement referred to in Article 6.
         
3.
 Paragraph is also to be applied if the designations protected under the agreement are used in translation or with a reference
         to the actual source or with additions such as  
         style,  
         type,  
         as produced in,  
         imitation or the like.
         
4.
 Paragraph does not apply to translations of designations from one of the contracting States where the translation is a colloquial
         word in the language of the other contracting State.
         
            
 Article 16(3) of the bilateral convention provides that the two contracting parties may denounce the convention by giving
         notice of at least one year, issued in writing and through diplomatic channels. 
         
            
 In accordance with Article of the bilateral convention, an agreement on its application (
         the bilateral agreement) was concluded on June 1979. Pursuant to Article 2(1) thereof, that agreement came into force at the same time as the bilateral
         convention, namely February 1981. It was published in the  
          Bundesgesetzblatt für die Republik Österreich  of February (BGBl. No 1981/76). 
         
            
 Annex B to the bilateral agreement states: Czechoslovak designations for agricultural and industrial products...
         
B.
 Food and agriculture (except wine)
         ...
         
2.
 Beer
          Czech Socialist Republic...BudBudějovické pivoBudějovické pivo BudvarBudějovický Budvar...
         
            
 On December 1992, the Czech National Council declared that, in accordance with the prevailing principles of, and to the
         extent provided for by, international law, the Czech Republic considered itself bound, as of January 1993, by the multilateral
         and bilateral agreements to which the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic was party on that date. 
         
            
 By Constitutional Law No 4/of December 1992, the Czech Republic confirmed that it assumed the rights and obligations
         of the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic which existed under international law on the date of its dissolution. 
         
            
 The communication of the Federal Chancellor concerning the bilateral agreements in force between the Republic of Austria and
         the Czech Republic (BGBl. III No 1997/123;  
         the Federal Chancellor's communication) states: On the basis of a joint examination of the bilateral agreements between the Republic of Austria and the Czech Republic by
         the competent authorities of the two States it was established that, under the generally recognised rules of international
         law, the following bilateral agreements were in force between the Republic of Austria and the Czech Republic on January
         1993, the date on which the Czech Republic succeeded the former Czech and Slovak Federative Republic in the relevant territory,
         and have since been applied by the competent authorities within the framework of the legal systems of the two countries:...
         
19.
 Agreement between the Republic of Austria and the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic on the protection of indications of source,
         designations of origin and other designations referring to the source of agricultural and industrial products, and the protocol
         of November Vienna, June (BGBl. No 75/1981) ... 
         
26.
 Agreement implementing the Agreement between the Republic of Austria and the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic on the protection
         of indications of source, designations of origin and other designations referring to the source of agricultural and industrial
         products Prague, June (BGBl No 76/1981). 
         ...
         The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred
            
 Budvar markets beer, in particular under the names Budějovický Budvar and Budweiser Budvar, and exports a beer called  
         Budweiser Budvar in particular to Austria. 
         
            
 Ammersin markets inter alia a beer called American Bud, produced by the brewery Anheuser-Busch, which it buys from Josef Sigl
         KG (
         Josef Sigl), a company established in Obertrum (Austria) which is the sole Austrian importer of that beer. 
         
            
 By act of July 1999, Budvar brought proceedings before the national court requesting that Ammersin be ordered to refrain
         from using on Austrian territory, in the course of its commercial activities, the name Bud, or similar designations likely
         to cause confusion, for beer or similar goods or in connection with such goods, save where Budvar products were concerned.
         In addition, Budvar also sought the suppression of all designations conflicting with that prohibition, the rendering of accounts
         and publication of the judgment. The action was accompanied by an application for interim measures. 
         
            
 Budvar's action in the main proceedings is essentially based on two different pleas in law. 
         
            
 First of all, Budvar submits that the name American Bud, which is registered as a trade mark in favour of Anheuser-Busch,
         bears a similarity, likely to cause confusion within the meaning of the legislation on unfair competition, to its own priority
         trade marks protected in Austria, namely Budweiser, Budweiser Budvar and Bud. 
         
            
 Second, Budvar asserts that the use of the designation American Bud for a beer from a State other than the Czech Republic
         is contrary to the provisions of the bilateral convention because, pursuant to Article of that convention, the designation
         Bud, referred to in Annex B to the bilateral agreement, is a protected designation and is therefore reserved exclusively for
         Czech products. 
         
            
 On October 1999, the national court granted the interim measures sought by Budvar. 
         
            
 The appeal brought by Ammersin before the Oberlandesgericht Wien (Higher Regional Court, Vienna) (Austria) against those measures
         was not successful and leave to appeal to the Oberster Gerichtshof (Supreme Court) (Austria) was refused. Now that the interlocutory
         proceedings have ended, the Handelsgericht Wien is hearing the main application. 
         
            
 The national court observes that before bringing the action in the main proceedings, Budvar had already brought an action
         before the Landesgericht Salzburg (Regional Court, Salzburg) (Austria) which was identical with regard to both its purpose
         and its legal basis, but which was directed against Josef Sigl. 
         
            
 In that parallel case, the Landesgericht Salzburg ordered the interim measures sought by the claimant, and the Oberlandesgericht
         Linz (Higher Regional Court, Linz) (Austria) dismissed the appeal brought against that order. By order of February 2000,
         the Oberster Gerichtshof dismissed the appeal brought on a point of law against the order made in the initial appeal proceedings,
         and upheld the interim measures. 
         
            
 The national court states that the order of the Oberster Gerichtshof is essentially based on the following considerations.
         
         
            
 The Oberster Gerichtshof, which confined its examination to the plea related to the bilateral convention, held that the injunction
         sought against Josef Sigl, the defendant, could constitute an obstacle to the free movement of goods for the purposes of Article
         EC. 
         
            
 However, it held that that obstacle is compatible with Article EC because the protection of the designation Bud provided
         for in the bilateral convention constitutes protection of industrial and commercial property within the meaning of Article
         EC. 
         
            
 According to the national court, the Oberster Gerichtshof held that the designation Bud is  
         a simple geographical indication or ... an indirect reference to source, in other words an indication for which it is not necessary to respect the guarantees associated with designations of origin
         ─ such as production in compliance with the quality or manufacturing standards adopted and monitored by the authorities, or
         the specific product characteristics. Moreover, the designation Bud enjoys  
         absolute protection, that is to say, irrespective of whether there is any risk of confusion or of consumers being misled. 
         
            
 In the light of the arguments submitted to it, the national court considers that there is reasonable doubt as to the correct
         answers to the questions of Community law raised in the main proceedings, in particular because it is not possible to ascertain
         from the Court's case-law whether  
         simple indications of geographical source, which do not carry any risk of consumers being misled, also come within the scope of
         the protection of industrial and commercial property within the meaning of Article EC. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Handelsgericht Wien decided to stay proceedings and refer the following questions to the Court
         for a preliminary ruling: 
         
(1)
 Is the application of a provision of a bilateral agreement concluded between a Member State and a non-member country, under
         which a simple/indirect geographical indication which in the country of origin is the name neither of a region nor a place
         nor a country is accorded the absolute protection, regardless of any misleading, of a qualified geographical indication within
         the meaning of Regulation No 2081/compatible with Article EC and/or Regulation No 2081/92, if on application of that
         provision the import of a product which is lawfully put on the market in another Member State may be prevented? 
         
(2)
 Does this apply also where the geographical indication which in the country of origin is the name neither of a region nor
         a place nor a country is not understood in the country of origin as a geographical designation for a specific product, and
         also not as a simple or indirect geographical indication? 
         
(3)
 Do the answers to Questions and apply also where the bilateral agreement is an agreement which the Member State concluded
         before its accession to the European Union and continued after its accession to the European Union with a successor State
         to the original other State party to the agreement by means of a declaration of the Federal Government? 
         
(4)
 Does the second paragraph of Article EC oblige the Member State to interpret such a bilateral agreement, concluded between
         that Member State and a non-member country before the Member State's accession to the EU, in conformity with Community law
         as stated in Article EC and/or Regulation No 2081/92, so that the protection laid down therein for a simple/indirect geographical
         indication which in the country of origin is the name neither of a region nor a place nor a country comprises merely protection
         against misleading and not the absolute protection of a qualified geographical indication within the meaning of Regulation
         No 2081/92?
         
The questions referred by the national court Admissibility of the reference for a preliminary ruling
          Observations submitted to the Court
         
            
 Budvar claims that the case at issue in the main proceedings concerns provisions of a bilateral agreement concluded by a Member
         State and a non-member country to which, pursuant to the first paragraph of Article EC, Community law does not apply.
         The interpretation of such provisions comes under the exclusive jurisdiction of the national court. In those circumstances,
         it is neither necessary nor permissible for the Court to give a ruling on the questions referred by the national court. 
         
            
 According to the Austrian Government, the part of the first question relating to the compatibility with Regulation No 2081/of the protection enjoyed under the bilateral convention is inadmissible. The issue is hypothetical inasmuch as the order
         for reference contains no evidence that any of the products concerned has been registered or is intended to be registered
         within the meaning of that regulation. 
         
            
 The Commission submits that the question arises whether the questions referred by the national court are hypothetical and,
         as such, inadmissible, given in particular that, first, the national court clearly does not concur with the interpretation
         of the bilateral convention given by the Oberster Gerichtshof in its interim order of February as to the absolute nature
         of the protection enjoyed under that convention, second, the national court does not state what type of protection is, in
         its view, enjoyed by the name at issue in the main proceedings and, third, it also does not explain whether it is bound by
         the interpretation referred to above. 
          Findings of the Court
         
            
 It is settled law that in the context of the cooperation between the Court of Justice and the national courts provided for
         by Article EC, it is solely for the national court before which the dispute has been brought, and which must assume responsibility
         for the subsequent judicial decision, to determine in the light of the particular circumstances of the case both the need
         for a preliminary ruling in order to enable it to deliver judgment and the relevance of the questions which it submits to
         the Court. Consequently, where the questions submitted by the national court concern the interpretation of Community law,
         the Court of Justice is, in principle, bound to give a ruling. The Court may refuse to rule on a question referred by a national
         court only where it is quite obvious that the interpretation of Community law that is sought bears no relation to the actual
         facts of the main action or its purpose, where the problem is hypothetical, or where the Court does not have before it the
         factual or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions submitted to it (see, inter alia, Case C-379/PreussenElektra  [2001] ECR I-2099, paragraphs and 39). 
         
            
 According to Budvar, the national court's questions are not admissible because, given the applicability of the first paragraph
         of Article EC, the case at issue in the main proceedings concerns only the interpretation of rules of national law, namely
         the bilateral convention and agreement (
         the bilateral instruments at issue), since Community law does not apply to that case. 
         
            
 In that regard, it need only be noted, first, that the third and fourth questions specifically concern the correct interpretation
         of Article EC in the light of the circumstances of the case at issue in the main proceedings, while the first and second
         questions concern the interpretation of provisions of Community law, namely those of Articles EC and EC and of Regulation
         No 2081/92, in order to enable the national court to determine the compatibility of the national rules at issue with Community
         law. There can be no doubt as to the relevance of such an examination given the possible application of Article EC to
         the case in question. 
         
            
 As regards, next, the Austrian Government's assertion that the part of the first question which relates to Regulation No 2081/is hypothetical, it must be observed that the case at issue in the main proceedings concerns Budvar's claim to a right which
         would result in Ammersin being prohibited from marketing certain goods under a protected designation and whose compatibility
         with the system established by Regulation No 2081/has been called into question, irrespective of whether there has been
         any registration under the system instituted by that regulation. That question is therefore in no way hypothetical. 
         
            
 Finally, as regards the Commission's arguments, suffice it to say that the various possibilities posited by the national court
         as to the nature of the name at issue in the main proceedings are merely the premisses on which the questions referred are
         based, the correctness of which it is not for the Court to examine. 
         
            
 It follows from all the foregoing that the reference for a preliminary ruling is admissible. 
          Substance
          The first question
         
            
 By its first question, the national court is asking essentially whether Regulation No 2081/or Article EC precludes the
         application of a provision of a bilateral agreement between a Member State and a non-member country, under which a simple
         and indirect indication of geographical source from that non-member country is accorded protection in the importing Member
         State, irrespective of whether there is any risk of consumers being misled, and the import of a product lawfully marketed
         in another Member State may be prevented. 
         
            
 That question deals with the hypothesis that the name Bud constitutes a simple and indirect indication of geographical source,
         that is to say, a name in respect of which there is no direct link between a specific quality, reputation or other characteristic
         of the product and its specific geographical origin, so that it does not come within the scope of Article 2(2)(b) of Regulation
         No 2081/(see Case C-312/Warsteiner Brauerei  [2000] ECR I-9187, paragraphs and 44), and which, moreover, is not in itself a geographical name but is at least capable
         of informing the consumer that the product bearing that indication comes from a particular place, region or country (see Case
         C-3/Exportur  [1992] ECR I-5529, paragraph 11). 
         ─ Regulation No 2081/Observations submitted to the Court
         
            
 Budvar submits that Bud is an abbreviation of the name of the town of Budweis ─ the Czech name for which is České Budějovice
         ─, which is the place of origin of its beer, and thus includes a geographical reference which establishes a relationship with
         the brewing tradition of that town and reflects, in particular, the worldwide reputation of beer from Budweis, which is attributable
         to its excellent quality. 
         
            
 According to Budvar, the name Bud ─ which is protected in Austria under the bilateral convention ─ is therefore a qualified
         geographical indication or designation of origin, that is to say, an indication or a designation which is eligible for registration
         under Regulation No 2081/92. 
         
            
 Budvar submits that it is clear from the Court's case-law (
          Warsteiner Brauerei , paragraph 47) that Regulation No 2081/does not preclude a national system of protection, similar to that established
         by the bilateral convention, of a qualified geographical indication or designation of origin such as Bud. 
         
            
 In addition, Budvar submits that if the name Bud, as protected under the bilateral convention, is merely a simple indication
         of geographic source ─ that is, an indication of geographic source in respect of which there is no link between the characteristics
         of the product and its geographical source ─, the judgment in  
          Warsteiner Brauerei , in particular paragraph 54,  
          a fortiori  indicates that Regulation No 2081/does not preclude the application of that national protection, since such indications
         are clearly beyond the scope of that regulation. 
         
            
 According to Budvar, Regulation No 2081/governs only Community protection of the designations to which it refers. It follows
         that the national court's distinction between simple indications of geographic source and qualified indications is of no relevance
         when considering the purely national protection accorded by the bilateral convention. In the light of the judgment in  
          Warsteiner Brauerei , in particular paragraphs and 44, that conclusion holds true even where there is no risk of consumers being misled. 
         
            
 Ammersin claims that  
          Warsteiner Brauerei  does not provide any answer to the question underlying the dispute in the main proceedings, namely the question whether the
         absolute protection which Regulation No 2081/reserves to qualified geographic indications and designations of origin can
         be granted at the level of the Member States, in parallel to the system established by that regulation. 
         
            
 That question must be answered in the negative since it is clear from the object, intention and scheme of Regulation No 2081/that that regulation is exhaustive to the extent that it grants absolute protection. Ammersin submits, first, that the regulation
         subjects the protection of a name to strict conditions, according to which the name must be the name of a place and there
         must be a direct link between the quality of the product concerned and the place where it originates (Article 2(2) of Regulation
         No 2081/92), and, second, that that protection is granted only after a compulsory notification, verification and registration
         procedure involving, in particular, a detailed assessment of compliance with the product specifications (Article et seq.
         of that regulation). 
         
            
 According to Ammersin, it follows that Regulation No 2081/precludes national systems of protection from granting absolute
         protection to geographical indications and designations of origin where it is not ensured that those indications and designations
         also meet the strict requirements laid down by that regulation. 
         
            
 That interpretation is lent support by Article of Regulation No 2081/92, from which it follows that national systems of
         protection of qualified indications of geographical source, including those founded on bilateral conventions, may be maintained
         beyond the six-month period provided for in that provision only if they have been notified to the Commission within that period.
         
         
            
 The indications of source protected under the bilateral convention, in particular the name Bud, were not however notified
         to the Commission within that period, which, for the Republic of Austria, expired on June 1999. They can thus no longer
         enjoy protection. 
         
            
 The Austrian Government argues that if one starts from the assumption that the name at issue in the main proceedings is merely
         a simple indication of geographical source, it follows from the case-law of the Court that the protection accorded under the
         bilateral convention is compatible with Regulation No 2081/92. 
         
            
 That Government further submits that it is likewise clear from the case-law of the Court that Regulation No 2081/also does
         not preclude the application of national rules protecting names which are eligible for registration under that regulation.
         
         
            
 The German Government submits that if the case concerns a simple indication of geographical source, then protection of the
         name Bud, as provided for in the bilateral convention, is compatible with Regulation No 2081/because that regulation applies
         only to qualified indications of geographical source, that is, indications which are intrinsically linked to the characteristics
         or the quality of the product in question. 
         
            
 On the other hand, if the case in the main proceedings concerns a qualified indication of source, that Government considers
         that it is necessary to bear in mind the fact that Regulation No 2081/provides only for the registration of indications
         of source from Member States (see Article 5(4) and (5) of that regulation). It is clear from the recitals in its preamble
         that the regulation is based on the premiss that the system it establishes will be supplemented by cooperation with non-member
         countries. However, at present there is no agreement between the European Union and the Czech Republic. 
         
            
 Therefore, no objections can be raised to the protection accorded under the bilateral convention, provided that, in terms
         of their content, the qualified indications of source referred to therein meet the requirements of Regulation No 2081/92.
         
         
            
 The French Government submits that Article 12(1) of Regulation No 2081/authorises the maintenance of international agreements
         concluded prior to the entry into force of that regulation. 
         
            
 It is thus beyond doubt that the protection accorded by the bilateral convention to the name Bud cannot be incompatible with
         Regulation No 2081/92, particularly since that name has been classified as a protected designation of origin inter alia in
         the framework of the Lisbon Agreement for the Protection of Appellations of Origin and their International Registration of
         October 1958, and was registered as such by the World Intellectual Property Organisation in 1975. 
         
            
 The Commission submits that it is clear from the case-law that Regulation No 2081/does not preclude a bilateral convention
         from according, possibly in conjunction with other national legal provisions, absolute protection, that is, irrespective of
         whether there is any use creating a risk of consumers being misled, to a geographical indication such as the one at issue
         in the main proceedings where there is no link between the characteristics of the product concerned and its geographical source.
         
          The Court's reply
         
            
 The Court has already held that there is nothing in Regulation No 2081/to imply that simple indications of geographical
         source cannot be protected under the national legislation of a Member State (see  
          Warsteiner Brauerei , paragraph 45). 
         
            
 The aim of Regulation No 2081/is to ensure uniform protection within the Community of the geographical designations which
         it covers; it introduced a requirement of Community registration in respect of those designations so that they could enjoy
         protection in every Member State, whereas the national protection which a Member State accords to geographical designations
         that do not meet the conditions for registration under Regulation No 2081/is governed by the national law of that Member
         State and is confined to its territory (see  
          Warsteiner Brauerei , paragraph 50). 
         
            
 No doubt is cast on that interpretation by the fact that the national system of protection of indications of geographical
         source at issue in the main proceedings provides for absolute protection, that is to say, irrespective of whether there is
         any risk of consumers being misled. 
         
            
 The scope of Regulation No 2081/is not determined by reference to such factors, but depends essentially on the nature of
         the designation, in that it covers only designations of products for which there is a specific link between their characteristics
         and their geographic origin, and by the fact that the protection conferred extends to the Community. 
         
            
 It is common ground that, for the purposes of the hypothesis to which the first question refers, the name at issue in the
         main proceedings is not a designation which comes within the scope of Regulation No 2081/92. Moreover, the protection which
         it enjoys under the bilateral instruments at issue is limited to Austrian territory. 
         
            
 In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the first question, in so far as it concerns Regulation No 2081/92, must be that
         that regulation does not preclude the application of a provision of a bilateral agreement between a Member State and a non-member
         country under which a simple and indirect indication of geographical origin from that non-member country is accorded protection
         in the importing Member State, whether or not there is any risk of consumers being misled, and the import of a product lawfully
         marketed in another Member State may be prevented. 
         ─ Articles EC and EC
          Observations submitted to the Court
         
            
 As a preliminary point, Budvar submits that the case at issue in the main proceedings concerns only direct imports to Austria
         from a non-member country, namely the United States, and thus does not involve a barrier to intra-Community trade. Hence,
         it has no bearing on the internal market and does not come within the scope of Article EC. 
         
            
 In addition, Budvar asserts that, according to the case-law of the Court, Articles EC and EC do not preclude the application
         of rules, laid down in an international agreement between Member States, on the protection of indications of source and designations
         of origin, provided that at, or after, the date on which that agreement comes into force the protected names have not become
         generic in the State of origin. 
         
            
 According to Budvar, that case-law applies  
          a fortiori  to a situation which, as in the main proceedings, concerns an agreement between a Member State and a non-member country according
         such protection, especially as it is indisputable ─ in particular since it is expressly stated in Article of the bilateral
         convention ─ that the designation Bud is not, and has never been, a generic term. 
         
            
 Ammersin submits that it does not follow from the Court's case-law that absolute protection of a name such as Bud is justified
         under Article EC. Only simple indications of geographical source ─ essentially, place-names ─ with a strong reputation,
         which constitute for producers established in the places to which they refer an essential means of attracting custom, are
         justified. The designation Bud is not the name of a place, nor does it have a reputation among consumers. 
         
            
 Ammersin also submits that protection of the name Bud likewise cannot be justified under Article EC, that is to say, by
         an overriding reason in the general interest, such as consumer protection or fairness in commercial transactions. Those objectives
         can be adequately attained by granting protection against the risk of consumers being misled. In those circumstances, absolute
         protection is clearly disproportionate. 
         
            
 The Austrian Government submits that according to the settled case-law of the Court, Article EC does not preclude restrictions
         on imports and exports where those restrictions are justified on the grounds of protection of industrial and commercial property
         within the meaning of Article EC, to the extent that such restrictions are necessary to safeguard the rights which constitute
         the specific subject-matter of that property. 
         
            
 That justification applies equally both to simple indications of geographical source and to indirect indications of geographical
         source. 
         
            
 That Government submits that the names protected by the bilateral convention ─ even though they are not qualified geographical
         indications or designations of origin capable of coming within the scope of Regulation No 2081/─ enjoy a special reputation
         capable of justifying restrictions on the free movement of goods. 
         
            
 Those names were listed in the annexes to the bilateral agreement at the suggestion of interested national circles, on the
         basis of consumer expectations and in close concertation with the competent interest groups and administrations. 
         
            
 The aim of the bilateral convention was to prevent the protected designations from being improperly used and from becoming
         generic. 
         
            
 The German Government submits that the protection which the bilateral convention accords to simple indications of geographical
         source is a measure having equivalent effect to a quantitative restriction within the meaning of Article EC, but is justified
         under Article EC on the grounds of protection of industrial and commercial property or, alternatively, under Article EC as an overriding reason in the public interest, relating in particular to fairness in commercial transactions or consumer
         protection. 
         
            
 As regards Article EC, the German Government submits that it is clear from the case-law of the Court that the prohibition
         on the use of the name Bud under the bilateral convention protects the commercial property in the indications of source within
         the meaning of that article and can, therefore, justify a barrier to trade which is prohibited by Article EC. 
         
            
 If it were found that the name at issue in the main proceedings is a simple indication of source, that indication would be
         protected against the risk of its reputation being exploited. It would, moreover, be irrelevant whether that indication does
         in fact have a reputation or whether a person not entitled to do so had in fact exploited the reputation of that indication
         of source in the marketing of his products. 
         
            
 The German Government submits, in the alternative, that where there are overriding reasons in the general interest, in particular
         relating to fairness in commercial transactions and consumer protection, Member States are permitted to adopt national provisions
         concerning the use of misleading indications which do not require consumers actually to have been misled. That principle is
         confirmed by various directives. 
         
            
 The Commission submits that the prohibition on marketing beer in Austria under the name of American Bud which follows from
         the bilateral convention constitutes a measure having equivalent effect to a quantitative restriction on imports within the
         meaning of Article EC, which is justified because it relates to the protection of industrial and commercial property within
         the meaning of Article EC. 
         
            
 In that regard, the Commission asserts that according to the case-law of the Court, geographical names such as Bud which are
         accorded absolute protection by an international agreement even though there is no link between the characteristics of the
         products concerned and their geographical source are covered by the justification relating to industrial and commercial property
         set out in Article EC. 
          The Court's reply
         
            
 Articles EC and EC apply without distinction to products originating in the Community and to those admitted into free
         circulation in any of the Member States, whatever the real origin of such products. It is therefore subject to those reservations
         that those articles apply to the American Bud beer at issue in the main proceedings (see, to that effect, Case 125/Nijman  [1989] ECR 3533, paragraph 11). 
         
            
 In the case at issue in the main proceedings, the prohibition on marketing beer from countries other than the Czech Republic
         under the name of Bud in Austria, which follows from the bilateral convention, is capable of affecting imports of that product
         under that name from other Member States and thus of constituting a barrier to intra-Community trade. Such a rule is therefore
         a measure having an effect equivalent to a quantitative restriction within the meaning of Article EC (see, to that effect,
          
          Nijman , paragraph 12, and  
          Exportur , paragraphs and 20). 
         
            
 National legislation prohibiting the use of a geographical name for goods originating in a non-member country which are admitted
         into free circulation in other Member States where they are lawfully marketed does not, it is true, absolutely preclude the
         importation of those products into the Member State concerned. It is, however, likely to make their marketing more difficult
         and thus to impede trade between Member States (see, to that effect, Case C-448/Guimont  [2000] ECR I-10663, paragraph 26). 
         
            
 It is therefore necessary to examine whether that restriction on the free movement of goods can be justified under Community
         law. 
         
            
 The Court has already held, in relation to the absolute protection of an indication of source granted under a bilateral agreement
         of essentially the same kind as the one at issue in the main proceedings, that the aim of such an agreement, which is to prevent
         the producers of a contracting State from using the geographical names of another State and thereby taking advantage of the
         reputation of the products of undertakings established in the regions or places indicated by those names, is to ensure fair
         competition. Such an objective may be regarded as falling within the sphere of the protection of industrial and commercial
         property within the meaning of Article EC, provided that the names in question have not, either at the time of the entry
         into force of that agreement or subsequently, become generic in the country of origin (see  
          Exportur , paragraph 37, and Case C-87/Consorzio per la tutela del formaggio Gorgonzola   [1999] ECR I-1301, paragraph 20). 
         
            
 As is clear from, in particular, Articles 1, and of the bilateral convention, that objective forms the basis of the system
         of protection established by the bilateral instruments at issue. 
         
            
 Therefore, if the findings of the national court show that according to factual circumstances and perceptions in the Czech
         Republic the name Bud designates a region or a place located on the territory of that State and its protection is justified
         there on the basis of the criteria laid down in Article EC, that does not preclude such protection from being extended
         to the territory of a Member State such as, in this case, the Republic of Austria (see, to that effect,  
          Exportur , paragraph 38). 
         
            
 In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the first question, in so far as it concerns Articles EC and EC, must be
         that those articles do not preclude the application of a provision of a bilateral agreement between a Member State and a non-member
         country, under which a simple and indirect indication of geographical origin from that non-member country is accorded protection
         in the Member State concerned, whether or not there is any risk of consumers being misled, and the import of a product lawfully
         marketed in another Member State may be prevented, provided that the protected name has not, either at the date of the entry
         into force of that agreement or subsequently, become generic in the State of origin (see  
          Exportur , paragraph 39). 
         
            
 The answer to the first question must therefore be that Article EC and Regulation No 2081/do not preclude the application
         of a provision of a bilateral agreement between a Member State and a non-member country under which a simple and indirect
         indication of geographical origin from that non-member country is accorded protection in the importing Member State, whether
         or not there is any risk of consumers being misled, and the import of a product lawfully marketed in another Member State
         may be prevented. 
          The second question
         
            
 By its second question, the national court is asking essentially whether Regulation No 2081/or Article EC precludes
         the application of a provision of a bilateral agreement between a Member State and a non-member country under which a name
         which in that country does not directly or indirectly refer to the geographical source of the product is accorded protection
         in the Member State concerned, whether or not there is any risk of consumers being misled, and the import of a product lawfully
         marketed in another Member State may be prevented. 
          Observations submitted to the Court
         
            
 Budvar claims that the protection accorded to the name Bud under the bilateral convention would be incompatible with Article
         EC only if there were absolutely no association in either the Member State concerned or the non-member country between
         the protected indication, which is a modified form of the full name of the place where the protected product is produced,
         on the one hand, and the product protected by that indication and bearing that particular name and its place of production,
         on the other. Such protection would be compatible with Regulation No 2081/even if such an association were completely ruled
         out. 
         
            
 Ammersin and the German Government submit that if the name Bud is not regarded in the country of origin as the geographical
         name of a specific product or as a simple or indirect geographical indication, protection of that name cannot be justified
         on the grounds of protection of industrial or commercial property within the meaning of Article EC. 
          The Court's reply
         
            
 If the findings of the national court show that according to factual circumstances and perceptions prevailing in the Czech
         Republic, the name Bud does not directly or indirectly identify any region or place in the territory of that State, the question
         then arises whether the absolute protection of that name, as provided for by the bilateral convention, which constitutes an
         obstacle to the free movement of goods (see paragraphs and above) can be justified under Community law by reference
         to Article EC or on some other ground. 
         
            
 In that case, and without prejudice to any protection under specific rights such as trade mark rights, the protection of that
         name cannot be justified on the grounds of protection of industrial and commercial property within the meaning of Article
         EC (see, to that effect,  
          Exportur , paragraph 37, and Joined Cases C-321/to C-324/Pistre and Others  [1997] ECR I-2343, paragraph 53). 
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Court must examine whether such an obstacle can be justified by an imperative requirement in the
         general interest such as fairness in commercial transactions or consumer protection. 
         
            
 If it were established that the name Bud does not contain any reference to the geographical source of the products that it
         designates, the Court would have to hold that none of the information supplied to it by the national court shows that protection
         of that name is susceptible of preventing economic operators from obtaining an unfair advantage or consumers from being misled
         as to any of the characteristics of those products. 
         
            
 The answer to the second question must therefore be that Article EC precludes the application of a provision of a bilateral
         agreement between a Member State and a non-member country under which a name which in that country does not directly or indirectly
         refer to the geographical source of the product that it designates is accorded protection in the importing Member State, whether
         or not there is any risk of consumers being misled, and the import of a product lawfully marketed in another Member State
         may be prevented. 
          The third and fourth questions
         
            
 By its third and fourth questions, which should be examined together, the national court is asking essentially whether the
         first paragraph of Article EC is to be interpreted as permitting a court of a Member State to apply the provisions of
         bilateral agreements such as those at issue in the main proceedings, concluded between that State and a non-member country
         and according protection to a name from the non-member country, even where those provisions prove to be contrary to the Treaty
         rules, on the ground that they concern an obligation resulting from agreements concluded before the date of the accession
         of the Member State concerned to the European Union, and whether the second paragraph of that article requires that national
         court to interpret those provisions in such a way that they are consistent with Community law. 
          Observations submitted to the Court
         
            
 Budvar observes that the bilateral agreement was concluded by the Republic of Austria before its accession to the European
         Union, which took place on January 1995, and that the Federal Chancellor's communication, issued in 1997, in other words
         after that accession, is, according to its very wording, of purely declaratory value. According to Budvar, the bilateral convention
         was not maintained in force by that declaration, but remained in force after the break-up of the Czech and Slovak Federative
         Republic on January by virtue of the rules of public international law on the succession of States. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, Budvar claims that the Republic of Austria was entitled under the first paragraph of Article EC,
         as interpreted by the Court, or even required under public international law, to take all the measures necessary to ensure
         the protection of the name Bud provided for in the bilateral convention, notwithstanding any provision of Community law. 
         
            
 Budvar submits that even assuming that in relation to the protection provided for by the bilateral convention there is a conflict
         between that convention and Community law, the Community institutions are prevented, under the first paragraph of Article
         EC, from applying all primary and secondary Community law until that conflict is resolved, possibly by denunciation of
         the bilateral convention. 
         
            
 According to Budvar, the only appropriate methods of eliminating any incompatibilities between an agreement which predates
         the accession of a Member State to the European Union and the Treaty are the methods permitted under public international
         law, such as renegotiation of the agreement, or its interpretation in such a way that it is consistent with Community law.
         
         
            
 There are no plans to renegotiate the bilateral convention. Moreover, it follows from the wording of Article 7(1) of that
         convention ─ a provision which is utterly unambiguous in that regard ─ that the protection accorded by the convention to the
         name concerned is independent of any risk of confusion or of consumers being misled. 
         
            
 Ammersin claims that the first paragraph of Article EC is not applicable to the case at issue in the main proceedings
         because, on the date of its accession to the European Union, the Republic of Austria did not have any obligations under the
         bilateral convention. 
         
            
 The Republic of Austria did not have any obligation under international law in the period prior to the Federal Chancellor's
         communication, which includes the date of its accession to the European Union. Furthermore, there is no custom of international
         law relating to the succession of States on the basis of which the bilateral agreements would have remained in force following
         the break-up of the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic. 
         
            
 Therefore, it was only by way of the Federal Chancellor's communication that the Republic of Austria assumed the obligations
         to the Czech Republic under the bilateral convention. Contrary to its wording, that communication is therefore constitutive
         in nature. The bilateral convention can be interpreted in such a way that it is consistent with Community law if it is taken to mean
         that, under that convention, the name Bud is protected only where consumers are in fact misled. Article 7(1) of the convention
         does not lay down a requirement of absolute protection but instead provides for the application of  
         judicial and administrative measures for acting against unfair competition or otherwise suppressing prohibited designations.
         
            
 Under Austrian law and, more specifically, its provisions on unfair competition, all applications for orders prohibiting the
         use of names are subject to the condition that those names are used in a misleading manner. 
         
            
 Moreover, according to Ammersin, it is Article 7(2) of the bilateral convention which is applicable to the case in the main
         proceedings, since the name American Bud, used as a registered trade mark, constitutes a modified form of the protected designation
         for the purposes of that provision. There are significant differences between that mark and the protected designation Bud
         ─ specifically in the form used as a bottle label ─ and it is perceived by consumers as an independent mark. 
         
            
 In that regard, Ammersin submits that the second paragraph of Article EC clarifies Article EC, which imposes on Member
         States the general obligation to act in a way favourable to the Community. In particular, it follows from the case-law relating
         to Article EC that when applying domestic law the national court called upon to interpret that law must do so as far as
         possible in the light of the wording and the purpose of higher-ranking provisions of Community law, in order to attain the
         results intended by the Treaty and thus to comply with Regulation No 2081/and Article EC. 
         
            
 The Austrian Government submits that the Republic of Austria and the Czech Republic both share the dominant opinion that States
         are bound by treaties concluded by their predecessor States. The principle of continuity in situations such as the one at
         issue in the main proceedings is expressed in Article 34(1) of the Vienna Convention on Succession of States in respect of
         Treaties. Moreover, that principle is consistent with customary international law. After the dissolution of the State which
         was succeeded by the Czech Republic, the validity of the bilateral instruments at issue was in no way affected by their application
         to bilateral relations between the Republic of Austria and the Czech Republic. 
         
            
 According to that Government, the Federal Chancellor's communication therefore has purely declaratory value. 
         
            
 In addition, the Austrian Government points out that in accordance with Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention on the Law
         of Treaties of May [a] treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty
         in their context and in the light of its object and purpose. 
         
            
 According to that Government, having regard to the meaning to be given to the relevant terms of the bilateral convention in
         their context, and in the light of the object and the purpose of that convention, those terms cannot be interpreted as meaning
         that, as a simple or indirect indication of geographical source, the name Bud only has protection against the risk of consumers
         being misled and not absolute protection. Such an interpretation is thus a priori excluded. 
         
            
 According to the German Government, the bilateral convention contains rights and obligations assumed by the Republic of Austria
         prior to its accession to the European Union. Pursuant to the first paragraph of Article EC, such a convention is not
         affected by Community law and its application therefore has priority over Community law. 
         
            
 The fact that the non-member country which entered into the bilateral convention, namely the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic,
         no longer exists does not call that interpretation into question. The Republic of Austria ─ like the Federal Republic of Germany
         and, to the best of the German Government's knowledge, a number of other Member States ─ has recognised the continuity of
         most international treaties and has therefore acted in accordance with customary practice between States. 
         
            
 According to the German Government, an interpretation favourable to Community law would have to take the form of an amendment
         to the bilateral convention following bilateral negotiations to that end, and, where such negotiations fail, denunciation
         or suspension of that convention. However, in the meantime, the national courts are entitled to protect the rights concerned
         even where they are contrary to Community law. That Government submits that the national court has not indicated whether the
         convention in question can be denounced. 
         
            
 The French Government submits that it follows from the Federal Chancellor's communication that the bilateral instruments at
         issue have remained in force between the Republic of Austria and the Czech Republic, without interruption, since January
         ─ a date prior to the Republic of Austria's accession to the European Union. That communication did not decide the continued
         validity of the bilateral convention from onwards, but merely noted that fact and informed individuals thereof. Therefore,
         those agreements are clearly international acts concluded prior to the accession of the Republic of Austria and to which Article
         EC applies. 
         
            
 Moreover, it follows from the case-law of the Court that, in accordance with the principles of international law, Community
         rules ─ in this case Article EC and the relevant provisions of Regulation No 2081/─ can be deprived of effect by an
         earlier international agreement ─ in this case the bilateral convention ─ where that agreement imposes on the Member State
         concerned obligations whose performance can still be required by the non-member country which is party to that agreement.
         
         
            
 According to that Government, it is clear from that case-law that the applicability of such a convention must be verified
         by the national court, which is also responsible for identifying the obligations in question in order to determine the extent
         to which they preclude application of Article EC or Regulation No 2081/92. 
         
            
 The French Government submits that the interpretation proposed by the national court would result, in the case at issue in
         the main proceedings, in an infringement of the bilateral convention and thus does not constitute a permissible method under
         international law for resolving an incompatibility between that convention and Community law within the meaning of the second
         paragraph of Article EC, as interpreted by the Court of Justice. 
         
            
 According to that Government, it follows from the wording of Article 7(1) of the bilateral convention, which is utterly unambiguous,
         that it excludes a priori an interpretation of that provision as meaning that the name Bud is protected as a simple and indirect
         geographical indication only against the risk of consumers being misled and consequently does not enjoy absolute protection.
         Therefore, that interpretation cannot be entertained as an interpretation which meets the requirement of compatibility with
         Community law. 
         
            
 The Commission submits that Article EC applies to the bilateral convention since that convention has an effect on the
         application of the Treaty and, moreover, was concluded between the Republic of Austria and a non-member country well before
         that Member State's accession to the European Union. 
         
            
 However, the question arises whether the first paragraph of Article EC also applies to an agreement which, as in the case
         at issue in the main proceedings, has been maintained in force to the benefit of the State which succeeded the original non-member
         country by virtue of a declaration made by the authorities of a Member State after its accession to the European Union. 
         
            
 That question also prompts the question whether the declaration concerned is constitutive in nature. 
         
            
 The Commission submits that under international law the Federal Chancellor's communication has only a declaratory effect,
         since a treaty remains in force if the parties' consent to its continuation can be inferred from their actions. 
         
            
 That is a question of fact, whose appraisal comes within the jurisdiction of the national court. The Commission submits that
         there is no information in the case-file to indicate that the parties did not wish to maintain the bilateral instruments at
         issue. 
         
            
 The Commission concludes that the first paragraph of Article EC applies to the case at issue in the main proceedings and,
         accordingly, that the Treaty does not affect either the rights or the obligations under the bilateral convention. 
          The Court's reply
         
            
 The Court must answer this question because it is clear from the answer to the second question that, in the event that the
         name Bud cannot be regarded as directly or indirectly referring to the geographical source of the products that it designates,
         Article EC precludes the protection accorded to that name by the bilateral instruments at issue. 
         
            
 It follows from the first paragraph of Article EC that rights and obligations under an agreement concluded between a Member
         State and a non-member country before the date of accession of that Member State are not affected by the Treaty provisions.
         
         
            
 The purpose of that provision is to make clear, in accordance with the principles of international law, that application of
         the EC Treaty does not affect the duty of the Member State concerned to respect the rights of non-member countries under an
         earlier agreement and to perform its obligations thereunder (see, inter alia, Case C-84/Commission  v  
          Portugal  [2000] ECR I-5215, paragraph 53). 
         
            
 Consequently, in order to determine whether a Community rule may be deprived of effect by an earlier international agreement,
         it is necessary to examine whether that agreement imposes on the Member State concerned obligations whose performance may
         still be required by the non-member country which is party to it (see, to that effect, inter alia, Joined Cases C-364/and
         C-365/T. Port  [1998] ECR I-1023, paragraph 60). 
         
            
 In the present case, it is common ground that protection of the name Bud is provided for by the bilateral instruments at issue,
         which were concluded between the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and the Republic of Austria well before the latter's accession
         to the European Union. 
         
            
 It also appears from the bilateral instruments at issue, in particular Article 7(1) of the bilateral convention, that they
         impose on the Republic of Austria obligations whose performance could have been required by the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.
         
         
            
 However, the question arises whether under those instruments the Czech Republic has acquired rights which it can still require
         the Republic of Austria to respect. 
         
            
 It should be recalled that following its break-up on January 1993, the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic, which had itself
         replaced the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, ceased to exist and that two new independent States, namely the Czech Republic
         and the Slovak Republic, succeeded it on the respective parts of its territory. 
         
            
 The question therefore arises whether, in the context of such a succession of States, the bilateral instruments at issue concluded
         by the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic remained in force following the break-up of the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic,
         in particular with respect to rights inuring to the benefit of the Czech Republic, such as the ones at issue in the main proceedings,
         with the effect that those rights and the corresponding obligations on the Republic of Austria remained in force after that
         break-up and were consequently still in force at the date of the Republic of Austria's accession to the European Union. 
         
            
 It is common ground that at the date of the break-up, there was a widely accepted international practice based on the principle
         of the continuity of treaties. According to that practice, unless one of the State parties to a bilateral agreement indicates
         its intention to renegotiate or denounce the agreement, the agreement is considered in principle to remain in force in relation
         to the States succeeding the State which has broken up. 
         
            
 At least as far as concerns the specific case of the complete break-up of States, and notwithstanding the possibility of denouncing
         or renegotiating agreements, it is apparent that the principle of the continuity of treaties, thus understood, constitutes
         a reference principle which was widely accepted at the time of the break-up in question. 
         
            
 In any event, and without there being any need for the Court to decide the question whether at the time of the break-up of
         the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic that principle of the continuity of treaties was a customary rule of international
         law, it cannot be denied that application of that principle in the international practice of the law of treaties was, at that
         time, fully consistent with international law. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, it must be ascertained whether both the Republic of Austria and the Czech Republic actually intended
         to apply the principle of the continuity of treaties to the bilateral instruments at issue and whether there is any evidence
         of their intentions in that regard during the period between the date of the break-up and that of the Republic of Austria's
         accession to the European Union. 
         
            
 As is clear from, in particular, the resolution of the Czech National Council of December and from Article of Constitutional
         Law No 4/(see paragraphs and above), the Czech Republic expressly accepted the principle of the automatic continuity
         of treaties. 
         
            
 As to the Republic of Austria's position, it appears traditionally to have advocated what is known as the  
          tabula rasa  principle, whereby, with the exception of treaties relating to territory or cases where there is an express agreement to
         the contrary, the succession of a new State to a contracting State automatically results in the expiry of the treaties concluded
         by the latter. 
         
            
 However, the question arises whether in a situation of succession of States such as that resulting from the complete break-up
         of the former State and, in particular, in relation to the bilateral instruments at issue, the Republic of Austria intended
         to apply the principle referred to in the preceding paragraph of this judgment. 
         
            
 As the Advocate General points out in points and of his Opinion, it seems clear from both the case-law of the Austrian
         courts and the fact that, in particular in relation to the Czech Republic, the Republic of Austria denounced certain agreements
         concluded with the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, but solely with regard to the future, that there are indications in the
         approach of that Member State, also during the period between the break-up of the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic and
         the Republic of Austria's accession to the European Union, to show that it had moved away from applying the  
          tabula rasa  principle. 
         
            
 The Austrian practice as regards the States succeeding the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic seems to be based on a pragmatic
         approach, according to which bilateral agreements remain in force unless they have been denounced by one or other of the parties.
         Such an approach leads to results which are very similar to those resulting from application of the principle of the continuity
         of treaties. 
         
            
 In that regard, it is for the national court to ascertain whether, at any time between the break-up of the Czech and Slovak
         Federative Republic, which took place on January 1993, and the Federal Chancellor's communication in 1997, the Republic
         of Austria indicated its intention to renegotiate or denounce the bilateral instruments at issue. 
         
            
 If confirmed by the national court, that would be particularly significant because, as has been pointed out in paragraph above, at the time of the break-up of its predecessor State, the Czech Republic clearly expressed the point of view that agreements
         concluded with that predecessor State remained in force. The Czech Republic thus expressly reserved the right to enforce against
         the Republic of Austria the rights accorded to it under the bilateral instruments at issue in its capacity as the successor
         State. 
         
            
 The importance of such a circumstance is, moreover, corroborated by the purpose of the first paragraph of Article EC,
         the aim of which is to allow a Member State to respect the rights which can be asserted against it by non-member countries
         on the basis of an agreement which predates that State's accession to the European Union in cases such as the one at issue
         in the main proceedings (see paragraph above). 
         
            
 It is for the national court to ascertain whether, in the case at issue in the main proceedings, both the Republic of Austria
         and the Czech Republic actually intended to apply the principle of the continuity of treaties to the bilateral instruments
         at issue. 
         
            
 As regards the Republic of Austria, it should again be made clear that it cannot be ruled out a priori that a declaration
         of intention in that regard, even where made after a certain delay (that is, not until 1997), can nevertheless be taken into
         account for the purpose of definitively establishing the intention of that Member State to accept the Czech Republic as contracting
         party to the bilateral instruments at issue and to find that, in the present case, application of those instruments comes
         within the scope of the first paragraph of Article EC. 
         
            
 It would be otherwise if, at any time prior to the Federal Chancellor's communication, the Republic of Austria had already
         clearly expressed the contrary intention. 
         
            
 If, having carried out the checks that are necessary having regard, in particular, to the criteria set out in this judgment,
         the national court were to reach the conclusion that at the date of the Republic of Austria's accession to the European Union
         that Member State was bound to the Czech Republic by the bilateral instruments at issue, it would follow that those instruments
         can be regarded as acts concluded before the date of the Republic of Austria's accession to the European Union for the purposes
         of the first paragraph of Article EC. 
         
            
 It should be added that, in accordance with the second paragraph of that provision, the Member States are required to take
         all appropriate steps to eliminate the incompatibilities between an agreement concluded before a Member State's accession
         and the Treaty. 
         
            
 It follows that the national court must ascertain whether a possible incompatibility between the Treaty and the bilateral
         convention can be avoided by interpreting that convention, to the extent possible and in compliance with international law,
         in such a way that it is consistent with Community law. 
         
            
 If it proves impracticable to interpret an agreement concluded prior to a Member State's accession to the European Union in
         such a way that it is consistent with Community law then, within the framework of Article EC, it is open to that State
         to take the appropriate steps, while, however, remaining obliged to eliminate any incompatibilities existing between the earlier
         agreement and the Treaty. If that Member State encounters difficulties which make adjustment of an agreement impossible, an
         obligation to denounce that agreement cannot therefore be excluded (see  
          Commission  v  
          Portugal , paragraph 58). 
         
            
 In that regard, its should be noted that Article 16(3) of the bilateral convention provides that the two contracting parties
         may denounce the convention by giving notice of at least one year, issued in writing and through diplomatic channels. 
         
            
 Pending the success of one of the methods referred to in the second paragraph of Article EC in eliminating any incompatibilities
         between an agreement predating the accession of the Member State concerned to the European Union and the Treaty, the first
         paragraph of that article permits that State to continue to apply such an agreement in so far as it contains obligations which
         remain binding on that State under international law. 
         
            
 In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the third and fourth questions must be that the first paragraph of Article EC is to be interpreted as permitting a court of a Member State, subject to the findings to be made by that court having regard
         inter alia to the criteria set out in this judgment, to apply the provisions of bilateral agreements such as those at issue
         in the main proceedings, concluded between that State and a non-member country and according protection to a name from the
         non-member country, even where those provisions prove to be contrary to the Treaty rules, on the ground that they concern
         an obligation resulting from agreements concluded before the date of the accession of the Member State concerned to the European
         Union. Pending the success of one of the methods referred to in the second paragraph of Article EC in eliminating any
         incompatibilities between an agreement predating that accession and the Treaty, the first paragraph of that article permits
         that State to continue to apply such an agreement in so far as it contains obligations which remain binding on that State
         under international law. 
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the Austrian, German and French Governments and by the Commission, which have submitted observations
         to the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action
         pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT,
 in answer to the questions referred to it by the Handelsgericht Wien by order of February 2001, hereby rules: 
         
1.
 Article EC and Council Regulation (EEC) No 2081/of July on the protection of geographical indications and designations
            of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs, as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 535/of March 1997, do not
            preclude the application of a provision of a bilateral agreement between a Member State and a non-member country under which
            a simple and indirect indication of geographical origin from that non-member country is accorded protection in the importing
            Member State, whether or not there is any risk of consumers being misled, and the import of a product lawfully marketed in
            another Member State may be prevented. 
            
2.
 Article EC precludes the application of a provision of a bilateral agreement between a Member State and a non-member country
            under which a name which in that country does not directly or indirectly refer to the geographical source of the product that
            it designates is accorded protection in the importing Member State, whether or not there is any risk of consumers being misled,
            and the import of a product lawfully marketed in another Member State may be prevented. 
            
3.
 The first paragraph of Article EC is to be interpreted as permitting a court of a Member State, subject to the findings
            to be made by that court having regard inter alia to the criteria set out in this judgment, to apply the provisions of bilateral
            agreements such as those at issue in the main proceedings, concluded between that State and a non-member country and according
            protection to a name from the non-member country, even where those provisions prove to be contrary to the EC Treaty rules,
            on the ground that they concern an obligation resulting from agreements concluded before the date of the accession of the
            Member State concerned to the European Union. Pending the success of one of the methods referred to in the second paragraph
            of Article EC in eliminating any incompatibilities between an agreement predating that accession and the Treaty, the first
            paragraph of that article permits that State to continue to apply such an agreement in so far as it contains obligations which
            remain binding on that State under international law. 
            
Skouris
Jann 
Timmermans 
Gulmann
Cunha Rodrigues 
Edward 
La Pergola
Puissochet 
Schintgen 
Colneric
von Bahr 
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on November 2003. 
         
 R. Grass 
V. Skouris  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: German.
Top  
 