
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 85/337/EEC – Assessment of the effects of projects on the environment – Obligation to give reasons for a decision not to make a project subject to an assessment)
In Case C‑495/08,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on November 2008,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by P. Oliver and J.-B. Laignelot, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, represented by L. Seeboruth and H. Walker, acting as Agents, and by J. Maurici, Barrister, with an address for service in
         Luxembourg,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
composed of J.-C. Bonichot (Rapporteur), President of the Fourth Chamber, acting as President of the Sixth Chamber, P. Kūris
         and L. Bay Larsen, Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities requests the Court to declare that, first, by failing to provide
         that individual decisions not to carry out an environmental impact assessment pursuant to Article 4(2) of Council Directive
         85/337/EEC of June on the assessment of the effects of certain public and private projects on the environment (OJ
         L 175, p. 40), as amended by Council Directive 97/11/EC of March (OJ L 73, p. 5) (‘Directive 85/337’), must
         be supported by sufficient reasoning and, second, by failing to make applications for Review of Mineral Planning (‘ROMP applications’)
         lodged in Wales prior to November subject to the requirements of that directive, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
         and Northern Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive.
      
By document lodged at the Registry of the Court on July 2009, the Commission stated that it was pursuing its application
         only in relation to the second complaint, and that it was withdrawing its first complaint.
      
The pre-litigation procedure relating to that second complaint has its origins in infringement procedure 2003/4793. By letter
         of April 2006, the Commission, pursuant to Article EC, gave formal notice to the United Kingdom to submit its observations
         on that issue within a period of two months. The United Kingdom replied to that formal notice by letter of June 2006. That
         reply prompted the Commission to send, on December 2006, a reasoned opinion to the United Kingdom, in which the Commission
         called on it to bring an end to the alleged infringement within a period of two months from receipt of the reasoned opinion.
         The United Kingdom replied to that reasoned opinion by letter of February 2007.
      
Taking the view that that reply was not satisfactory, the Commission decided to bring the present action.
      
The Commission claims that failing to make ROMP applications lodged in Wales prior to November subject to the requirements
         of Directive 85/is contrary to the provisions of Articles 2(1) and 4(2) of that directive. It relies, in that regard,
         on Case C‑201/Wells [2004] ECR I‑723.
      
The United Kingdom does not dispute the infringement complained of and limits itself to contending that Wales is currently
         preparing the legislation necessary for the transposition, in relation to that issue, of Directive 85/337. The United Kingdom
         contends, in addition, that there are a number of complex legal and operational issues which explain the delay in carrying
         out that transposition.
      
A Member State cannot however plead provisions, practices or situations prevailing in its domestic legal order to justify
         failure to observe obligations laid down by a directive (see, inter alia, Case C‑235/Commission v Spain [2007] ECR I‑5415, paragraph 55).
      
The question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations must, moreover, be determined by reference to the
         situation prevailing in the Member State at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion (see, inter alia, Case
         C‑173/Commission v Greece [2002] ECR I‑6129, paragraph 7).
      
It is not in dispute that, at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion, the measures necessary to transpose
         Directive 85/into national law had not been adopted.
      
Accordingly, it must be held that, by failing to make ROMP applications lodged in Wales prior to November subject
         to the requirements of Articles 2(1) and 4(2) of Directive 85/337, the United Kingdom has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under that directive.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Furthermore, under the first subparagraph of Article 69(5), a party who discontinues
         or withdraws from proceedings is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the other party’s observations
         on the discontinuance.
      
In its application, the Commission sought an order that the United Kingdom pay the costs. The United Kingdom has been unsuccessful
         in its pleas on the second complaint and did not submit observations on the Commission’s partial discontinuance. The United
         Kingdom will therefore be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Sixth Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by failing to make applications for Review of Mineral Planning lodged in Wales prior to November subject
            to the requirements of Articles 2(1) and 4(2) of Council Directive 85/337/EEC of June on the assessment of the effects
            of certain public and private projects on the environment, as amended by Council Directive 97/11/EC of March 1997, the United
            Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive;
2.      Orders the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 