
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-174/Streekgewest Westelijk Noord-Brabant
v
Staatssecretaris van Financiën
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden)
(State aid – Article 93(3) of the EC Treaty (now Article 88(3) EC) – Planned aid – Prohibition on the implementation of planned measures before the Commission’s final decision – Scope of the prohibition if the aid consists of an exemption from a tax – Persons who may rely on an infringement)
Opinion of Advocate General Geelhoed delivered on March Judgment of the Court (First Chamber), January Summary of the Judgment
1.     State aid – Planned aid – Prohibition on implementation before the Commission’s final decision – Direct effect – Persons who
            may rely on an infringement – Individual subject to a tax which is an integral part of an aid measure
(EC Treaty, Art. 93(3) (now Art. 88(3), EC))
2.     State aid – Provisions of the Treaty – Scope – Taxes coupled with exemptions regarded as aid – Included – Condition – Hypothecation
            
(EC Treaty, Art. (now, after amendment, Art. EC) and Art. (now Art. EC))
1.     An individual may have an interest in relying before the national court on the direct effect of the prohibition on implementation
         referred to in the last sentence of Article 93(3) of the Treaty (now, Article 88(3) EC), not only in order to erase the negative
         effects of the distortion of competition created by the grant of unlawful aid, but also in order to obtain a refund of a tax
         levied in breach of that provision. In the latter case, the question whether an individual has been affected by the distortion
         of competition arising from the aid measure is irrelevant to the assessment of his interest in bringing proceedings. The only
         fact to be taken into consideration is that the individual is subject to a tax which is an integral part of a measure implemented
         in breach of the prohibition referred to in the last sentence of Article 93(3) of the Treaty.
      
(see para. 19)
2.     Taxes do not fall within the scope of the provisions of the Treaty concerning State aid unless they constitute the method
         of financing an aid measure, so that they form an integral part of that measure.
      
For a tax, or part of a tax, to be regarded as forming an integral part of an aid measure, it must be hypothecated to the
         aid measure under the relevant national rules, in the sense that the revenue from the tax is necessarily allocated for the
         financing of the aid. In the event of such hypothecation, the revenue from the tax has a direct impact on the amount of the
         aid and, consequently, on the assessment of its compatibility with the common market. 
      
The fact that the aid is granted in the form of a tax exemption or that the loss of revenue due to that exemption is, for
         the purposes of the budget estimates of the Member State, offset by an increase in the tax is not in itself sufficient to
         amount to such hypothecation.
      
(see paras 25-26, 29, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)January 2005(1)
(State aid  –  Article 93(3) of the EC Treaty (now Article 88(3) EC)  –  Planned aid  –  Prohibition on the implementation of planned measures before the Commission's final decision  –  Scope of the prohibition if the aid consists of an exemption from a tax  –  Persons who may rely on an infringement)
In Case C-174/02,
 REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden (Netherlands), made by decision
            of March 2002, received at the Court on May 2002, in the proceedings
            
 Streekgewest Westelijk Noord-Brabant
v
 Staatssecretaris van Financiën, 
THE COURT (First Chamber),,
 composed of P. Jann, President of the Chamber, A. Rosas, K. Lenaerts, S. von Bahr and K. Schiemann (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed, Registrar: M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator,
             having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on January 2004,after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
            
–
 Streekgewest Westelijk Noord-Brabant, by H. Gilliams and P.H.L.M Kuypers, advocaten,
            
–
 the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster, acting as Agent,
            
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by J. Flett and H. van Vliet, acting as Agents,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 93(3) of the EC Treaty (now Article 88(3) EC),
         in order, in particular, to determine who may rely on the prohibition on implementation referred to in the last sentence of
         that provision and to clarify the circumstances in which there is a sufficient link between an aid and a tax financing that
         aid for the prohibition laid down by the last sentence of Article 93(3) to extend to that tax.
         
            
 The reference was made in the course of proceedings brought by Streekgewest Westelijk Noord-Brabant (a local body responsible
         for collecting domestic waste, ‘Streekgewest’) and the Staatssecretaris van Financiën (‘the Staatssecretaris’). Streekgewest
         seeks the reimbursement by the Statssecretaris of levies on waste paid in accordance with Article of the Wet belastingen
         op milieugrondslag of December (Law introducing taxes for the protection of the environment,  Staatsblad  1994, pp. 923, and 925, ‘the WBM’), on the ground that they were levied in breach of the prohibition on implementation
         referred to in the last sentence of Article 93(3) of the Treaty.
         
 Legal background
 Community legislation 
            
 Article 93(3) of the Treaty provides:
         ‘The Commission shall be informed, in sufficient time to enable it to submit its comments, of any plans to grant or alter
         aid. If it considers that any such plan is not compatible with the common market having regard to Article 92, it shall without
         delay initiate the procedure provided for in paragraph 2. The Member State concerned shall not put its proposed measures into
         effect until this procedure has resulted in a final decision.’
         
 National legislation 
            
 In accordance with Article 93(3) of the Treaty, the Netherlands Government, by letter of August 1992, notified the Commission
         of the draft Wet op de verbruiksbelastingen op milieugrondslag (Law introducing taxes on consumption for the protection of
         the environment) which, in an amended version, subsequently gave rise to the WBM. By letter of December 1992, the Commission
         informed the Netherlands Government that on November it had taken the decision not to raise any objections to the
         aid measures included in the draft law. That decision was published in the  Official Journal of the European Communities  of March (OJ C 83, p. 3).
         
            
 During the parliamentary examination of the draft law, several amendments were introduced. After the Netherlands Government
         had notified those amendments to the Commission by letter of December 1993, the latter indicated, by letter of April
         1994, that it had taken a decision on March not to raise any objections to the proposed amendments. That decision
         was published in the  Official Journal of the European Communities  of June (OJ C 153, p. 20).
         
            
 On October 1994, a draft law intended to amend the WBM by the introduction of one permanent and two temporary amendments
         was put before the Netherlands Parliament. As regards the levy on waste, that draft law provided for an increase in its amount
         from NLG 28.to NLG 29.per kg of waste, and for the possibility of reimbursement of that levy to persons delivering
         de-inking residues for processing and to persons delivering waste from the recycling of plastic materials to a waste processing
         undertaking. The Netherlands Government notified those measures, referred to as ‘refinements’, to the Commission by letter
         of October 1994.
         
            
 By letter of November 1994, the Commission drew the attention of the Netherlands Government to the fact that the notification
         was incomplete, and it raised a number of questions in that regard. The Netherlands Government replied to those questions
         by letter of December 1994. In that letter it went on to state that the draft law also concerned two new aid measures.
         One of those measures consisted of a temporary exemption from the levy on waste with respect to purifiable dredging spoil.
         
            
 The WBM, the law implementing that legislative proposal, and the amending law were adopted by the First Chamber of the Staten-Generaal
         on December 1994. By Royal Decree of December 1994, the date of entry into force of the amended WBM was fixed for January
         1995.
         
            
 Taking the view that the WBM, as amended, entered into force on January 1995, the Commission informed the Netherlands Government,
         by letter of January 1995, that it considered that the aid measures at issue had not been notified, since they had been
         adopted before it had defined its position in respect of them and it asked the Netherlands Government to send it, inter alia,
         the full text of the WBM. The Commission did not give its decision until the end of the tax period in question. By fax of
         May 1995, supplemented by letter of July 1995, it stated that in its view there were no aid elements incompatible with
         the common market.
         
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling 
            
 Streekgewest is a body with legal personality initially composed of and controlled by municipalities in the region of Westelijk
         Noord-Brabant in the Netherlands. Since January 1997, it has been composed of seven municipalities. Streekgewest is responsible
         for collecting domestic waste and transporting it to a processing facility for which it is also responsible. Each time waste
         is delivered to a processing facility the levy is payable in accordance with Article of the WBM.
         
            
 For the period from to January 1995, Streekgewest paid NLG 914.in tax on waste. However, it lodged a complaint
         and requested a refund of the amount paid. That request was rejected by decision of the tax inspector. Streekgewest brought
         an action against that decision before the Gerechtshof te ’s‑Gravenhage (Regional Court of Appeal, ’s‑Gravenhage, Netherlands),
         which ordered the refund of NLG 796.40.
         
            
 The Staatssecretaris brought an appeal against that judgment before the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden (Supreme Court of the Netherlands).
         Streekgewest also challenged the Gerechtshof’s refusal to award it a refund of the whole amount.
         
            
 Taking the view that the outcome of the dispute in the main proceedings depends on the interpretation of Article 93(3) of
         the Treaty, the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden decided to stay proceedings and refer the following questions to the Court for a
         preliminary ruling:
         
‘1.
May only an individual who is affected by a distortion of cross-border competition as a result of an aid measure rely on the
               last sentence of Article 93(3) of the EC Treaty …?
            
2.
Where an aid measure within the meaning of the last sentence of Article 93(3) of the EC Treaty … consists of an exemption
               from a tax (which is to be construed as also meaning a reduction in or relief on such tax) whose proceeds are paid into the
               public coffers, and no provision in that respect is made for suspending the exemption pending the notification procedure,
               must that tax be regarded as part of that aid measure, by virtue of the very fact that the levying of the tax on persons who
               do not enjoy an exemption is the means whereby a favourable effect is produced, so that as long as the implementation of that
               aid measure is not permitted under the abovementioned provision, the prohibition laid down therein is also applicable to (the
               levying of) that tax?
            
3.
In the event that the answer to the previous question is in the negative: Where a connection [such as the fact that a small
               part of the tax (NLG 0.per tonne of waste) serves to compensate for the reimbursement schemes referred to in paragraph
               of this judgment] must be established between the increase in a particular tax whose proceeds are paid into the public coffers
               and a proposed aid measure within the meaning of the last sentence of Article 93(3) of the EC Treaty …, must the introduction
               of that increase be regarded as a (start on the) putting into effect of that aid measure within the meaning of this provision?
               If the answer to this question turns on the intensity of that connection, what circumstances are of relevance in this respect?
            
4.
If the prohibition on implementation of the aid measure also relates to the tax, does a final decision by the Commission declaring
               the aid measure compatible with the common market not mean that the unlawfulness of the tax is retroactively corrected?
            
5.
If the prohibition on implementation also relates to the tax, can persons on whom the tax is levied oppose such tax in legal
               proceedings by relying on the direct effect of Article 93(3) of the Treaty in respect of the total amount of the tax or only
               in respect of part thereof?
            
6.
In the latter case, do specific requirements stem from Community law as regards the manner in which it must be determined
               which part of the tax is covered by the prohibition in the last sentence of Article 93[3] of the Treaty?’
            
 The first question 
            
 By its first question the national court asks, essentially, whether the provisions of the last sentence of Article 93(3) of
         the Treaty may be relied on by a litigant who is not affected by distortion of cross-border competition arising from an aid
         measure.
         
            
 It is settled case‑law of the Court of Justice that, as a result of the direct effect which the last sentence of Article 93(3)
         of the Treaty has been held to have, the immediate enforceability of the prohibition on implementation referred to in that
         article extends to all aid which has been implemented without being notified (Case C-354/Fédération nationale du commerce extérieur des produits alimentaires et Syndicat national des négociants et transformateurs
            de saumon  [1991] ECR I‑5505, paragraph (‘ FNCE ’)). 
         
            
 Furthermore, the Court has held that where a method of financing aid by means of a tax forms an integral part of the aid measure,
         the consequences of a failure by the national authorities to comply with the last sentence of Article 93(3) of the Treaty
         must also apply to that aspect of the aid (Joined Cases C‑261/and C‑262/Van Calster and Others  [2003] ECR I-0000, paragraph 52). In those circumstances, it follows that the national authorities are therefore required
         in principle to repay charges levied in breach of Community law (Joined Cases C‑192/to C-218/Comateb and Others  [1997] ECR I-165, paragraph 20, and  Van Calster and Others , paragraph 53).
         
            
 It is for the national courts to uphold the rights of the persons concerned in the event of a possible breach by the national
         authorities of the prohibition on putting aid into effect. Where such a breach is invoked by individuals who may rely on it
         and is established by the national courts, the latter must take all the consequential measures under national law (see, in
         particular, the judgments in  FNCE , paragraph 12, and in Case C-17/Lornoy and Others  [1992] ECR I-6523, paragraph 30). 
         
            
 As regards the national rules relating to the determination of an individual’s standing and legal interest in bringing proceedings,
         the Court has held that Community law requires that such rules do not undermine the right to effective judicial protection
         when exercising the rights conferred by Community law (judgments in Joined Cases C-87/to C-89/Verholen and Others  [1991] ECR I-3757, paragraph 24, and Case C-13/Safalero  [2003] ECR I-8679, paragraph 50).
         
            
 An individual may have an interest in relying before the national court on the direct effect of the prohibition on implementation
         referred to in the last sentence of Article 93(3) of the Treaty not only in order to erase the negative effects of the distortion
         of competition created by the grant of unlawful aid, but also in order to obtain a refund of a tax levied in breach of that
         provision. In the latter case, the question whether an individual has been affected by the distortion of competition arising
         from the aid measure is irrelevant to the assessment of his interest in bringing proceedings. The only fact to be taken into
         consideration is that the individual is subject to a tax which is an integral part of a measure implemented in breach of the
         prohibition referred to in that provision.
         
            
 That conclusion is justified, moreover, by the objective of ensuring the effectiveness of the prohibition on implementation
         of aid referred to in the last sentence of Article 93(3) of the Treaty (see, inter alia, the judgment in  FNCE , paragraph 16).
         
            
 The answer to the first question must therefore be that the last sentence of Article 93(3) of the Treaty must be interpreted
         as meaning that it may be relied on by a person liable to a tax forming an integral part of an aid measure levied in breach
         of the prohibition on implementation referred to in that provision, whether or not the person is affected by the distortion
         of competition resulting from that aid measure.
         
 The second and third questions 
            
 The second and third questions concern the circumstances in which there is a sufficient link between a tax and an aid measure
         which consists of an exemption from that tax with the result that the prohibition on implementation referred to in the last
         sentence of Article 93(3) of the Treaty applies not only to the aid measure but also to the tax. It is appropriate to deal
         with those two questions together.
         
            
 By its second question, the national court asks, essentially, whether the prohibition on implementation referred to in the
         last sentence of Article 93(3) of the Treaty applies to a tax where an aid measure consists of an exemption from that tax.
         By its third question, the national court wishes to know in what circumstances an increase in the tax as compensation for
         the loss of revenue due to the exemption creates a sufficient link between the aid and the tax, so that the prohibition on
         implementation referred to in that provision extends to the tax.
         
            
 It must be observed, at the outset, as the Advocate General pointed out in points and of his Opinion, that the Treaty
         makes a clear distinction between, on the one hand, the regime in Articles of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article
         EC) of the Treaty and of the EC Treaty (now Article EC), concerning State aid and, on the other, that in Articles
         of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) and of the EC Treaty (now Article EC) concerning the distortions
         which arise from differences between the laws, regulations or administrative provisions of the Member States and, in particular,
         their tax provisions.
         
            
 Taxes do not fall within the scope of the provisions of the Treaty concerning State aid unless they constitute the method
         of financing an aid measure, so that they form an integral part of that measure.
         
            
 For a tax, or part of a tax, to be regarded as forming an integral part of an aid measure, it must be hypothecated to the
         aid measure under the relevant national rules, in the sense that the revenue from the tax is necessarily allocated for the
         financing of the aid. In the event of such hypothecation, the revenue from the tax has a direct impact on the amount of the
         aid and, consequently, on the assessment of the compatibility of the aid with the common market (see, to that effect, Case
         47/France  v  Commission  [1970] ECR 487, paragraphs 17, and 21). The Court thus held that, where there is such a link between the aid measure and
         its financing, the notification of the aid provided for in Article 93(3) of the Treaty must also cover the method of financing,
         so that the Commission may consider it on the basis of all the facts. If this requirement is not satisfied, it is possible
         that the Commission may declare that an aid measure is compatible when, if the Commission had been aware of its method of
         financing, it could not have been so declared ( Van Calster and Others , paragraphs and 50, and Case C‑352/Pearle and Others  [2004] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 30).
         
            
 In the case of the main proceedings, the aid measure takes the form of an exemption from tax on waste. Even if, for the purposes
         of the budget estimates of the Member State in question, the tax advantage was compensated for by the increase in the amount
         of the tax on waste from NLG 28.to NLG 29.per kg of waste, that fact is not sufficient in itself to show that
         the tax was hypothecated to the tax exemption.
         
            
 First, it is clear from the order for reference that the provisions of the WBM do not hypothecate the tax on waste to the
         financing of the tax exemption. Second, the tax revenue has no impact on the amount of the aid. The application of the tax
         exemption and its extent do not depend on the tax revenue.
         
            
 The answer to the second and third questions must therefore be that the last sentence of Article 93(3) of the Treaty must
         be interpreted as meaning that the prohibition in it applies to a tax only if the revenue from it is hypothecated to the aid
         measure at issue. The fact that the aid is granted in the form of a tax exemption or that the loss of revenue due to that
         exemption is, for the purposes of the budget estimates of the Member State in question, offset by an increase in the tax are
         not in themselves sufficient to amount to such hypothecation.
         
            
 Having regard to the answer to the second and third questions, there is no need to answer the fourth, fifth and sixth questions.
         
Costs
            
 Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
         
 On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) rules as follows:
         
 
1.
 The last sentence of Article 93(3) of the EC Treaty (now the last sentence of Article 88(3) EC) must be interpreted as meaning
                     that it may be relied on by a person liable to a tax forming an integral part of an aid measure levied in breach of the prohibition
                     on implementation referred to in that provision, whether or not the person is affected by the distortion of competition resulting
                     from that aid measure. 
                  
 
2.
 The last sentence of Article 93(3) of the Treaty must be interpreted as meaning that the prohibition in it applies to a tax
                     only if the revenue from it is hypothecated to the aid measure at issue. The fact that the aid is granted in the form of a
                     tax exemption or that the loss of revenue due to that exemption is, for the purposes of the budget estimates of the Member
                     State in question, offset by an increase in the tax are not in themselves sufficient to amount to such hypothecation. 
                  
[Signatures]
      
 –
            
Language of the case: Dutch.
Top  
 