
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-265/Criminal proceedingsagainstAnnie Pansard and Others(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Tribunal de grande instance de Dinan)
         
«(Origin of a fishery product – Article EC – National legislation imposing a periodic prohibition on the landing of certain fish catches – Competence of the Member States)»
Opinion of Advocate General Alber delivered on April I - Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), January I - Summary of the Judgment
Fisheries – Conservation of the resources of the sea – National conservation measures – National legislation prohibiting on a temporary basis the landing of a specific species caught within the territorial waters
                     of another Member State – Not permissible
                  (Council Regulations Nos 3760/92, Art. 10(1), and 850/98, Art. 46(1))Community fisheries legislation precludes national legislation which prohibits, during a given period, the landing, on part
         of the coastline of the Member State concerned, of scallops caught within the territorial waters of another Member State.
         The measures which Member States are empowered to adopt for the conservation and management of fishery stocks, in accordance
         with Article 10(1), first and second indents, of Regulation No 3760/establishing a Community system for fisheries and aquaculture
         and Article 46(1) of Regulation No 850/for the conservation of fishery resources through technical measures for the protection
         of juveniles of marine organisms must concern strictly local stocks or only the fishermen of the Member State concerned or
         fishing vessels flying the flag of that State and may apply only to waters coming under its sovereignty or jurisdiction.see paras 34-38, operative part
      
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)January (1)
((Origin of a fishery product – Article EC – National legislation imposing a periodic prohibition on the landing of certain fish catches – Competence of the Member States))
In Case C-265/01, 
            REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC from the Tribunal de grande instance de Dinan (France), for a preliminary ruling
            in the criminal proceedings pending before that court against
            
 Annie Pansard and Others, joined as party:
            
 Comité Région pêches maritimes,  civil party in those proceedings,
            
on the interpretation of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/of October establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L 302, p. 1) and of Article EC,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
composed of: J.-P. Puissochet, President of the Chamber, C. Gulmann, F. Macken (Rapporteur), N. Colneric and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: S. Alber, Registrar: M.-F. Contet, Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of: 
               
─
the French Government, by L. Bernheim and G. de Bergues, acting as Agents, 
               
─
the Commission of the European Communities, by A. Bordes and T. van Rijn, acting as Agents, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of the French Government, represented by L. Bernheim, the Netherlands Government, represented
               by J. van Bakel, acting as Agent, and the Commission, represented by A. Bordes and T. van Rijn, at the hearing on March
               2002,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 2002, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By judgment of June 2001, received at the Court on July 2001, the Tribunal de grande instance (Regional Court) de Dinan,
         exercising its criminal jurisdiction, referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC two questions on
         the interpretation of Council Regulation No 2913/of October establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L 302,
         p. 1,  
         the Customs Code) and of Article EC.  
         
            
Those questions were raised in the context of criminal proceedings against Annie Pansard and Others, who are alleged to have
         committed the offence of landing scallops during a prohibited period. 
         
Legal context
Community legislation
         The legislation concerning the origin of the products
         
            
The Customs Code, which defines the origin of goods subject to the Community customs legislation, provides, in Article 23:
          
         
1.
 Goods originating in a country shall be those wholly obtained or produced in that country. 
         
2.
 The expression  
         goods wholly obtained in a country means: 
         ...
         
(e)
products of hunting or fishing carried on therein;  
         
(f)
products of sea-fishing and other products taken from the sea outside a country's territorial sea by vessels registered or
         recorded in the country concerned and flying the flag of that country;  
         ...
         
3.
 For the purposes of paragraph 2, the expression  
         country covers that country's territorial sea.
         
            
Article 4(2)(f) of Regulation No 802/of the Council of June on the common definition of the concept of the origin
         of goods (OJ, English Special Edition (I), p. 165), which was repealed by the Code, included amongst  
         goods wholly obtained ... in one countryproducts of sea-fishing and other products taken from the sea by vessels registered or recorded in that country and flying
         its flag. 
         The legislation concerning fishing
         
            
Article 2(1) and (2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 101/of January laying down a common structural policy for the
         fishing industry (OJ L 20, p. 19), provides:  
         
1.
 Rules applied by each Member State in respect of fishing in the maritime waters coming under its sovereignty or within its
         jurisdiction shall not lead to differences in treatment of other Member States. 
         Member States shall ensure in particular equal conditions of access to and use of the fishing grounds situated in the waters
         referred to in the preceding subparagraph for all fishing vessels flying the flag of a Member State and registered in Community
         territory. 
         
2.
 Member States shall notify other Member States and the Commission of the existing laws and administrative rules and regulations
         in the field referred to in the first subparagraph of paragraph together with those arising out of application of the provisions
         referred to in the second subparagraph of that paragraph.
         
            
Article of Regulation No 101/states: Member States shall notify other Member States and the Commission of any alterations they intend to make to fishery rules
         laid down pursuant to Article 2.
         
            
Under Council Regulation (EEC) No 170/of January establishing a Community system for the conservation and management
         of fishery resources (OJ L 24, p. 1), and Council Regulation (EEC) No 3760/of December establishing a Community
         system for fisheries and aquaculture (OJ L 389, p. 1), which repealed Regulation No 170/83, the Council, in order to
         preserve the Community's fishery resources, set total allowable catches and divided the quotas between the Member States.
         However, no total allowable catches were set for scallops. 
         
            
However, in the first and second indents of Article 10(1) of Regulation No 3760/it is provided as follows: Member States may take measures for the conservation and management of resources in waters under their sovereignty or jurisdiction
         provided:
         
─
they involve strictly local stocks which are only of interest to fishermen from the Member State concerned, or 
         
─
they apply solely to the fishermen from the Member State concerned.
         
            
The legal framework established by Regulation No 170/was clarified by Council Regulation (EEC) No 171/of January
         laying down certain technical measures for the conservation of fishery resources (OJ L 24, p. 14), Article 19(1)
         and (2) of which provides: 
         
1.
 In the case of strictly local stocks of interest to the fishermen of one Member State only, that Member State may take measures
         for the conservation and management of those stocks, provided that such measures are compatible with Community law and are
         in conformity with the common fisheries policy. 
         
2.
 Member States shall be authorised to lay down any strictly local conditions or detailed arrangements, applying to their national
         fishermen only, designed to limit the catches by technical measures in addition to those defined in the Community regulations,
         provided that such measures are compatible with Community law and are in conformity with the common fisheries policy.
         
            
The rules introduced by Regulation No 171/have been amended on several occasions. That regulation was repealed by Council
         Regulation (EEC) No 3094/of October laying down certain technical measures for the conservation of fishery resources
         (OJ L 288, p. 1). According to the first recital in Council Regulation (EC) No 894/of April laying down certain
         technical measures for the conservation of fishery resources (OJ L 132, p. 1), the regulation codified, for reasons of
         clarity and rationality, Regulation No 3094/86, which was therefore repealed by Article of Regulation No 894/97.  
         
            
The provisions and annexes of that last regulation, with the exception of Articles and to 20, were repealed by Council
         Regulation (EC) No 850/of March for the conservation of fishery resources through technical measures for the protection
         of juveniles of marine organisms (OJ L 125, p. 1).  
         
            
Article 46(1) of Regulation No 850/provides:  Member States may take measures for the conservation and management of stocks:
         
(a)
in the case of strictly local stocks which are of interest solely to the fishermen of the Member State concerned;  or 
         
(b)
in the form of conditions or detailed arrangements designed to limit catches by technical measures: 
         
(i)
supplementing those laid down in the Community legislation on fisheries;  or 
         
(ii)
going beyond the minimum requirements laid down in the said legislation;  
         
provided that such measures apply solely to the fishermen of the Member State concerned, are compatible with Community law,
         and are in conformity with the common fisheries policy.
         
            
That article was modified as follows by Council Regulation (EC) No 1298/of June amending for the fifth time Regulation
         (EC) No 850/(OJ L 148, p. 1), in order to clarify its applicability: 
         
1.
 Member States may take measures for the conservation and management of stocks:
         
(a)
in the case of strictly local stocks which are of interest solely to the Member State concerned; or 
         
(b)
in the form of conditions or detailed arrangements designed to limit catches by technical measures: 
         
(i)
supplementing those laid down in the Community legislation on fisheries; or 
         
(ii)
going beyond the minimum requirements laid down in the said legislation;  
         
provided that such measures apply solely to fishing vessels flying the flag of the Member State concerned and registered in
         the Community or, in the case of fishing activities which are not conducted by a fishing vessel, to persons established in
         the Member State concerned.
         The national legislation
         
            
On March 1980, the French Minister for Transport adopted Order No P-3, laying down rules for the catching and landing
         of scallops (
         the Order), Article of which provides that  
         [i]n coastal waters between the Belgian and Spanish frontiers it is prohibited to catch scallops between May and September and Article of which provides that  
         it is prohibited to land scallops during periods closed to such fishing.  
         The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
Annie Pansard and Others, who are fishermen, fished for scallops in the territorial waters of the Channel Island of Jersey,
         from vessels registered in France, under licences issued by the Jersey authorities permitting fishing by diving. They landed
         those catches on the French coast, at Saint-Cast Le Guildo between May and June and at Saint-Suliac on July 2000.
         Since those landings infringed the Order, Ms Pansard and Others were prosecuted before the court making the reference.  
         
            
Before that court, the accused in the main proceedings stated that, after they had informed the Commission of the difficulties
         they were experiencing, the Commission was examining the possibility of bringing an action against the French Republic for
         failure to comply with obligations under the Treaty. They also asked the national court to refer a question to the Court of
         Justice for a preliminary ruling concerning the compatibility of the Order with Community law. They therefore requested the
         court to stay proceedings pending a decision either from the Commission or from the Court of Justice. 
         
            
In the light of those considerations, the Tribunal de grande instance de Dinan decided to stay proceedings and to refer the
         following questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling: 
         
1.
 Can scallops caught in the circumstances described be regarded as imported products, notwithstanding the French legislation
         which applies to fish catches the law of the flag of the fishing vessel? 
         
2.
 Is the validity of the Order of March 1980, which prohibits the landing of scallops during the close season, affected by
         the provisions of the Treaty of Maastricht, which prohibits measures having an equivalent effect to quantitative restrictions
         on imports?
         
The questions
            
It should be noted at the outset, first, that in proceedings under Article EC the Court does not have jurisdiction to
         rule on the compatibility of a national measure with Community law. However, it does have jurisdiction to supply the national
         court with a ruling on the interpretation of Community law so as to enable that court to determine whether such compatibility
         exists in order to decide the case before it (see, in particular, Case 6/Costa  [1964] ECR 585, at p. 593, and Case C-17/De Coster  [2001] ECR I-9445, paragraph 23).  
         
            
Second, in order to provide a helpful answer to the national court which has referred a question to it for a preliminary ruling,
         the Court may deem it necessary to consider provisions of Community law to which the national court has not referred in its
         question (Case 35/Tissier   [1986] ECR 1207, paragraph 9, and Case C-107/Teckal   [1999] ECR I-8121, paragraph 39).  
         
            
In order to provide an interpretation which will be of assistance to the national court, it must be observed that the Community
         fisheries legislation is relevant for the purposes of deciding the case in the main proceedings.  
         
            
The second question referred for a preliminary ruling, which must be examined first, should therefore be construed as asking,
         in essence, whether Community fisheries law precludes national legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings which
         prohibits, during a given period, the landing, on part of the coastline of the Member State concerned, of scallops caught
         within the territorial waters of another Member State.  
         Observations submitted to the Court
         
            
The Commission, which has alone proposed a reply to the second question, submits, first, that the French legislation at issue
         in the main proceedings, in so far as it lays down a general prohibition on landing scallops, must be regarded as a measure
         having an equivalent effect to a quantitative restriction on imports within the meaning of Article EC. 
         
            
It submits, next, that, in that connection, Member States cannot rely on the derogations provided by Article EC, since
         their residual competence in respect of technical measures for the conservation of fishing resources relates solely, according
         to the Community legislation, to the conservation of strictly local stocks which are only of interest to the Member State
         concerned and to technical measures which go beyond the minimum requirements of the Community legislation and concern only
         the fishermen of that Member State. 
         
            
The Commission further contends that, since the adoption of Regulation No 3760/92, the Member States may take measures only
         in waters coming under their sovereignty or within their jurisdiction. 
         
            
The Commission also maintains that the Order, because it was not notified to the Commission, has, since the adoption of Regulation
         No 171/83, suffered from a substantial procedural defect rendering it inapplicable to third parties.  
         
            
Finally, the Commission argues that a general and absolute prohibition on unloading in French ports during the seasonal fishing
         prohibition cannot be regarded either as a measure necessary to secure compliance with the latter prohibition or as an indispensable
         measure for the purposes of providing effective protection for the health and life of animals, since those objectives could
         be attained just as effectively by measures having less restrictive effects on intra-Community trade.  
         Findings of the Court
         
            
Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) provides that Member States are to develop a common agricultural
         policy, during the transitional period, and are to bring it into force by the end of that period at the latest, in order to
         attain the objectives set out in Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC). 
         
            
It must be borne in mind that, by virtue of Article of the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Kingdom of
         Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the adjustments to the Treaties, the power
         to adopt measures for the protection of the biological resources of the sea has since January been vested exclusively
         in the Council, acting on a proposal from the Commission (Case 24/Gewiese and Mehlich  [1984] ECR 817, paragraph 5).  
         
            
Furthermore, the Court has already held that once the Community has, pursuant to Article of the EC Treaty, adopted legislation
         establishing an organisation of the market in a given sector, the Member States are under an obligation to refrain from taking
         any measure which might undermine or create exceptions to it (Case 111/Van den Hazel   [1977] ECR 901, paragraph 13, and Case C-44/Fishermen's Organisations and Others   [1995] ECR I-3115, paragraph 52).  
         
            
By the adoption of Council Regulation (EEC) No 100/of January on the common organisation of the market in fishery
         products (OJ L 20, p. 1), which was repealed by Council Regulation (EEC) No 3796/of December (OJ L 379,
         p. 1), the Community introduced a common agricultural policy for the fishing industry. Furthermore, the Council laid down,
         by Regulation No 101/76, a common structural policy in that sector. 
         
            
Admittedly, the existence of a common organisation of the market does not prevent the competent authorities of a Member State
         from adopting national measures on the terms provided for by Community legislation forming part of that organisation (
          Fishermen's Organisations and Others , cited above, paragraph 53).
         
            
In that regard, it should be pointed out, as has been observed in paragraph of this judgment, that the Community has adopted
         numerous measures for the management of the stocks of fishery products, in particular by establishing catch quotas for those
         products, and has to a large extent regulated the fishery market.  
         
            
On the other hand, it has not adopted any specific measure for the management of scallops stocks.  
         
            
However, as may be seen from the first and second indents of Article 10(1) of Regulation No 3760/92, Member States may take
         measures for the conservation and management of resources in waters under their sovereignty or jurisdiction, provided that
         they involve strictly local stocks which are only of interest to fishermen from the Member State concerned and that they apply
         solely to the fishermen from that Member State. 
         
            
It is also clear from Article 46(1) of Regulation No 850/98, and from that article as amended by Regulation No 1298/2000,
         that a Member State is empowered to take measures for the conservation and management of fishery stocks only if they concern
         strictly local stocks which are of interest only to that Member State or which are in the form of details or conditions or
         detailed arrangements designed to limit catches by technical measures, provided that such measures apply, according to the
         provision as set out in Regulation No 850/98, solely to the fishermen of the Member State concerned, and are compatible with
         Community law and in conformity with the common fisheries policy, and, according to the provision as amended by Regulation
         No 1298/2000, solely to fishing vessels flying the flag of the Member State concerned and registered in the Community or,
         in the case of fishing activities which are not conducted by a fishing vessel, to persons established in the Member State
         concerned. 
         
            
Thus, it follows from the above that the competence of the Member States to take measures for the conservation and management
         of fishery stocks is part of a specific framework. The measures which Member States are empowered to adopt in that regard
         must concern strictly local stocks or only the fishermen of the Member State concerned or fishing vessels flying the flag
         of that State and may apply only to waters coming under its sovereignty or jurisdiction.  
         
            
The national provision at issue in the main proceedings exceeds the competence of the Member State concerned since, first,
         it concerns neither strictly local stocks nor is it in the form of conditions or detailed arrangements designed to limit catches
         by technical measures, and, second, it prohibits the landing of fish caught in waters which do not come under the sovereignty
         or jurisdiction of the Member State concerned.  
         
            
Therefore, the reply to be given to the second question, as reformulated, must be that Community fisheries law precludes national
         legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings which prohibits, during a given period, the landing, on part of
         the coastline of the Member State concerned, of scallops caught within the territorial waters of another Member State.  
         
            
Having regard to the answer given to the second question, it is not necessary to answer the first question. 
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the French and Netherlands Governments and the Commission, which have submitted observations to the
         Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings
         pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
in answer to the questions referred to it by the Tribunal de grande instance de Dinan by judgment of June 2001, hereby
         rules: 
         
Puissochet
 Gulmann
Macken
Colneric
Cunha Rodrigues
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on January 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
J.-P. Puissochet  
Registrar
President of the Sixth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: French.
Top  
 