
Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber) of May – Commission v Portugal
(Case C‑530/07)
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 91/271/EEC – Pollution and nuisance – Urban waste water treatment – Articles and 1.                     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Examination of the merits by the Court – Situation to be taken into consideration
            – Situation on expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion (Art. EC) (see paras 25, 54)
2.                     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Right of the Commission to bring judicial proceedings – To be exercised at its
            discretion (Art. EC) (see para. 29)
3.                     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Proof of failure – Burden of proof on Commission – Production of evidence showing
            failure (Art. EC) (see para. 32)
4.                     Environment – Urban waste-water treatment – Directive 91/– Implementation by Member States – Obligation to achieve a result
            – Failure to satisfy that obligation – Failure to fulfil obligations – National system pleaded as justification – Not permissible
            (Art. EC; Council Directive 91/271, Arts and 4) (see para. 55)
Re: 
Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations – Failure to adopt within the prescribed period the measures necessary
                  to comply with Articles and of Council Directive 91/271/EEC of May concerning urban waste-water treatment (OJ
                  L 135, p. 40)
               
Operative part
The Court: 
1.
	Declares that, by failing to provide, in accordance with the provisions of Article of Council Directive 91/271/EEC of May concerning urban waste water treatment, the agglomerations of Bacia do Rio Uima (Fiães S. Jorge), Costa de Aveiro,
                     Covilhã, Espinho/Feira, Ponta Delgada, Póvoa de Varzim/Vila do Conde and Santa Cita with collection systems, and by failing
                     to subject to secondary treatment or an equivalent treatment, in accordance with Article of that directive, the urban waste
                     water from the agglomerations of Alverca, Bacio do Rio Uima (Fiães S. Jorge), Carvoeiro, Costa de Aveiro, Costa Oeste, Covilhã,
                     Lisbon, Matosinhos, Milfontes, Nazaré/Famalicão, Ponta Delgada, Póvoa de Varzim/Vila do Conde, Santa Cita, Vila Franca de
                     Xira and Vila Real de Santo António, the Portuguese Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles and of
                     that directive;
                  
2.
	Dismisses the action as to the remainder;
3.
	Orders the Portuguese Republic to pay the costs.
Top  
 