
Case C-226/Flughafen Köln/Bonn GmbH
v
Hauptzollamt Köln
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Finanzgericht Düsseldorf)
(Directive 2003/96/EC – Community framework for the taxation of energy products and electricity – Article 14(1)(a) – Exemption for energy products used to produce electricity – Option to impose taxation for reasons of environmental policy – Direct effect of the exemption)
Summary of the Judgment
Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Taxation of energy products and electricity – Directive 2003/(Council Directive 2003/96, Art. 14(1)(a))
Article 14(1)(a) of Directive 2003/restructuring the Community framework for the taxation of energy products and electricity,
         in so far as it provides for the exemption from taxation under that directive of energy products used to produce electricity,
         has direct effect in the sense that it may be relied upon by an individual before national courts – in relation to a period
         of time during which the Member State concerned was in default of its obligation to transpose that directive into its national
         law within the prescribed period – in a dispute between that individual and the customs authorities of that State, for the
         purpose of having national legislation which is incompatible with that provision disapplied and, consequently, obtaining a
         refund of tax which infringed that provision.
      
The obligation to exempt from taxation under that directive energy products intended to produce electricity is expressed in
         terms sufficiently precise and unconditional to confer on individuals the right to rely on it in proceedings before national
         courts with a view to contesting national rules that are incompatible with it. The fact that the introductory wording of Article
         14(1) affords Member States a degree of latitude with regard to the conditions for ensuring the correct and straightforward
         application of the exemption does not affect the unconditional character of that exemption obligation.
      
The latter finding is not invalidated by the fact that Member States may, under the second sentence of Article 14(1)(a) of
         Directive 2003/96, impose taxation on the products in question for reasons of environmental policy, since that is merely a
         potential limitation to the exemption rule and since a Member State which has not exercised that option cannot rely on its
         own failure to do so in order to refuse a taxpayer the benefit of an exemption which he may legitimately claim under Directive
         2003/96.
      
(see paras 31-33, 39, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Directive 2003/96/EC – Community framework for the taxation of energy products and electricity – Article 14(1)(a) – Exemption for energy products used to produce electricity – Option to impose taxation for reasons of environmental policy – Direct effect of the exemption)
In Case C‑226/07,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Finanzgericht Düsseldorf (Germany), made by decision of April 2007, received at the Court on May 2007, in the proceedings
      
Flughafen Köln/Bonn GmbH
v
Hauptzollamt Köln,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of A. Rosas, President of the Chamber, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, J. Klučka, A. Ó Caoimh (Rapporteur) and A. Arabadjiev,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro,
Registrar: B. Fülöp, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on April 2008,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Flughafen Köln/Bonn GmbH, by D. Schiebold and A. Richter, Rechtsanwälte,
–        the Hauptzollamt Köln, by O. Meyer, Oberregierungsrat, and K. Deutschmann, acting as Agent,
–        the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and G. Albenzio, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by W. Mölls, acting as Agent,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 14(1)(a) of Council Directive 2003/96/EC of
         October restructuring the Community framework for the taxation of energy products and electricity (OJ L 283,
         p. 51).
      
The reference was made in proceedings between Flughafen Köln/Bonn GmbH and the Hauptzollamt Köln (Principal Customs Office,
         Cologne) concerning the latter’s refusal to refund the tax paid by Flughafen Köln/Bonn GmbH for on gas oil used to produce
         electricity. 
      
 Legal framework
 Community legislation
Recitals to in the preamble to Directive 2003/read as follows: 
      
‘(1)      The scope of Council Directive 92/81/EEC of October on the harmonisation of the structures of excise duties on mineral
         oils [(OJ L 316, p. 12), as amended by Council Directive 94/74/EC of December (OJ L 365, p. 46)] and of
         Council Directive 92/82/EEC of October on the approximation of the rates of excise duties on mineral oils [(OJ L 316, p. 19), as amended by Directive 94/74] is restricted to mineral oils.
      
(2)      The absence of Community provisions imposing a minimum rate of taxation on electricity and energy products other than mineral
         oils may adversely affect the proper functioning of the internal market.
      
(3)      The proper functioning of the internal market and the achievement of the objectives of other Community policies require minimum
         levels of taxation to be laid down at Community level for most energy products, including electricity, natural gas and coal.
      
(4)      Appreciable differences in the national levels of energy taxation applied by Member States could prove detrimental to the
         proper functioning of the internal market.
      
(5)      The establishment of appropriate Community minimum levels of taxation may enable existing differences in the national levels
         of taxation to be reduced. 
      
(6)      In accordance with Article of the [EC] Treaty, environmental protection requirements must be integrated into the definition
         and implementation of other Community policies.’
      
Article of Directive 2003/provides that the Member States are to impose taxation on energy products and electricity in
         accordance with that directive. 
      
Article 2(1)(b) of Directive 2003/96, read in conjunction with Article 2(5) thereof, provides that, for the purposes of the
         directive, the term ‘energy products’ is to apply to products ‘falling within CN codes 2701, and to 2715’ as referred
         to in Commission Regulation (EC) No 2031/of August amending Annex I to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/on
         the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff (OJ L 279, p. 1), that is, inter alia, gas oil,
         which falls within heading of the Combined Nomenclature (‘the CN’). 
      
According to Article 4(1) of Directive 2003/96, ‘[t]he levels of taxation which Member States shall apply to the energy products
         and electricity listed in Article may not be less than the minimum levels of taxation prescribed by this Directive’. 
      
Articles to of Directive 2003/provide that, as from January 2004, the minimum levels of taxation applicable to motor
         fuels, to heating fuels and to electricity are to be fixed as set out in Annex I to that directive. 
      
Article 14(1)(a) of Directive 2003/provides:
      
‘In addition to the general provisions set out in [Council] Directive 92/12/EEC [of February on the general arrangements
         for products subject to excise duty and on the holding, movement and monitoring of such products (OJ L 76, p. 1), as
         amended by Council Directive 2000/47/EC of July (OJ L 193, p. 73)] on exempt uses of taxable products, and without
         prejudice to other Community provisions, Member States shall exempt the following from taxation under conditions which they
         shall lay down for the purpose of ensuring the correct and straightforward application of such exemptions and of preventing
         any evasion, avoidance or abuse:
      
(a)      energy products and electricity used to produce electricity and electricity used to maintain the ability to produce electricity.
         However, Member States may, for reasons of environmental policy, subject these products to taxation without having to respect
         the minimum levels of taxation laid down in this Directive. In such case, the taxation of these products shall not be taken
         into account for the purpose of satisfying the minimum level of taxation on electricity laid down in Article 10’.
      
The third subparagraph of Article 21(5) of Directive 2003/provides as follows:
      
‘An entity producing electricity for its own use is regarded as a distributor. Notwithstanding Article 14(1)(a), Member States
         may exempt small producers of electricity provided that they tax the energy products used for the production of that electricity’.
      
Article 28(1), (2) and (3) of Directive 2003/states:
      
‘1.      Member States shall adopt and publish the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive
         not later than December 2003. They shall forthwith inform the Commission thereof.
      
2.      They shall apply these provisions from January 2004, except the provisions laid down in Articles and 18(1), which may
         be applied by the Member States from January 2003. 
      
3.      When Member States adopt these measures, they shall contain a reference to this Directive or shall be accompanied by such
         reference on the occasion of their official publication. The methods of making such reference shall be laid down by the Member
         States.’
      
According to Article of the directive:
      
‘Notwithstanding Article 28(2), Directives 92/81/EEC and 92/82/EEC shall be repealed as from December 2003.’
 National legislation
The Mineralölsteuergesetz (Law on taxation of mineral oils) of December (BGBl. I, p. 2185; ‘the Law on taxation
         of mineral oils’), in the version in force at the time of the facts in the main proceedings, contained, inter alia, the following
         provisions:
      
‘Paragraph – Definitions
(1)      Mineral oils shall be subject, within the tax jurisdiction, to mineral oil tax …
(2)      For the purposes of this Law, “mineral oils” means:
…
4.      Goods falling within heading of the [CN],
Paragraph – Standard rates of tax, definitions
(1)      The tax to be charged
…
4.      for litres of gas oil coming within subheading of the [CN]
(a)      with a sulphur content of more than mg/kg, shall be EUR 485.70, 
(b)      with a maximum sulphur content of mg/kg, shall be EUR 470.…’
The Stromsteuergesetz (Law on taxation of electricity) of March (BGBl. I, p. 378), in the version in force at
         the time of the facts in the main proceedings, provided, in Paragraph 9(1)(3), that electricity produced in installations
         with a maximum nominal electrical power rating of two megawatts was, subject to compliance with certain conditions, exempt
         from that tax.
      
The Energiesteuergesetz (Law on taxation of energy) of July (BGBl. I, p. 1534;’the Law on taxation of energy’),
         which entered into force on August 2006, repealed as from that date, with express reference to Directive 2003/96, the Law
         on taxation of mineral oils. It contains, inter alia, the following provisions:
      
‘Paragraph – Tax jurisdiction, energy products
(1)      Energy products shall be subject, within the tax jurisdiction, to energy tax …
(2)      Energy products for the purposes of this Law are:
…
2.      goods falling within headings … to of the [CN]
…
Paragraph – Rate of tax
(1)      The tax to be charged
…
4.      for litres of gas oil falling within subheadings to of the [CN]
(a)      with a sulphur content of more than mg/kg, shall be EUR 485.70, 
(b)      with a maximum sulphur content of mg/kg, shall be EUR 470.…
(3)      In derogation from subparagraphs and 2, the tax to be charged 
1.      for litres of lawfully marked gas oil falling within subheadings to of the [CN]
(a)      with a sulphur content of more than mg/kg, 
         until December 2008, shall be EUR 61.35,
         as from January 2009, shall be EUR 76.35,
(b)      with a maximum sulphur content of mg/kg, shall be EUR 61.35,
…
when it is used as heating oil or for the propulsion of gas turbines and combustion engines in installations receiving preferential
         treatment within the meaning of Paragraphs and 3a or when delivered for those purposes …
      
Paragraph – Installations receiving preferential treatment
(1)      Installations receiving preferential treatment are stationary installations
1.      the mechanical energy of which is used exclusively to produce electricity
…
Paragraph – Tax exemption for the production of electricity and the combined production of power and heat 
(1)      A tax exemption shall be granted on request, subject to subparagraph 2, for energy products on which tax is proved to have
         been paid … and which were used 
      
1.      to produce electricity in stationary installations 
… 
If, in the case referred to in point of the first sentence, the mechanical energy produced in the installation is used for
         the production of electricity and also for other purposes, the tax exemption shall be granted only in respect of the proportion
         of the energy products used to produce electricity. 
      
(2)      Point of the first sentence of subparagraph shall apply only to installations with a nominal electrical power rating greater
         than two megawatts.
      
(3)      The person entitled to the exemption is the user of the energy products.’
 The main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
The applicant in the main proceedings is the operator of Cologne-Bonn airport in Germany. In order to supply aircraft with
         onboard electricity, it uses ground power-generating units. For the production of such electricity, it used, in the course
         of the calendar year 2004, litres of taxed gas oil. 
      
On December 2005, the applicant applied to the Hauptzollamt Köln for a refund of that tax on the basis of Article 14(1)(a)
         of Directive 2003/96. 
      
On January 2006, that application was rejected on the ground, first, that the Law on taxation of mineral oils did not provide
         for a refund of the tax in the case of taxed gas oil used to produce electricity and, second, that Article 14(1)(a) of Directive
         2003/does not have direct effect. 
      
Having exhausted administrative proceedings without success, the applicant in the main proceedings brought an action before
         the Finanzgericht (Finance Court) Düsseldorf. 
      
In the order for reference, that court points out that, in Case C-346/Braathens [1999] ECR I-3419, paragraphs to 31, the Court of Justice accepted that Article 8(1)(b) of Directive 92/has direct
         effect. The national court notes that the wording of the introductory paragraph of Article 8(1) of Directive 92/corresponds
         to that of the introductory paragraph of Article 14(1) of Directive 2003/96, and that Article 8(1)(b) of Directive 92/81,
         in the same way as the first sentence of Article 14(1)(a) of Directive 2003/96, lays down a clear and precise obligation to
         exempt. 
      
The national court is, however, uncertain whether the unconditional and precise character of Article 14(1)(a) is affected
         by the fact that, according to the second sentence of that provision, Member States may tax energy products ‘for reasons of
         environmental policy’. In that regard, the national court observes that, while those reasons, which are clearly not defined
         by Directive 2003/96, appear to confer on the national legislature a discretion with regard to which energy products it will
         or will not tax, it remains in any event possible to determine whether that legislature has made use of the power thus conferred
         on it by Article 14(1)(a). There is, in the legislation which subsequently amended the Law on taxation of mineral oils or
         in the related preparatory legislative materials, nothing to indicate that the legislature wished, for reasons of environmental
         policy, to continue to tax gas oil used to produce electricity. The national legislature thus quite simply remained inactive
         in that regard and did not transpose the provisions of Article 14(1)(a) of Directive 2003/within the prescribed period.
         That transposition occurred only on the adoption of the Law on taxation of energy, which entered into force on August 2006.
      
In those circumstances, the Finanzgericht Düsseldorf decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question to
         the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘Is Article 14(1)(a) of [Directive 2003/96] to be interpreted as meaning that an undertaking which used gas oil on which tax
         was paid, falling within heading of the [CN], in order to produce electricity, and which has applied for a refund of
         that tax, can rely directly on that provision?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
By its question, the national court asks whether Article 14(1)(a) of Directive 2003/96, in so far as it provides for the exemption
         from taxation under the directive of energy products used to produce electricity, has direct effect, with the consequence
         that it may be relied on by an individual before the national courts in proceedings, such as the main proceedings, between
         that individual and the national customs authorities, in order to disapply national legislation which is incompatible with
         that provision. 
      
According to settled case-law of the Court, whenever the provisions of a directive appear, so far as their subject-matter
         is concerned, to be unconditional and sufficiently precise, they may be relied on before the national courts by individuals
         against the State where the latter has failed to implement the directive in domestic law by the end of the period prescribed
         or where it has failed to implement the directive correctly (see, inter alia, Joined Cases C-6/and C-9/Francovich and Others [1991] ECR I-5357, paragraph 11; Case C-62/Marks & Spencer [2002] ECR I-6325, paragraph 25; and Joined Cases C-397/to C‑403/Pfeiffer and Others [2004] ECR I-8835, paragraph 103).
      
It is not disputed that, at the time of the facts in the main proceedings, that is to say, after the expiry of the period
         for transposition of Directive 2003/laid down in Article 28(1) thereof, namely December 2003, the Federal Republic of
         Germany had not adopted specific national measures in order to transpose that directive into German law. Such transposition
         measures were adopted only later, in the Law on taxation of energy, which entered into force on August 2006. 
      
It is also common ground that the Federal Republic of Germany had not, at the time of the facts in the main proceedings, exercised
         the option provided for in the second sentence of Article 14(1)(a) of Directive 2003/96, allowing it, in derogation from the
         exemption rules established under the first sentence of that provision, to impose taxation ‘for reasons of environmental policy’
         on energy products, such as gas oil, used to produce electricity. It is not, in fact, disputed that the taxation rules then
         in force in that Member State were not based on such reasons; rather, the Federal Republic of Germany limited itself to transposing
         into national law the taxation rules relating to mineral oils laid down previously by Directives 92/and 92/82. 
      
At the hearing, the Italian Government nevertheless contended that the time-limit for transposition laid down in Article 28(1)
         of Directive 2003/did not apply to provisions which, like the second sentence of Article 14(1)(a) of the directive, provide
         the Member States with a choice. 
      
That argument cannot, however, be accepted. Article 28(1) of Directive 2003/provides, in unambiguous wording, that the
         Member States are to adopt the national measures necessary to comply with the directive not later than December 2003, without
         making any distinction as between its provisions. In addition, and in any event, it is not disputed that the Law on taxation
         of energy, which entered into force on August 2006, with the aim of transposing into German law the provisions of Directive
         2003/96, did not exercise the option provided for in the second sentence of Article 14(1)(a) of that directive, with the consequence
         that the question as to the amount of time given to the Member States to transpose that provision cannot have any bearing
         on the answers to be given to the national court.
      
In those circumstances, it is necessary to examine whether, as claimed by the applicant in the main proceedings and the Commission,
         Article 14(1)(a) of Directive 2003/is, from the point of view of its content, sufficiently precise and unconditional to
         be capable of being relied on directly by an individual against the authorities of the Member State in question in relation
         to a period of time during which that Member State was, following expiry of the period laid down in Article 28(1) of the directive,
         in default of its obligation to transpose that directive into its national law.
      
With regard to the first condition, it must be held that Article 14(1)(a) of Directive 2003/96, in so far as it imposes on
         Member States the obligation not to impose taxation under the directive on energy products used to produce electricity, is
         sufficiently precise, since it lays down clearly the products covered by the exemption (see, by analogy, Case 8/Becker [1982] ECR 53, paragraph 27, and Braathens, paragraph 31).
      
With regard to the second condition, it follows from the case-law that the fact that a provision of a directive gives Member
         States a choice does not necessarily render it impossible to determine with sufficient precision, on the basis of the provisions
         of the directive alone, the content of the rights thus conferred on individuals (see, to that effect, Francovich and Others, paragraph 17, and Joined Cases C-253/to C‑258/Kampelmann and Others [1997] ECR I-6907, paragraph 39).
      
Thus, it follows from settled case-law that the unconditional nature of an obligation to grant an exemption cannot be affected
         at all by the degree of latitude afforded to Member States by introductory wording such as that contained in Article 14(1)
         of Directive 2003/96, according to which exemptions are granted by those States ‘under conditions which they shall lay down
         for the purpose of ensuring the correct and straightforward application of such exemptions and of preventing any evasion,
         avoidance or abuse’. A Member State may not rely, as against a taxpayer who is able to show that his tax position actually
         falls within one of the categories of exemption laid down in a directive, on its failure to adopt the very provisions which
         are intended to facilitate the application of that exemption (see, by analogy, Becker, paragraph 33; Braathens, paragraph 31; Case C-141/Kügler [2002] ECR I-6833, paragraph 52; Case C-45/Dornier [2003] ECR I-12911, paragraph 79; and Joined Cases C-453/and C-462/Linneweber and Akritidis [2005] ECR I-1131, paragraph 34).
      
Contrary to what is submitted by the defendant in the main proceedings and by the Italian Government, that finding is not
         invalidated by the fact that Member States may, under the second sentence of Article 14(1)(a) of Directive 2003/96, impose
         taxation on the products in question for reasons of environmental policy. That is merely a potential limitation to the exemption
         rule, and a Member State which has not exercised that option cannot rely on its own failure to do so in order to refuse a
         taxpayer the benefit of an exemption which he may legitimately claim under Directive 2003/(see, by analogy, Kügler, paragraphs and 60, and Linneweber and Akritidis, paragraph 35).
      
It follows that the obligation under Article 14(1)(a) of Directive 2003/to exempt from taxation under that directive energy
         products intended to produce electricity is sufficiently precise and unconditional to confer on individuals the right to rely
         on it in proceedings before national courts with a view to contesting national rules that are incompatible with it. 
      
According to settled case-law, the right to obtain a refund of charges levied in a Member State in breach of rules of Community
         law is the consequence and the complement of the rights conferred on individuals by Community provisions as interpreted by
         the Court (see, inter alia, Case C-343/Dilexport [1999] ECR I‑579, paragraph 23; Joined Cases C‑397/and C-410/Metallgesellschaft and Others [2001] ECR I-1727, paragraph 84; and Marks & Spencer, paragraph 30). 
      
It must also be pointed out that, at the hearing, the parties to the main proceedings explained, in reply to a request by
         the Court, that the electricity produced by the applicant in the main proceedings fell, at the time of the facts in issue,
         within the scope of Paragraph 9(1)(3) of the Law on taxation of electricity of March 1999, in the version then in force,
         which provided essentially for the exemption of electricity produced by entities the installations of which did not exceed
         a certain threshold of rated electrical power. 
      
Taking those explanations into account, the Commission and the defendant in the main proceedings therefore submitted, at that
         hearing, that it would be incompatible with Directive 2003/to exempt the energy products used by the applicant in the main
         proceedings to produce electricity, as the electricity produced was itself also exempted. While, pursuant to the third subparagraph
         of Article 21(5) of Directive 2003/96, Member States may, notwithstanding Article 14(1)(a) of the directive, exempt electricity
         produced by small producers of electricity, that is subject to the express proviso that the energy products used for that
         purpose are taxed. The applicant in the main proceedings nevertheless claimed, on that point, that the legislation which transposed
         Directive 2003/during precisely introduced a specific rate of taxation which is substantially lower than the standard
         rate which applied at the time of the facts in the main proceedings. 
      
In that regard, it must be stated that, by its question, the national court asked the Court of Justice only as to the interpretation
         of Article 14(1)(a) of Directive 2003/and that the abovementioned matters of fact and law, which were raised and discussed
         for the first time at the hearing before the Court, are not referred to either in the order for reference or in the written
         observations lodged by the interested parties. Moreover, the parties to the main proceedings confirmed, in response to a question
         put by the Court, that that aspect of the dispute was not addressed at any stage of the main proceedings. 
      
In those circumstances, in the absence of more precise and detailed information on that point, the Court finds that the documents
         submitted to it do not indicate with sufficient clarity that those various matters may be relevant in resolving the case in
         the main proceedings and, therefore, of any use to the national court, which, as the court that must resolve the dispute,
         is best placed to determine the relevance of the questions referred to the Court in the light of the particular features of
         the case before it. 
      
The answer to the question referred must therefore be that Article 14(1)(a) of Directive 2003/96, in so far as it provides
         for the exemption from taxation under that directive of energy products used to produce electricity, has direct effect in
         the sense that it may be relied upon by an individual before national courts – in relation to a period of time during which
         the Member State concerned was in default of its obligation to transpose that directive into its national law within the prescribed
         period – in a dispute, such as that in the main proceedings, between that individual and the customs authorities of that State,
         for the purpose of having national legislation which is incompatible with that provision disapplied and, consequently, obtaining
         a refund of tax which infringed that provision.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
Article 14(1)(a) of Council Directive 2003/96/EC of October restructuring the Community framework for the taxation
            of energy products and electricity, in so far as it provides for the exemption from taxation under that directive of energy
            products used to produce electricity, has direct effect in the sense that it may be relied upon by an individual before national
            courts – in relation to a period of time during which the Member State concerned was in default of its obligation to transpose
            that directive into its national law within the prescribed period – in a dispute, such as that in the main proceedings, between
            that individual and the customs authorities of that State, for the purpose of having national legislation which is incompatible
            with that provision disapplied and, consequently, obtaining a refund of tax which infringed that provision. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 