
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-91/Kingdom of Spain
v
Council of the European Union
(Conservation and exploitation of fisheries resources – Regulation (EC) No 2371/2002)
Opinion of Advocate General Tizzano delivered on January Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), March 2005. 
Summary of the Judgment
1.     Fisheries – Common structural policy – Conservation of the resources of the sea – Access for fishing vessels to the coastal
            bands of the Member States – Transitional arrangements introduced by Article of the Act of Accession of Spain and Portugal
            – Power of the Council to adopt rules having a content analogous to that article after those arrangements have expired – Permissible
(Art. EC; Council Regulation No 2371/2002, Annex I, point 6)
2.     Fisheries – Common structural policy – Conservation of the resources of the sea – Access for fishing vessels to the coastal
            bands of the Member States – Specific arrangements restricting that access to the vessels of one Member State and having as
            their purpose the protection of the most sensitive Community waters – Purpose not entailing the application of criteria of
            reciprocity – Principle of non-discrimination – No breach
(Council Regulation No 2371/2002)
1.     Article of the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Kingdom of Spain and the Portuguese Republic and the
         adjustments to the Treaties, appearing in Part Four of that act relating to transitional measures and providing for restrictions
         on fishing, has not been applicable since the date fixed by Article of that Act, viz., December 2002.
      
None the less, the Community legislature may, exercising the competence conferred on it by Article EC, adopt new rules
         with content analogous to the rule in Article of the Act of Accession, such as those in point of Annex I to Regulation
         No 2371/on the conservation and sustainable exploitation of fisheries resources under the common fisheries policy, which
         defines the conditions of access for Spanish fishing vessels to French coastal bands.
      
(see paras 27-29)
2.     The purpose of Regulation No 2371/on the conservation and sustainable exploitation of fisheries resources under the common
         fisheries policy is, according to recital in the preamble thereto, to protect the most sensitive Community waters while
         taking account of the need to preserve traditional fishing activities.  The arrangements applicable to Spanish fishing vessels
         for access to French coastal bands, laid down in point of Annex I to that regulation, do not breach the principle of non-discrimination
         because such a purpose does not of itself entail the application of criteria of reciprocity between Member States and because
         those arrangements do no more than extend the arrangements that have been in force since the Kingdom of Spain acceded to the
         Community.
      
(see paras 45, 50-51, 54-55)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)March 2005(1)
(Conservation and exploitation of fisheries resources  –  Regulation (EC) No 2371/2002)
 In Case C-91/03,ACTION for annulment under Article EC, brought on February 2003,
            
Kingdom of Spain,  represented by N. Díaz Abad, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant,
v
Council of the European Union, represented by J. Carbery, F. Florindo Gijón and M. Balta, acting as Agents,  
            
defendant, supported by:Commission of the European Communities, represented by T. van Rijn and  S. Pardo Quintillàn, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,French Republic, represented by G. de Bergues and A. Colomb, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
THE COURT (Second Chamber),,
 composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, C. Gulmann, R. Schintgen, P. Kūris (Rapporteur) and J. Klučka, Judges,
            
            
 Advocate General: A. Tizzano, Registrar: K. Sztranc, Administrator,
             having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on November 2004,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By its application, the Kingdom of Spain seeks annulment of paragraph of Annex I to Council Regulation (EC) No 2371/of December on the conservation and sustainable exploitation of fisheries resources under the common fisheries policy
         (OJ L 358, p. 59, ‘the contested regulation’).
         
The legal background and the origins of the dispute
            
 Article of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2141/of 0ctober laying down a common structural policy for the fishing
         industry (OJ, English Special Edition (III), p. 703) established the principle of free access to waters under the jurisdiction
         or sovereignty of the Member States.
         
            
 In derogation from that principle, Article 100(1) of the Act of Accession of the Kingdom of Denmark, Ireland and the United
         Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the adjustments to the Treaties (OJ L 73, p. 14, ‘the Act of Accession
         1972’) authorised the Member States until December to restrict fishing in waters under their sovereignty or jurisdiction,
         situated within a limit of six nautical miles calculated from the base lines of the coastal Member State, to vessels which
         traditionally fished in those waters.
         
            
 On January the Council of the European Union adopted Regulation (EEC) No 170/establishing a Community system for
         the conservation and management of fishery resources (OJ L 24, p. 1).  Under Article 6(1) of that regulation, the Member
         States were authorised to retain the arrangements defined in Article of the Act of Accession and to generalise up
         to nautical miles for all waters under their sovereignty or jurisdiction the limit of six miles laid down in that article.
         
            
 According to Article 6(2) of that regulation, ‘[i]n addition to the activities pursued under existing neighbourhood relations
         between Member States, the fishing activities under the arrangements established in paragraph of this Article shall be pursued
         in accordance with the arrangements contained in Annex I, fixing for each Member State the geographical zones within the coastal
         bands of other Member States where these activities are pursued and the species concerned.’  That Annex was amended pursuant
         to Article of the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Kingdom of Spain and the Portuguese Republic and the
         adjustments to the Treaties (OJ L 302, p. 23, ‘the Act of Accession 1985’).
         
            
 Article of the Act of Accession provides, as a provisional measure, restrictions on fishing without distinguishing
         the fishing zones on either side of the 12-nautical-mile limit calculated from the base lines.
         
            
 Article of the Act of Accession provides:
         
‘The regime defined in Articles to 164, including the adjustments which the Council will be able to adopt pursuant to
         Article 162, shall remain in force until the date of expiry of the period laid down in Article 8(3) of Regulation (EEC) No
         170/83.’
         
            
 Under Article 8(3) of Regulation (EEC) No 170/83:
         ‘The Commission shall submit to the Council, during the 10th year following December 1992, a report on the economic and
         social situation of coastal regions, on the basis of which the Council, acting in accordance with the procedure laid down
         in Article of the Treaty, shall decide on the provisions which, once the 10-year-period mentioned in this paragraph has
         expired, could follow the arrangements referred to in Articles and 7.’
         
            
 The time-limit laid down in Article of the Act of Accession was therefore December 2002, the date on which the
         arrangements provided for by Article of that Act were also to expire.
         
            
 Article of the contested regulation provides: 
         ‘1.     Community fishing vessels shall have equal access to waters and resources in all Community waters other than those referred
         to in paragraph 2, subject to the measures adopted under Chapter II.
          2.       In the waters up to nautical miles from baselines under their sovereignty or jurisdiction, Member States shall be authorised
         from January to December to restrict fishing to fishing vessels that traditionally fish in those waters from
         ports on the adjacent coast, without prejudice to the arrangements for Community fishing vessels flying the flag of other
         Member States under existing neighbourhood relations between Member States and the arrangements contained in Annex I, fixing
         for each Member State the geographical zones within the coastal bands of other Member States where fishing activities are
         pursued and the species concerned.
         …’
         
            
 Annex I to that regulation defines the conditions of access to coastal bands within the meaning of Article 17(2) of the regulation.
          Under Point of that annex, in the zone stretching from the border between the Kingdom of Spain and the French Republic
         to 46o 08’ North, Spanish vessels may fish for anchovy only between March and June and for anchovy as live bait only between
         July and October; with regard to sardines, those vessels may fish for them only from January to February and from
         July to December. In addition, fishing activities relating to those various species of fishing must be carried out in
         accordance with and within the limits of activity carried on during the year 1984.
         
            
 By laying down the rule of free access to waters more than nautical miles from the coastal Member State’s baselines (‘the
         zone beyond the 12-mile limit’), Article 17(1) of the contested regulation replaces, in relation to Spanish fishing vessels’
         access to French waters, the arrangements under the Act of Accession 1985, in particular, Article thereof.  That provision
         laid down limitations similar to those provided for in respect of the 6-to-12-mile zone by Annex I to the contested regulation.
         
            
 During the negotiations preceding the adoption of the contested regulation, the Kingdom of Spain sought amendment of point
         of the draft regulation, in order to do away with the restrictions provided for by the Act of Accession 1985, which applied
         to Spanish vessels in the 6-to-12-mile zone calculated from the baselines of the French Atlantic coast.  Spain also requested
         that the conditions of access should be brought into line with those for French vessels in Spanish maritime waters.
         
            
 The Council decided not to make amendments to point 6.
         
            
 The Kingdom of Spain presented a declaration expressing its disagreement and ‘reserving the right to bring the matter before
         the Court of Justice of the European Communities in order to have that part of the regulation amended’.
         
            
 Those were the circumstances in which it decided to bring this action.
         
            
 By orders of the President of the Court of June and September 2003, the Commission and the French Republic were granted
         leave to intervene in support of the forms of order sought by the Council.
         
Concerning the action
            
 In its application the Kingdom of Spain has raised two pleas in law, which it is appropriate to examine in reverse order to
         that in which they are presented.
         
Concerning the plea alleging infringement of the Act of Accession Arguments of the parties
         
            
 The Spanish Government maintains that Article of the Act of Accession 1985, which restricted access by Spanish vessels
         to the zone within nautical miles calculated from the baselines (‘the 12-mile zone’) of the French coast and to the zone
         beyond miles, has not been applicable since December 2002, by virtue of the provisions relating to the transitional
         period provided for by Article of that Act of Accession.  Consequently, the restrictions covering both the 12-mile zone
         and the zone beyond miles ought to have been repealed.  By continuing those restrictions, the contested regulation unjustifiably
         prolongs the transitional arrangements beyond the time-limit fixed by that Act.
         
            
 Furthermore, the Spanish Government argues that there is no specific measure concerning access to pelagic species in the 12-mile
         zone that requires special management of that zone.
         
            
 The Council contends that it is not the purpose of Article of the Act of Accession to restrict the powers of the
         Community legislature after December 2002.  Provisions adopted on the basis of Article EC are new measures the lawfulness
         of which may be evaluated only having regard to the provisions of the Treaty in force.
         
            
 The Council states, moreover, that Annex I to Regulation No 170/was amended by Article of the Act of Accession and by Chapter XV of Annex I to that Act.  That article appears in Part Three of the Act of Accession, relating to adaptations
         to acts adopted by the institutions, and not in Part Four of that Act, relating to transitional measures.  As a result, the
         Council considers that the adaptations to Regulation No 170/are unlimited in duration and cannot be regarded as temporary
         measures.
         
            
 According to the Council, Articles to of the Act of Accession do not mention the arrangements for access to the
         coastal band of the French Republic.  It is, in its view, unreasonable to interpret Article of that Act of Accession as
         applying also to the expiry of a provision to which no reference is made, but which was to be found in a regulation amended
         pursuant to Article of that Act and the content of which was reiterated in the regulation adopted on the basis of Article
         EC.  What is more, it maintains that Article does not regulate the arrangements for access to the coastal band.
         
            
 In addition, it argues that the Kingdom of Spain’s request that the conditions for fishing in the coastal band should apply
         without limit in time is not supported by any legal basis.
         
            
 The Commission, intervening in support of all the Council’s arguments, considers in particular that the Spanish Government
         misinterprets the provisions of the Act of Accession 1985.  In its opinion, Article of that Act does not refer to the
         conditions of access of Spanish vessels to French Atlantic waters within the 12-mile zone.  The Act of Accession does no more
         than adapt Annex I to Regulation No 170/by supplementing the table which sets out in detail the conditions for access to
         the Member States’ coastal zones.
         
            
 The French Government considers that the adaptations to Regulation No 170/were made pursuant to Article of the Act of
         Accession 1985, which appears, not in Part Four of that act concerning transitional measures, but in Part Three, relating
         to adaptations to acts adopted by the institutions.  It follows that measures taken pursuant to that article are permanent
         in nature.  In consequence, point of Annex I to the contested regulation cannot constitute an infringement of the transitional
         measures of the Act of Accession 1985.
         
 Findings of the Court
         
            
 As the Spanish Government and the Commission observed at the hearing, it must be held that Article of the Act of Accession
         contains a rule analogous to that at issue in these proceedings and that it does not draw any distinction, so far as
         its ambit is concerned, between the waters comprised in the 12-mile zone and waters beyond that zone.
         
            
 It must also be found that that provision, appearing in Part Four of the Act of Accession relating to transitional measures,
         has not been applicable since the date fixed by Article of that Act, viz., December 2002.
         
            
 It does not, however, follow from those findings that the Community legislature could not adopt the contested rule under its
         competence conferred by Article EC.
         
            
 That Articles and of the Act of Accession want legal effect is due, in particular, to the circumstance that,
         with regard to the 12-mile zone, Annex I to Regulation No 170/has been added to by a rule analogous to that at issue in
         the present case by virtue of Article of the Act of Accession 1985, with the result that that rule quite apparently falls
         within the competence of the Community legislature as defined in Article EC.
         
            
 It follows from all the foregoing that the plea alleging infringement of the act of Accession must be rejected.
         
Concerning the plea alleging breach of the principle of non-discrimination Arguments of the parties
         
            
 The Spanish Government claims that point of Annex I to the contested regulation imposes restrictions which do not exist,
         either as regards French vessels’ access to Spanish coastal bands or as regards other Member States’ coastal bands.  It states
         that the Kingdom of Spain is the only Member State the vessels of which have restricted access to the coastal bands of its
         neighbour State.  It concludes therefrom that it is afforded discriminatory treatment contrary to the principle of equality
         enshrined in Article EC and Article 34(2) EC relating to the common agricultural policy and fisheries.
         
            
 The Spanish Government states that the common policy rules may be differentiated according to zones or regions only on the
         basis of criteria that ensure a proportionate division of advantages and disadvantages between those concerned, without distinguishing
         between the territories of the Member States.  In the instant case, there is, in its view, no objective reason for different
         treatment.
         
            
 Furthermore, the Spanish Government claims that, on the one hand, the same restrictions of access as those imposed on vessels
         when the Kingdom of Spain acceded to the Community have been maintained, without account’s being taken of the expiry of the
         transitional period and, on the other, the Agreement on fisheries concluded between the Community and the Government of Spain
         on April and approved by Council Regulation (EEC) No 3062/of November (OJ L 322, p. 3) concerns only
         the exclusive 200-mile economic zone.
         
            
 The Council maintains that it is sufficient to examine Annex I to the contested regulation to find that the rules of access
         are not reciprocal.  Access is often restricted by species and sometimes limited in time.
         
            
 In its view, those limitations originate in the desire to comprehend traditional fishing activities in those zones in order
         to enable them to continue.  The list of those limitations does not answer to any geographic criterion of neighbourhood or
         reciprocity.
         
            
 The Council contends that in that way the Kingdom of Spain keeps for its vessels the same conditions of access as those they
         had before that State acceded to the Community and until the contested regulation was adopted.  Furthermore, it states that
         before that accession the fishing agreement concluded on April between the Community and the Kingdom of Spain granted
         no unlimited access for the latter’s vessels to the French coastal band.
         
            
 Consequently, the Council considers that the Kingdom of Spain has in no way been the victim of discrimination, but has rather
         been afforded treatment that is objective and comparable to that afforded the other Member States.
         
            
 In addition, the Council argues that the applicant has furnished no explanation of how it considers that the institution,
         by adopting the contested regulation, acted in manifestly inappropriate fashion in the exercise of its powers.  The Council
         observes that while, beyond the nautical miles calculated from the baselines of the Member States, the principle is of
         free access to the waters for all Community vessels, within the 12-mile zone, on the other hand, the arrangements reserve
         access to the fishing vessels that traditionally operate there from ports on the adjacent coast.  As a result, limited access
         to those waters for vessels that do not operate out of those ports is already a privileged legal situation.  Spanish vessels
         alone have access to the French 12-mile zone.
         
            
 The Commission maintains that the Kingdom of Spain’s plea is founded on a misunderstanding of the whole legislative context.
          It stresses the difference in kind that exists between the arrangements applicable to waters and resources situated, on the
         one hand, within the 12-mile zone and, on the other, beyond that zone.  That limitation of access is based on objective grounds
         of conservation of the most sensitive of Community waters, such as those situated near to coasts and on social and economic
         grounds intended to protect the activity of fishing with small-tonnage vessels.  It considers that, contrary to the Spanish
         Government’s submission, the extension until December of the arrangements for limited access to the waters under the
         sovereignty or jurisdiction of the other Member States is more than justified in the wording of the regulation, properly speaking,
         and in particular in the 14th recital in the preamble thereto.  It is therefore of the opinion that there exists an objective
         reason for distinguishing the arrangements applicable to the 12-mile zone from those applicable to the zone beyond the miles.  It states that, in defining the conditions on which Spanish vessels have access to French coastal waters, the Council
         took into account the traditional conditions for access existing before the Kingdom of Spain acceded to the Community, linked
         to neighbourhood relations.
         
            
 The French Government argues that the objective pursued by the contested regulation is the sustainable continuation of traditional
         fishing activity and that, as a result, it is inappropriate to use criteria based on reciprocity.
         
            
 It emphasises, furthermore, on the one hand, that in the six-to-12-mile zone calculated from the baselines of the Spanish
         coasts French vessels are authorised to fish only for pelagic species and, on the other, that the contested regulation offers
         the same opportunities for access as those that Spanish vessels have always enjoyed since their Member State acceded to the
         Community.  It concludes that Spain has not been treated in a discriminatory manner.
         
 Findings of the Court
         
            
 It is settled case-law that the principle of non-discrimination requires that comparable situations must not be treated differently
         unless such treatment is objectively justified (Joined Cases 201/and 202/Klensch and Others [1986] ECR 3477, paragraph 9).
         
            
 It is appropriate to observe that, with regard to the 12-mile zone, Article 17(2) of the contested regulation explicitly authorises
         the Member States to restrict fishing to vessels that traditionally operate within that zone from ports on the adjacent coast.
          However, that article provides for certain specific arrangements giving Community fishing vessels flying the flags of other
         Member States the right to fish in the 12-mile zones under pre-existing neighbourhood relations between Member States.  Annex
         I to the contested regulation, referred to by Article 17(2), fixes for each of the Member States the geographical zones within
         the coastal bands of other Member States where those activities are pursued and the species concerned.
         
            
 It is furthermore to be borne in mind that the 14th recital in the preamble to the contested regulation states that ‘[r]ules
         in place restricting access to resources within the nautical mile zones of Member States have operated satisfactorily benefiting
         conservation by restricting fishing effort in the most sensitive part of Community waters and preserving traditional fishing
         activities on which the social and economic development of certain coastal communities is highly dependent’ and that ‘[t]hey
         should therefore continue to apply until December 2012’.
         
            
 The Spanish Government has not challenged the fundamental principles underlying the arrangements applicable to the 12-mile
         zones and established by the contested regulation.
         
            
 None the less, it considers that by adopting point of Annex I to the contested regulation, the Council has caused the Kingdom
         of Spain to suffer discrimination contrary to the principle of equality enshrined in Article EC and Article 34(2) EC relating
         to the common agricultural policy and fisheries.
         
            
 It maintains, in particular, that the common policy rules may be differentiated depending on zones or regions only on the
         basis of objective criteria that ensure a proportionate division of the advantages and disadvantages between those concerned,
         without distinguishing between the territories of the Member States.  In the circumstances of the case, it believes that there
         is no objective reason justifying different treatment.
         
            
 That plea in law is unfounded.
         
            
 In this regard, the Council, the Commission and the French Government correctly point out that the purpose of the arrangements
         applicable to the 12-mile zones, provided for by Article 17(2) of the contested regulation, is to protect the most sensitive
         Community waters, while taking account of the need to preserve traditional fishing activities.
         
            
 Such a purpose does not of itself entail the application of criteria of reciprocity.
         
            
 In any case, the Spanish Government has not demonstrated that, by adopting point of Annex I to the contested regulation,
         the Council has departed from the stated purpose.
         
            
 It is apparent simply from reading Annex I to the contested regulation that access to the coastal bands of Member States other
         than the French Republic, when accorded to Community fishing vessels, is restricted in time and limited to certain species.
         
            
 In addition, it is to be recalled that point of Annex I to the contested regulation does no more than extend the arrangements
         that have been in force since the Kingdom of Spain acceded to the Community.
         
            
 In those circumstances, the plea in law alleging breach of the principle of non-discrimination must be rejected.
         
            
 From all the foregoing it follows that the Kingdom of Spain’s action must be dismissed.
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied
         for.  Since the Council has applied for costs and the Kingdom of Spain has been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to
         bear its own costs and to pay those incurred by the Council.  In accordance with Article 69(4) of those Rules, a Member State
         or institution intervening in the proceedings is to bear its own costs.  The Commission and the French Republic, as interveners,
         are therefore to bear their own costs.
         
 On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
         
 
1.
Dismisses the action;
 
2.
Orders the Kingdom of Spain to bear its own costs and those incurred by the Council of the European Union;
 
3.
Orders the French Republic and the Commission of the European Communities to bear their own costs.
[Signatures]
      
 –
            
Language of the case: Spanish.
Top  
 