
Case C-111/SCT Industri AB i likvidation
v
Alpenblume AB
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Högsta domstolen (Sweden))
(Judicial cooperation in civil matters – Jurisdiction and enforcement of judgments – Scope – Insolvency)
Summary of the Judgment
Judicial cooperation in civil matters – Jurisdiction and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters – Regulation
            No 44/– Scope – Excluded matters – Bankruptcy, proceedings relating to the winding-up of insolvent companies or other
            legal persons, judicial arrangements, compositions and analogous proceedings 
(Council Regulation No 44/2001, Art.(2)(b))
The exception provided for in Article 1(2)(b) of Regulation 44/2001on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of
         judgments in civil and commercial matters must be interpreted as applying to a judgment of a court of Member State A regarding
         registration of ownership of shares in a company having its registered office in Member State A, according to which the transfer
         of those shares was to be regarded as invalid on the ground that the court of Member State A did not recognise the powers
         of a liquidator from a Member State B in the context of insolvency proceedings conducted and closed in Member State B.
      
The action which gave rise to such a decision derives directly from insolvency proceedings and is closely linked to them.
         First, the link between the court action and the insolvency proceedings is particularly close since the dispute concerns solely
         the ownership of the shares which were transferred in insolvency proceedings by a liquidator on the basis of provisions, such
         as those enacted under the legislation of Member State B on insolvency proceedings, which derogate from the general rules
         of private law and, in particular, from property law. Thus, the transfer of the shares and the action for restitution of title
         to which it gave rise are the direct and indissociable consequence of the exercise by the liquidator – an individual who intervenes
         only after the insolvency proceedings have been opened – of a power which he derives specifically from the provisions of national
         law governing insolvency proceedings. Second, the content and the scope of the decision declaring the transfer to be invalid
         are intimately linked to the conduct of the insolvency proceedings since the ground on which the transfer was held invalid
         relates, specifically and exclusively, to the extent of the powers of that liquidator in insolvency proceedings.
      
(see paras 25-28, 30-31, 33, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Judicial cooperation in civil matters – Jurisdiction and enforcement of judgments – Scope – Insolvency)
In Case C‑111/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Högsta domstolen (Sweden), made by decision of March 2008,
         received at the Court on March 2008, in the proceedings
      
SCT Industri AB i likvidation
v
Alpenblume AB,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann (Rapporteur), President of Chamber, A. Tizzano, A. Borg Barthet, E. Levits and J.-J. Kasel, Judges,
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: C. Strömholm, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on February 2009,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        SCT Industri AB i likvidation, by F. Lüning, jur. kand.,
–        Alpenblume AB, by L.-O. Svensson, advokat, 
–        the German Government, by M. Lumma and J. Kemper, acting as Agents,
–        the Spanish Government, by J. López-Medel Bascones, acting as Agent,
–        the Portuguese Government, by L. Inez Fernandes and D. Pires, acting as Agents,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by L. Seeboruth, acting as Agent, and A. Henshaw, Barrister,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by A.‑M. Rouchaud-Joët and P. Dejmek, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 1(2)(b) of Council Regulation (EC) No 44/of December on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters (OJ L 12, p. 1).
      
The reference was made in the context of proceedings between SCT Industri AB (‘SCT Industri’) and Alpenblume AB (‘Alpenblume’),
         two Swedish companies, concerning an action to recover ownership of shares which had been held in an Austrian company by SCT
         Industri and which were sold to Alpenblume; the action was brought following a judgment delivered by an Austrian court which
         declared Alpenblume’s acquisition of those shares to be invalid.
      
 Legal framework
Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 44/provides:
      
‘Certain differences between national rules governing jurisdiction and recognition of judgments hamper the sound operation
         of the internal market. Provisions to unify the rules of conflict of jurisdiction in civil and commercial matters and to simplify
         the formalities with a view to rapid and simple recognition and enforcement of judgments from Member States bound by this
         Regulation are essential.’
      
Pursuant to Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 44/2001, ‘[t]he scope of this Regulation must cover all the main civil
         and commercial matters apart from certain well-defined matters’.
      
Recital in the preamble to the regulation states:
      
‘In the interests of the harmonious administration of justice it is necessary to minimise the possibility of concurrent proceedings
         and to ensure that irreconcilable judgments will not be given in two Member States. There must be a clear and effective mechanism
         for resolving cases of lis pendens and related actions and for obviating problems flowing from national differences as to the determination of the time when
         a case is regarded as pending. For the purposes of this Regulation that time should be defined autonomously.’
      
Recital in the preamble to Regulation No 44/provides:
      
‘Continuity between the (Convention of September on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial
         Matters (OJ L 304, p. 36; “the Brussels Convention”)) and this Regulation should be ensured, and transitional provisions
         should be laid down to that end. The same need for continuity applies as regards the interpretation of the Brussels Convention
         by the Court of Justice of the European Communities, and the Protocol (on such interpretation by the Court, as revised
         and amended (OJ C 27, p. 28)) should remain applicable also to cases already pending when this Regulation enters into
         force.’
      
Article of the regulation defines its scope. According to Article 1(1) of Regulation No 44/2001, it covers all civil and
         commercial matters but does not extend to revenue, customs or administrative matters.
      
Article 1(2)(b) of the regulation provides:
      
‘The Regulation shall not apply to:
…
bankruptcy, proceedings relating to the winding-up of insolvent companies or other legal persons, judicial arrangements, compositions
         and analogous proceedings’.
      
Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 1346/of May on insolvency proceedings (OJ L 160, p. 1), which is
         headed ‘Recognition and enforceability of other judgments’, provides as follows:
      
‘1.      Judgments handed down by a court whose judgment concerning the opening of proceedings is recognised in accordance with Article
         and which concern the course and closure of insolvency proceedings, and compositions approved by that court shall also
         be recognised with no further formalities. Such judgments shall be enforced in accordance with Articles to 51, with the
         exception of Article 34(2), of the Brussels Convention on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial
         Matters, as amended by the Conventions of Accession to this Convention.
      
The first subparagraph shall also apply to judgments deriving directly from the insolvency proceedings and which are closely
         linked with them, even if they were handed down by another court.
      
The first subparagraph shall also apply to judgments relating to preservation measures taken after the request for the opening
         of insolvency proceedings.
      
2.      The recognition and enforcement of judgments other than those referred to in paragraph shall be governed by the Convention
         referred to in paragraph 1, provided that that Convention is applicable.’
      
According to Article of Regulation No 1346/2000, ‘[t]he provisions of this Regulation shall apply only to insolvency proceedings
         opened after its entry into force. Acts done by a debtor before the entry into force of this Regulation shall continue to
         be governed by the law which was applicable to them at the time they were done’.
      
 The main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
In 1993, insolvency proceedings were opened against SCT Industri by Malmö tingsrätt (Malmö District Court). A liquidator was
         appointed. In the course of those proceedings, the liquidator transferred SCT Industri’s shares, that is, a holding of 47%
         in the capital of SCT Hotelbetrieb GmbH, a company incorporated under Austrian law, now Scaniahof Ferienwohnungen GmbH (‘Scaniahof’),
         to Alpenblume for SEK 2. Alpenblume was registered in Austria as owner of those shares in the company.
      
The insolvency proceedings were closed in without surplus. On March 2002, Malmö tingsrätt ordered SCT Industri to
         be wound up.   
      
Further to proceedings brought before an Austrian court by SCT Industri, that court held that the liquidator appointed in
         Sweden had no power to dispose of assets situated in Austria and that consequently Alpenblume’s acquisition of the shares
         was invalid. Accordingly, the Austrian court ordered Scaniahof to register SCT Industri as owner of the shares transferred
         from the assets in insolvency. Alpenblume appeared as intervener (‘Nebenintervenientin’) in the Austrian proceedings. The Oberster Gerichtshof (Supreme Court, Austria) dismissed the intervener’s appeal (‘außerordentliche Revision’ – exceptional appeal on a point of law) on May 2004.
      
On August 2004, Alpenblume brought proceedings before a Swedish court against SCT Industri for restitution of title to
         the shares in question, requesting that SCT Industri be ordered, on penalty of a fine, to take all measures necessary for
         Alpenblume to be registered as rightful owner of the shares. By decision of March 2005, Malmö tingsrätt, following an objection
         by the applicant in the main proceedings, held that there was no obstacle to examination of that request. 
      
SCT Industri appealed against that decision, asking that the claim be dismissed. Alpenblume contended that it should be upheld.
         By decision of July 2005, Hovrätten för Skåne och Blekinge (Court of Appeal for Scania and Blekinge) dismissed the appeal.
      
On appeal by SCT Industri, the Högsta domstolen (Supreme Court), by order of March 2008, decided to stay proceedings and
         to refer the following question to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Is the exclusion under Article 1(2)(b) of Regulation [No 44/2001] of bankruptcy, proceedings relating to the winding-up of
         insolvent companies or other legal persons, judicial arrangements, compositions and analogous proceedings from the scope of
         that regulation to be interpreted as meaning that it covers a decision given by a court in one Member State (A) regarding
         registration of ownership of shares in a company having its registered office in Member State A, the shares having been transferred
         by the liquidator of a company having its registered office in another Member State (B), where the court based its decision
         on the fact that, in the absence of an international agreement on the mutual recognition of insolvency proceedings, Member
         State A does not recognise the liquidator’s powers to dispose of property situated in Member State A?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
The referring court raises the question, essentially, of recognition between the Member States of a judgment in civil proceedings
         linked to insolvency proceedings which took place in another Member State. More precisely, the question concerns whether a
         decision by which a court of another Member State has held a transfer of shares effected in the context of insolvency proceedings
         to be invalid, on the ground that the liquidator who made the transfer lacked the power to dispose of assets situated in that
         Member State, falls under the exception in Article 1(2)(b) of Regulation 44/which applies to bankruptcy, proceedings
         relating to the winding-up of insolvent companies or other legal persons, judicial arrangements, compositions and other similar
         proceedings. 
      
As a preliminary point, it must be noted that Regulation No 1346/is not applicable to this case as the insolvency proceedings
         were opened before the entry into force of that regulation.
      
Therefore, it must be determined only whether a judgment such as that of the Austrian court in the case in the main proceedings
         falls within Regulation No 44/2001, so as to be binding on the referring court.
      
In that regard, it should first of all be noted that, with regard in particular to bankruptcy and other similar proceedings,
         these were excluded from the scope of the Brussels Convention both on account of the special nature of the subject-matter
         concerned, which necessitates specific rules, and because of major differences between the legislation of the Contracting
         States (see, to that effect, Case 133/Gourdain [1979] ECR 733, paragraph 3, and Report by Mr Jenard on the Brussels Convention (OJ C 59, p. 1)).
      
In its case-law relating to the Brussels Convention, the Court has thus held that an action is related to bankruptcy if it
         derives directly from the bankruptcy and is closely linked to proceedings for realising the assets or judicial supervision
         (see Gourdain, paragraph 4). An action with such characteristics does not, therefore, fall within the scope of that convention.
      
The case-law also indicates that, in so far as Regulation No 44/now replaces the Brussels Convention in relations between
         the Member States, with the exception of the Kingdom of Denmark, an interpretation given by the Court concerning that convention
         also applies to the regulation, where its provisions and those of the Brussels Convention may be treated as equivalent (see,
         inter alia, Case C-180/Ilsinger [2009] ECR I-0000, paragraph 41).
      
In the scheme established by Regulation No 44/2001, Article 1(2)(b) of that regulation has the same position and performs
         the same role as point of the second subparagraph of Article of the Brussels Convention. Moreover, the wording of those
         two provisions is identical. 
      
In view of such equivalence between a provision of the Brussels Convention and a provision of Regulation No 44/2001, it is
         necessary, in accordance with recital in the preamble to the latter, to ensure continuity in the interpretation of those
         two instruments, as such continuity is also the means to ensure observance of the principle of legal certainty, which constitutes
         one of the cornerstones of those instruments (Ilsinger, paragraph 58).
      
In the light of the foregoing it is therefore the closeness of the link, in the sense of the Gourdain case-law, between a court action such as that at issue in the main proceedings and the insolvency proceedings that is decisive
         for the purposes of deciding whether the exclusion in Article 1(2)(b) of Regulation No 44/is applicable.
      
It is clear, in the present case, that that link is particularly close.
      
First, according to the order for reference, the dispute in the main proceedings concerns solely the ownership of the shares
         which were transferred in insolvency proceedings by the liquidator on the basis of provisions, such as those enacted by the
         Swedish Law on insolvency (Konkurslagen) No of (SFS 1987, No 672), which derogate from the general rules of private
         law and, in particular, from property law. In particular, such provisions provide that, in the case of insolvency, debtors
         lose the right freely to dispose of their assets and the liquidator has to administer the assets in insolvency on behalf of
         the creditors, which includes effecting any necessary transfers.
      
In other words, the transfer at issue in the main proceedings and the action for restitution of title to which it gave rise,
         are the direct and indissociable consequence of the exercise by the liquidator – an individual who intervenes only after the
         insolvency proceedings have been opened – of a power which he derives specifically from the provisions of national law governing
         that type of proceedings.
      
That is also evident from the fact that in the case in the main proceedings – as is clear from the documents before the Court
         – the assets of the undertaking which was subject to the insolvency proceedings increased following the sale of the shares
         at issue by the liquidator.
      
Second, it is not disputed that, in the judgment of which recognition is sought before the referring court, the ground on
         which the Austrian court held invalid the transfer of the shares at issue in the main proceedings relates, specifically and
         exclusively, to the extent of the powers of that liquidator in insolvency proceedings and, in particular, his power to dispose
         of the assets situated in Austria. The content and scope of that decision are therefore intimately linked to the conduct of
         the insolvency proceedings. That link is, moreover, not weakened by the fact that, in the case in the main proceedings, the
         insolvency proceedings had been closed when the action for restitution of title was brought before the Austrian courts.
      
In those circumstances, it must be held that an action such as that at issue in the main proceedings derives directly from
         insolvency proceedings and is closely linked with them, so that it does not fall within the scope of Regulation No 44/2001.
      
Having regard to the specific legal situation at issue in the case in the main proceedings and taking into account the close
         link between the action pending before the referring court and the insolvency proceedings, the principles set out in recitals
         2, and in the preamble to Regulation No 44/do not affect that assessment.
      
In the light of all of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the question referred is that the exception provided for
         in Article 1(2)(b) of Regulation No 44/must be interpreted as applying to a judgment of a court of Member State A regarding
         registration of ownership of shares in a company having its registered office in Member State A, according to which the transfer
         of those shares was to be regarded as invalid on the ground that the court of Member State A did not recognise the powers
         of a liquidator from a Member State B in the context of insolvency proceedings conducted and closed in Member State B.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
The exception provided for in Article 1(2)(b) of Council Regulation No 44/(EC) of December on jurisdiction and
            the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters must be interpreted as applying to a judgment
            of a court of Member State A regarding registration of ownership of shares in a company having its registered office in Member
            State A, according to which the transfer of those shares was to be regarded as invalid on the ground that the court of Member
            State A did not recognise the powers of a liquidator from a Member State B in the context of insolvency proceedings conducted
            and closed in Member State B.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Swedish.
      
Top  
