
Case C-367/Belgisch Interventie- en Restitutiebureau
v
SGS Belgium NV and Others 
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the hof van beroep te Antwerpen)
(Preliminary ruling – Act detrimental to the financial interests of the European Union – Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 2988/– Article 1, Article 3(1), third subparagraph, and Articles and – Regulation (EEC) No 3665/– Articles and 18(2)(c) – Meaning of ‘economic operator’ – Persons who have taken part in the irregularity – Persons under a duty to take responsibility for the irregularity or to ensure that it is not committed – Administrative penalty – Direct effect – Limitation period for proceedings – Interruption)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Own resources of the European Union – Regulation on the protection of the Union’s financial interests – Administrative penalties
            – Conditions on which applicable – Not possible to impose such penalties purely on the basis of Articles and of that regulation
(Council Regulation No 2988/95, Arts and 7)
2.        Own resources of the European Union – Regulation on the protection of the Union’s financial interests – Administrative penalties
            – Conditions on which applicable – International control and supervisory agency having issued false certificates 
(Council Regulation No 2988/95, Art. 7)
3.        Own resources of the European Union – Regulation on the protection of the Union’s financial interests – Proceedings concerning
            irregularities – Limitation period
(Council Regulation No 2988/95, Arts 1(2), and 3(1), third subpara.)
1.        Articles and of Regulation No 2988/on the protection of the European Communities financial interests do not apply in
         such a way that an administrative penalty may be imposed on the basis of those provisions alone, for, in connection with the
         protection of the financial interests of the Union, it is a necessary precondition for the application of an administrative
         penalty to a category of persons that, before the irregularity in question was committed, either the Union legislature should
         have adopted sectoral rules laying down such a penalty and the conditions for its application to that category of persons
         or, if such rules have not yet been adopted at Union level, the law of the Member State in which the irregularity was committed
         should have provided for the imposition of an administrative penalty on that category of persons. 
      
Although, by virtue of the very nature of regulations and of their function in the system of sources of Union law, the provisions
         of regulations generally have immediate effect in the national legal systems without its being necessary for the national
         authorities to adopt measures of application or without its being necessary for the Union legislature to adopt supplementary
         legislation, some of the provisions of a regulation may, in order to be given effect, require implementing measures to be
         adopted, either by the Member States or by the Union legislature itself.
      
That is the case, in relation to the protection of the financial interests of the Union, with regard to administrative penalties
         imposed on the various categories of operators identified in Regulation No 2988/95. Such is the case, in particular, of the
         penalties mentioned in Articles and of that regulation since those provisions merely lay down general rules for supervision
         and penalties for the purpose of safeguarding the financial interests of the Union and, in particular, do not specify which
         of the penalties listed in Article of Regulation No 2988/ought to be applied in the case of an irregularity detrimental
         to the financial interests of the Union or the category of operators on whom such penalties are to be imposed in such cases.
         
      
(see paras 32-34, 36, 43, operative part 1)
2.        In circumstances in which EU sectoral rules did not yet require Member States to provide for effective penalties in cases
         in which an international control and supervisory agency approved by a Member State issued false certificates, Article of
         Regulation No 2988/on the protection of the European Communities’ financial interests does not prevent Member States from
         applying a penalty to that agency in its capacity as a person who has ‘taken part in the irregularity’ or as a person who
         is ‘under a duty to take responsibility’ for the irregularity within the meaning of Article 7, provided, however, that the
         application of such a penalty rests on a clear and unambiguous legal basis, a matter falling to be determined by the national
         court.
      
(see para. 62, operative part 2)
3.        The communication, to an international control and supervisory agency which has issued a certificate for release for consumption
         in respect of a specific export operation, of an investigative report drawing attention to an irregularity in connection with
         that operation, the presentation to that agency of a request to produce additional documents for the purpose of checking whether
         the release for consumption actually took place and the sending of a registered letter imposing a penalty on that agency for
         having taken part in an irregularity within the meaning of Article 1(2) of Regulation No 2988/on the protection of the
         European Communities financial interests constitute sufficiently specific acts, notified to the person in question and relating
         to investigation or legal proceedings concerning the irregularity, that consequently interrupt the limitation period for proceedings
         within the meaning of the third subparagraph of Article 3(1) of Regulation No 2988/95.
      
(see para. 70, operative part 3)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Preliminary ruling – Act detrimental to the financial interests of the European Union – Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 2988/– Article 1, Article 3(1), third subparagraph, and Articles and – Regulation (EEC) No 3665/– Articles and 18(2)(c) – Meaning of ‘economic operator’ – Persons who have taken part in the irregularity – Persons under a duty to take responsibility for the irregularity or to ensure that it is not committed – Administrative penalty – Direct effect – Limitation period for proceedings – Interruption)
In Case C‑367/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the hof van beroep te Antwerpen (Belgium), made by decision of
         September 2009, received at the Court on September 2009, in the proceedings
      
Belgisch Interventie- en Restitutiebureau
v
SGS Belgium NV,
Firme Derwa NV,
Centraal Beheer Achmea NV,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of J.‑C. Bonichot, President of the Chamber, K. Schiemann, L. Bay Larsen, C. Toader (Rapporteur), and A. Prechal,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on June 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        SGS Belgium NV, by M. Storme, avocat,
–        Firme Derwa NV, by L. Wysen and J. Gevers, avocats,
–        the Belgian Government, by J.C. Halleux, acting as Agent, assisted by P. Bernaerts and E. Vervaeke, advocaten, 
–        the Austrian Government, by E. Riedl, acting as Agent,
–        the European Commission, by A. Bouquet and F. Wilman, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on July 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles 3(1), third subparagraph, and of Council
         Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 2988/of December on the protection of the European Communities financial interests
         (OJ L 312, p. 1; with corrigendum OJ L 36, p. 16).
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between the Belgisch Interventie- en Restitutiebureau (the Belgian Intervention
         and Refund Agency, ‘the BIRB’) and SGS Belgium NV (‘SGS Belgium’), a control and supervisory agency, Firme Derwa NV (‘Firme
         Derwa’), an export company, and Centraal Beheer Achmea NV, an insurance company, concerning the imposition of a penalty on
         SGS Belgium for having enabled Firme Derwa to obtain an export refund to which it was not entitled.
      
 Legal context
 European Union law
 Regulation No 2988/The second to 5th, 7th, 8th, 10th and 13th recitals in the preamble to Regulation No 2988/read as follows:
      
‘Whereas more than half of Community expenditure is paid to beneficiaries through the intermediary of the Member States;
Whereas detailed rules governing this decentralised administration and the monitoring of their use are the subject of differing
         detailed provisions according to the Community policies concerned; whereas acts detrimental to the Communities’ financial
         interests must, however, be countered in all areas;
      
Whereas the effectiveness of the combating of fraud against the Communities’ financial interests calls for a common set of
         legal rules to be enacted for all areas covered by Community policies;
      
Whereas irregular conduct, and the administrative measures and penalties relating thereto, are provided for in sectoral rules
         in accordance with this Regulation;
      
…
Whereas Community administrative penalties must provide adequate protection for the said interests; whereas it is necessary
         to define general rules applicable to these penalties;
      
Whereas Community law has established Community administrative penalties in the framework of the common agricultural policy;
         whereas such penalties must be established in other fields as well;
      
…
Whereas not only under the general principle of equity and the principle of proportionality but also in the light of the principle
         of ne bis in idem, appropriate provisions must be adopted while respecting the acquis communautaire and the provisions laid down in specific Community rules existing at the time of entry into force of this Regulation, to
         prevent any overlap of Community financial penalties and national criminal penalties imposed on the same persons for the same
         reasons;
      
…
Whereas Community law imposes on the Commission and the Member States an obligation to check that Community budget resources
         are used for their intended purpose; whereas there is a need for common rules to supplement existing provisions’.
      
Article of Regulation No 2988/provides:
      
‘1.      For the purposes of protecting the European Communities’ financial interests, general rules are hereby adopted relating to
         homogenous checks and to administrative measures and penalties concerning irregularities with regard to Community law.
      
2.      “Irregularity” shall mean any infringement of a provision of Community law resulting from an act or omission by an economic
         operator, which has, or would have, the effect of prejudicing the general budget of the Communities or budgets managed by
         them, either by reducing or losing revenue accruing from own resources collected directly on behalf of the Communities, or
         by an unjustified item of expenditure.’
      
Article of the regulation provides that:
      
‘1.      Administrative checks, measures and penalties shall be introduced in so far as they are necessary to ensure the proper application
         of Community law. They shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive so that they provide adequate protection for the Communities’
         financial interests.
      
2.      No administrative penalty may be imposed unless a Community act prior to the irregularity has made provision for it. In the
         event of a subsequent amendment of the provisions which impose administrative penalties and are contained in Community rules,
         the less severe provisions shall apply retroactively.
      
3.      Community law shall determine the nature and scope of the administrative measures and penalties necessary for the correct
         application of the rules in question, having regard to the nature and seriousness of the irregularity, the advantage granted
         or received and the degree of responsibility.
      
4.      Subject to the Community law applicable, the procedures for the application of Community checks, measures and penalties shall
         be governed by the laws of the Member States.’
      
Article 3(1) of Regulation No 2988/states that:
      
‘The limitation period for proceedings shall be four years as from the time when the irregularity referred to in Article 1(1)
         was committed. However, the sectoral rules may make provision for a shorter period which may not be less than three years.
      
…
The limitation period shall be interrupted by any act of the competent authority, notified to the person in question, relating
         to investigation or legal proceedings concerning the irregularity. The limitation period shall start again following each
         interrupting act.
      
...’
Article of Regulation No 2988/95, which is in Title II of the regulation entitled ‘Administrative measures and penalties’,
         provides:
      
‘1. As a general rule, any irregularity shall involve withdrawal of the wrongly obtained advantage:
–        by an obligation to pay or repay the amounts due or wrongly received,
–        by the total or partial loss of the security provided in support of the request for an advantage granted or at the time of
         the receipt of an advance.
      
2. Application of the measures referred to in paragraph shall be limited to the withdrawal of the advantage obtained plus,
         where so provided for, interest which may be determined on a flat-rate basis.
      
3. Acts which are established to have as their purpose the obtaining of an advantage contrary to the objectives of the Community
         law applicable in the case by artificially creating the conditions required for obtaining that advantage shall result, as
         the case shall be, either in failure to obtain the advantage or in its withdrawal.
      
4. The measures provided for in this Article shall not be regarded as penalties.’ 
Article of Regulation No 2988/provides, at paragraphs and 2:
      
‘1.      Intentional irregularities or those caused by negligence may lead to the following administrative penalties:
(a)      payment of an administrative fine;
(b)      payment of an amount greater than the amounts wrongly received or evaded, plus interest where appropriate; this additional
         sum shall be determined in accordance with a percentage to be set in the specific rules, and may not exceed the level strictly
         necessary to constitute a deterrent;
      
(c)      total or partial removal of an advantage granted by Community rules, even if the operator wrongly benefited from only a part
         of that advantage;
      
…
(g)      other penalties of a purely economic type, equivalent in nature and scope, provided for in the sectoral rules adopted by the
         Council in the light of the specific requirements of the sectors concerned and in compliance with the implementing powers
         conferred on the Commission by the Council.
      
2.      Without prejudice to the provisions laid down in the sectoral rules existing at the time of entry into force of this Regulation,
         other irregularities may give rise only to those penalties not equivalent to a criminal penalty that are provided for in paragraph
         1, provided that such penalties are essential to ensure correct application of the rules.’
      
Under Article of Regulation No 2988/95: 
      
‘Community administrative measures and penalties may be applied to the economic operators referred to in Article 1, namely
         the natural or legal persons and the other entities on which national law confers legal capacity who have committed the irregularity.
         They may also apply to persons who have taken part in the irregularity and to those who are under a duty to take responsibility
         for the irregularity or to ensure that it is not committed.’
      
 Regulation (EEC) No 3665/Paragraphs and of Article of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 3665/of November laying down common detailed
         rules for the application of the system of export refunds on agricultural products (OJ L 351, p. 1), as amended by Commission
         Regulation (EC) No 495/of March (OJ L 77, p.12, ‘Regulation No 3665/87’) provides:
      
‘1.      Where it is found that an exporter, with a view to the grant of an export refund, has requested a refund in excess of that
         applicable, the refund due for the relevant exportation shall be the refund applicable to the actual exportation reduced by
         an amount equivalent to:
      
(a)      half the difference between the refund requested and the refund applicable to the actual exportation; 
(b)      twice the difference between the refund requested and the refund applicable, if the exporter has intentionally supplied false
         information.
      
…
The sanctions shall be without prejudice to additional sanctions laid down at national level.
...
3.      Without prejudice to the obligation to pay any negative amount as referred to in the fourth subparagraph of paragraph 1, where
         a refund is unduly paid, the beneficiary shall reimburse the amounts unduly received, which includes any sanction applicable
         pursuant to the first subparagraph of paragraph ...’
      
Article of Regulation No 3665/provides:
      
‘1.      Proof that the product has been cleared through customs for release for consumption shall, at the exporter’s choice, be furnished
         by production of one of the following documents:
      
(a)      the customs document …
(b)      a certificate of unloading and release for consumption drawn up by an international control and supervisory agency approved
         by a Member State. The date and number of the customs document of release for consumption must appear on the certificate concerned.
         
      
2.      If the exporter cannot obtain the document chosen in accordance with paragraph 1(a) or (b) even after taking the appropriate
         steps or if there are doubts as to the authenticity of the document furnished, proof that the product has been cleared through
         customs for release for consumption may be deemed to have been furnished by the production of one or more of the following
         documents: 
      
...
(c)      a certificate of unloading drawn up by an international control and supervisory agency approved by a Member State, certifying
         also that the product has left the port zone or at least that, to its knowledge, the product has not subsequently been loaded
         for re-export;
      
…’
 National law
Article of the Royal Decree of January establishing the conditions for approval of agencies responsible for issuing
         a certificate of unloading in the country of destination of goods exported in the framework of the common agricultural policy
         (Belgisch Staatsblad of February 1985, p. 1937) is worded as follows:
      
‘Certificates which prove that the goods exported have been unloaded in the country of destination may, for the application
         of the common agricultural policy, be accepted by the competent authorities only if they have been drawn up by international
         control and supervisory agencies approved for that purpose by orders of the Ministers responsible for economic affairs and
         agriculture.’
      
Article 2(2) of the royal decree provides that:
      
‘The agency undertakes:
(i)      to be jointly and severally liable, with the other persons involved in an export operation, for the financial consequences
         of the certificates issued by it;
      
(ii)      to grant access to its premises, at any time, to officials … and to allow those officials to consult all documents relating
         to certificates that have been issued;
      
…’
The abovementioned royal decree was repealed by the Royal Decree of February setting the conditions for approval of
         agencies responsible for issuing certificates of unloading and release for consumption in the country of destination, of goods
         exported in the framework of the common agricultural policy (Belgisch Staatsblad of June 1999, p. 23534). 
      
Under Article 2(1)(2)(a) of that royal decree, ‘the agency undertakes to be jointly and severally liable, with the other persons
         involved in an export operation, for the financial consequences of the certificates issued by it’. 
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
On June 1997, Firme Derwa exported a consignment of kilograms of beef to Egypt and applied to the BIRB for an export
         refund in respect thereof. Firme Derwa thus received, after providing security, an advance of EUR 268.under the prefinancing
         system.
      
In order to become definitively entitled to the full amount of the refund, Firme Derwa was required to produce proof that
         the shipment of meat in question had been imported into Egypt. The ship transporting the cargo of meat reached its destination
         on June 1997. On February 1998, Firme Derwa forwarded to the BIRB a certificate, drawn up by SGS Belgium dated November
         1997, confirming that the Egyptian customs authorities had cleared the goods in question for release for consumption.
      
On June 1998, the BIRB released the security provided by Firme Derwa, which definitively acquired the export refund in question.
      
An investigation by the Economic Inspection Board of the Belgian Ministry of Economic Affairs revealed that SGS Egypt Ltd
         had sent SGS Belgium a fax on September informing it that it had not been possible to import the goods concerned into
         Egypt because Egypt had prohibited the import of beef originating in Belgium.
      
The BIRB sent SGS Belgium reports relating to the investigation in communications dated August and and October 1998.
         By letter of April 1999, the BIRB also requested SGS Belgium to provide it with the customs documents on the basis of which
         SGS had drawn up its certificate of November 1997.
      
Having noted that SGS Belgium had failed to act upon its request, the BIRB concluded, in a letter sent to that agency on February 2002, that the goods had not been imported into Egypt and released for consumption and that consequently it had decided
         to impose an administrative penalty on SGS Belgium pursuant to Article of Regulation No 3665/87, amounting to 200% of the
         sum of EUR 268.unduly received by Firme Derwa on the basis of the certificate issued by SGS Belgium. The latter was
         also asked to pay a sum representing the refund plus an additional amount and, accordingly, a total amount of EUR 260.was claimed from SGS Belgium.
      
By letter of April 2002, SGS Belgium informed the BIRB that, following an internal investigation, it had emerged that the
         goods had been imported into Egypt only temporarily and that they had ultimately been exported to South Africa.  In a letter
         of May 2002, however, SGS Belgium stressed that it had not knowingly supplied incorrect information.
      
By writ, service of which was effected on September 2003, the BIRB commenced proceedings before the Rechtbank van eerste
         aanleg te Antwerpen (Antwerp Court of First Instance), requesting that SGS Belgium be ordered to pay the administrative penalty.
         SGS Belgium thereupon requested that Firme Derwa and Centraal Beheer Achmea NV be joined as parties to the proceedings.
      
By judgment of January 2006, the Rechtbank dismissed as unfounded both the BIRB’s action and SGS Belgium’s application
         to join third parties to the proceedings. That court first of all noted that the four-year limitation period provided for
         in the first subparagraph of Article 3(1) of Regulation No 2988/had not expired since it had been interrupted within the
         meaning of the third subparagraph of that provision as a result of the BIRB sending the letter dated February by which
         it imposed the administrative fine on SGS Belgium.
      
However, the Rechtbank van eerste aanleg te Antwerpen took the view that Articles and of Regulation No 2988/did not
         provide a sufficient legal basis for imposing an administrative penalty on a firm such as SGS Belgium.  In fact, according
         to the Rechtbank, unlike Article of Regulation No 2988/95, those provisions leave Member States a margin of discretion and
         do not include an obligation to impose penalties. Thus, it falls to the European Union (‘EU’) legislature or to national legislatures
         to provide, in sectoral rules, that operators other than the exporter which has received a refund are required to pay a penalty.
         It also falls to them to determine those penalties. Furthermore, Regulation No 3665/contains no provision allowing persons
         taking part in an export operation to be penalised for irregularities committed by the exporter.
      
The BIRB appealed against that judgment to the referring court, maintaining, inter alia, that under the Royal Decree of January 1985, SGS Belgium was jointly and severally liable with the exporter for the financial consequences of certificates
         drawn up by it.  Since SGS Belgium had artificially created the conditions which allowed the exporter wrongly to receive an
         export refund and since the exporter, Firme Derwa, was unaware that the certificate provided was incorrect and had not been
         negligent, the BIRB considered that it was not appropriate to recover the refund from Firme Derwa or to impose an administrative
         penalty on it. The BIRB argued in essence that, although the penalty provided for in Article 11(1)(b) of Regulation No 3665/in principle concerns only the exporter, it was possible under Article of Regulation No 2988/– because of the rule laid
         down by national law concerning the joint responsibility of the control and supervision agency – to impose the penalty on
         SGS Belgium in its capacity as a person who is under a duty to take responsibility for the irregularity as provided for in
         that provision. The BIRB also argued that, in any event, if no finding of fraudulent intention were made, SGS Belgium should
         at the very least be ordered to pay the penalty provided for in Article 11(1)(a) of Regulation No 3665/87. 
      
For its part, SGS Belgium maintained, in particular, that to the extent to which it could be held liable, the liability should
         be joint and several with the exporter and the insurer since the amounts claimed are owed by the exporter and Article of
         Regulation No 2988/and Article 2(2), point (i), of the Royal Decree of January entail joint and several liability
         between the parties to an export operation.
      
In those circumstances, the hof van beroep te Antwerpen (Antwerp court of appeal) decided to stay proceedings and to refer
         the following questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Do the provisions of Articles and of Regulation No 2988/have direct effect in the national legal orders of the Member
         States without any discretion on the part of those Member States and without the national authorities being required to adopt
         any measures for their implementation?
      
(2)      Can an international control and supervisory agency approved by the Member State in which the export declaration was accepted
         – in this case, Belgium – which has submitted a false certificate of unloading within the meaning of Article 18(2)(c) of Regulation
         No 3665/be deemed to be an economic operator within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 2988/95, or a person who
         has taken part in the irregularity or is under a duty to take responsibility for the irregularity or to ensure that it is
         not committed, within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 2988/95?
      
(3)      Can communication of an investigative report drawn up by the Economic Inspection Board, or a letter requesting the production
         of additional documents as evidence of the release for consumption, or a registered letter imposing a penalty be deemed to
         be investigation or legal proceedings within the meaning of the third subparagraph of Article 3(1) of Regulation No 2988/95?’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred
 First question
By its first question, the referring court is, in actual fact, seeking to ascertain whether Articles and of Regulation
         No 2988/apply in such a way that administrative penalties within the meaning of that regulation may be imposed on the basis
         of those provisions alone.
      
SGS Belgium, Firme Derwa and the Austrian Government maintain, in essence, that Articles and of Regulation No 2988/do not have direct effect since administrative penalties can be imposed on the various categories of operator taking part
         in the procedure for checking that payments from the EU budget are properly and lawfully obtained only if EU sectoral rules
         determining the type of penalty and the category of operators concerned were in force at the time when the irregularity was
         committed. They submit in that regard that no such sectoral rules existed at the time of the exports at issue in the main
         proceedings so far as control and supervisory agencies were concerned.
      
Conversely, the Belgian Government and the European Commission submit that, where a category of operators is not yet covered
         by EU sectoral rules such as Regulation No 3665/as regards refunds unduly received by exporters, Articles and of Regulation
         No 2988/95, in so far as they provide generally that an administrative penalty may be applied to operators other than the
         beneficiaries of export refunds, are directly applicable by virtue of the second paragraph of Article TFEU.
      
In that regard, by virtue of the very nature of regulations and of their function in the system of sources of EU law, the
         provisions of regulations generally have immediate effect in the national legal systems without it being necessary for the
         national authorities to adopt measures of application (Case 93/Leonesio [1972] ECR 287, paragraph 5, and Case C‑278/Handlbauer [2004] ECR I‑6171, paragraph 25) or without it being necessary for the EU legislature to adopt supplementary legislation.
      
Some of the provisions of a regulation may, however, necessitate, for their implementation, the adoption of measures of application
         (see, to that effect, Case C-403/Monte Arcosu [2001] ECR I-103, paragraph 26) either by the Member States or by the EU legislature itself.
      
That is the case, in relation to the protection of the EU’s financial interests, with regard to administrative penalties imposed
         on the various categories of operators identified in Regulation No 2988/95.
      
Indeed, Article of that regulation merely provides that intentional irregularities or those caused by negligence ‘may’ lead
         to certain administrative penalties listed in that provision whilst, as regards the categories of operators who may be liable
         to incur such penalties, Article of the regulation provides that those penalties ‘may’ be applied not only to the economic
         operators who have committed the irregularity but also to persons who have taken part in the irregularity and to those who
         are under a duty to take responsibility for the irregularity or to ensure that it is not committed.
      
It must therefore be concluded that those provisions merely lay down general rules for supervision and penalties for the purpose
         of safeguarding the EU’s financial interests (see Joined Cases C‑383/to C‑385/Vereniging Nationaal Overlegorgaan Sociale Werkvoorziening [2008] ECR I‑1561, paragraph 39). In particular, those provisions do not specify which of the penalties listed in Article
         of Regulation No 2988/should be applied in the case of an irregularity detrimental to the EU’s financial interests nor
         the category of operators on whom such penalties are to be imposed in such cases.
      
In that regard, it should be added, first, that it is clear from Article of Regulation No 2988/95, in particular from paragraph
         thereof, in conjunction with the fifth and eighth recitals to the regulation, that it is for the EU legislature to lay down
         sectoral rules establishing administrative penalties, following the example of those which already existed in the sphere of
         the common agricultural policy when the regulation was adopted. Furthermore, as is apparent from the seventh recital to Regulation
         No 2988/95, the latter seeks to establish general rules applicable to such sectoral rules.
      
Second, it is apparent from Article 2(4) of Regulation No 2988/that, subject to the EU law applicable, the procedures for
         the application of checks, measures and administrative penalties for which that law provides are to be governed by the laws
         of the Member States. 
      
Admittedly, Article 2(2) of Regulation No 2988/also provides, in keeping with the principle of the legality of criminal
         offences and penalties, that no administrative penalty may be imposed unless an EU act prior to the irregularity has made
         provision for it. 
      
However, as is clear from Article TFEU, Member States are to take the same measures to counter fraud affecting the financial
         interests of the EU as they take to counter fraud affecting their own financial interests. Consequently and in view of the
         objectives pursued by Regulation No 2988/95, when the EU legislature has not adopted sectoral rules intended to protect the
         Union’s financial interests against the conduct of certain operators, Member States are entitled to maintain or adopt provisions
         in that domain and in respect of those operators in so far as such provisions prove to be necessary for combating fraud and
         provided that they observe the general principles of EU law, in particular that of proportionality, as well as the general
         rules laid down in Regulation No 2988/and any existing EU sectoral rules concerning other operators.
      
In fact, where EU legislation does not make specific provision for a penalty in cases of infringement, or where such legislation
         provides that certain penalties may be imposed for infringement of EU law but does not exhaustively list the penalties that
         the Member States may impose, Article 4(3) TEU requires the Member States to take all effective measures to penalise conduct
         detrimental to the financial interests of the EU (see, to that effect, Case 68/Commission v Greece [1989] ECR I‑2965, paragraph 23, and Case C‑186/Nunes and de Matos [1999] ECR I‑4883, paragraphs and 14).
      
Furthermore, it would be inconsistent with the objective pursued by Article TFEU, which places a duty on both the EU and
         the Member States to counter fraud and other irregularities affecting the EU’s financial interests, to restrict the action
         of Member States against a category of operators who are not yet subject to sectoral rules adopted at EU level. Indeed, if
         the protection of the EU’s financial interests is to be rendered effective, it is essential that the deterrence of, and the
         fight against, fraud and other irregularities operate at all levels at which those interests are liable to be affected by
         such phenomena, in particular since it is often the case that phenomena so fought involve actors at various levels (see, to
         that effect, Case C‑15/Commission v EIB [2003] ECR I‑7281, paragraph 135). That is the case with regard to the role played by control and supervisory agencies in
         relation to the lawfulness of payments of export refunds.
      
In view of the foregoing, the answer to the first question is that Articles and of Regulation No 2988/do not apply
         in such a way that an administrative penalty may be imposed on the basis of those provisions alone, since, if, in connection
         with the protection of the EU’s financial interests, an administrative penalty is to be applied to a category of persons,
         a necessary precondition is that, prior to commission of the irregularity in question, either the EU legislature has adopted
         sectoral rules laying down such a penalty and the conditions for its application to that category of persons or, where such
         rules have not yet been adopted at EU level, the law of the Member State where the irregularity was committed has provided
         for the imposition of an administrative penalty on that category of persons.
      
 Second question 
By its second question, the referring court asks, in essence, whether, in circumstances such as those in issue before it,
         in which EU sectoral rules did not yet require Member States to provide for effective penalties in cases in which an international
         control and supervisory agency approved by a Member State has issued false certificates, Article of Regulation No 2988/prevents Member States from imposing, on the basis of national measures, a penalty on that agency in its capacity as a person
         who has ‘taken part in the irregularity’, a person who is ‘under a duty to take responsibility’ for the irregularity or a
         person who should have ‘[ensured] that it is not committed’ within the meaning of Article 7.
      
In that regard, it should be observed that, in issuing a false certificate of unloading and release for consumption for the
         purposes of Article of Regulation No 3665/(a certificate allowing an exporter to receive an export refund to which he
         is not entitled), an international control and supervisory agency approved by a Member State may be regarded as a person who
         has ‘taken part in the irregularity’ within the meaning of Article of Regulation No 2988/and to whom, by the same token,
         administrative measures and penalties may be applied for the purposes of that regulation. Such an agency may also be regarded
         as a person who is under a duty to take responsibility for the irregularity within the meaning of that provision where national
         law provides for that agency to be liable for the financial consequences of the certificates issued by it.
      
However, as has been stated at paragraph of this judgment, a necessary precondition for the application of such a penalty
         is that EU sectoral rules or, in the absence of such rules, national law, should have provided for the application of an administrative
         penalty to that category of operators. 
      
At the time of the imports in issue in the main proceedings, EU law did not include any sectoral rules, as referred to in
         Regulation No 2988/95, specifically governing the penalties to be imposed in cases of acts detrimental to the EU’s financial
         interests resulting from the issue by such control and supervisory agencies of false certificates of unloading and release
         for consumption.
      
In fact, it was only with the adoption of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1253/of July amending Regulation (EC)
         No 800/laying down common detailed rules for the application of the system of export refunds on agricultural products
         (OJ L 183, p. 12) that a new Article 16c of Regulation No 800/provided that thereafter ‘Member States which have
         approved [control and supervisory agencies (‘SA’)] shall provide for an effective system of sanctions for cases where an approved
         SA has issued a false certificate’.
      
By contrast, Article of Regulation No 3665/laid down specific rules concerning the recovery from the exporter of export
         refunds to which he was not entitled, in conjunction with the imposition of a penalty – in particular where the exporter has
         obtained an unjustified advantage of that kind by intentionally supplying false information – and with additional penalties
         which may be provided for by national law. Accordingly, in the case before the referring court, the question arises as to
         whether the national authorities were entitled to refrain from recovering the refund from the exporter and from imposing an
         administrative penalty on him and to proceed instead against the control and supervisory agency which was jointly and severally
         liable under national law for the financial consequences of the certificates provided by it.
      
In relation to assistance granted by the EU budget in the framework of the Structural Funds and the common agricultural policy,
         the Court has previously held that the exercise, by a Member State, of any discretion to decide whether or not it would be
         expedient to demand repayment of assistance unduly or unlawfully granted would be inconsistent with the obligations imposed
         on national administrations by EU rules applicable in those sectors to recover assistance unduly or unlawfully paid (see,
         to that effect, Joined Cases 205/to 215/Deutsche Milchkontor and Others [1983] ECR 2633, paragraph 22, and Vereniging Nationaal Overlegorgaan Sociale Werkvoorziening, paragraph 38).
      
As a rule, the same is true of the obligation of the Member States to recover from exporters refunds unduly received by them.
         That obligation is laid down in Article of Regulation No 3665/and is allied with the penalty provided for in Article
         11(1)(a) or (b), as well as with any additional penalties which may be provided for by national law.
      
It is true that, before the entry into force of Regulation No 1253/2002, Member States were not required to make provision,
         in a case of refunds unduly received by an exporter, for penalties as against a control and supervisory agency which had provided
         a false certificate. However, that circumstance does not prevent Member States – as has been stated at paragraph of this
         judgment – from maintaining or adopting, in connection with the protection of the EU’s financial interests, national rules
         providing for administrative penalties to be applied to the category of operators which the EU legislature has made responsible
         for playing a part in checking the lawfulness of export operations in respect of which refunds are payable from the EU budget.
         Moreover, such measures would merely anticipate the obligation to which Member States are now subject by virtue of Article
         16c of Commission Regulation (EC) No 800/of April laying down common detailed rules for the application of the
         system of export refunds on agricultural products (OJ L 102, p. 11), as amended by Regulation No 1253/2002.
      
It follows that, in circumstances such as those in issue in the main proceedings and subject to confirmation by the referring
         court of the applicability of the Royal Decree of January mentioned in its request for a preliminary ruling, in the
         absence of EU sectoral rules applicable ratione temporis to control and supervisory agencies, the Member States were entitled to provide for agencies of that type to be jointly and
         severally liable with the exporter, in their capacity as persons who have taken part in the irregularity or as persons who
         are under a duty to take responsibility for the irregularity, for the financial consequences of their issue of certificates
         of unloading and release for consumption which made it possible for the exporter to receive, to the detriment of the EU budget,
         export refunds to which he was not entitled.
      
In the main proceedings, it is apparent, however, that the national authorities are seeking, on the one hand, to recover the
         unjustified refund from SGS Belgium, and, on the other, to apply to that control and supervisory agency the administrative
         penalties provided for in Article 11(1)(b) of Regulation No 3665/which are normally applied to the exporter, invoking in
         that regard the direct effect of Article of Regulation No 2988/and the fact that under national law such an agency is
         jointly and severally liable with the exporter. In particular, the BIRB argues that the fact that the control and supervisory
         agency in issue in the main proceedings intentionally submitted an incorrect certificate gives grounds for concluding that
         the condition for the application of the penalty provided for in Article 11(1)(b) of Regulation No 3665/is met. However,
         in the alternative, the BIRB has also submitted before the referring court that, if no fraudulent intention were to be found,
         SGS Belgium should be ordered to pay the penalty laid down in Article 11(1)(a) of that regulation.
      
In that respect, with regard to recovery of the unduly received refund, as has been stated at paragraph of this judgment,
         recovery must be made from the exporter who has received a refund to which he was not entitled.
      
With regard to the application of the penalty provided for in Article 11(1)(b) of Regulation No 3665/87, it may be applied
         only where ‘the exporter has intentionally supplied false information’. The EU legislature accordingly expressly provided
         that that condition for application must be met by the exporter alone.
      
In those circumstances, if, in the case before the referring court, it is apparent that the exporter was unaware of the errors
         in the certificate of release for consumption which was intentionally provided by the control and supervisory agency – a matter
         which falls to be determined by the referring court, it cannot be held that the exporter intentionally supplied false information
         for the purposes of Article 11(1)(b) of Regulation No 3665/87: consequently, the penalty provided for in that provision cannot
         be applied either to the exporter or, in application of a national rule providing for joint and several liability, to the
         control and supervisory agency.
      
Conversely, in such a situation, the penalty laid down in Article 11(1)(a) of Regulation No 3665/could be applied. Indeed,
         that penalty may be applied even if the exporter has not committed any fault (see Case C‑143/AOB Reuter [2008] ECR I‑3171, paragraph 17).
      
In that regard, first, such a penalty may, as a rule, be imposed only on those operators who have applied for export refunds
         when it is apparent that the information provided by them in support of their application is incorrect. Second, as there is
         a real risk that the exporter, who is often the last link in a contractual chain of purchases for resale, may avoid responsibility
         for the inaccuracy of his declaration because of the possibility of error, negligence or fraud further back up the chain,
         Article of Regulation No 3665/makes him responsible for the accuracy of his declaration, subject to a penalty in the
         event of non-compliance (see, to that effect, Case C‑210/Käserei Champignon Hofmeister [2002] ECR I‑6453, paragraphs 42, and 62). The exporter is fully at liberty to select his trading partners and it is up
         to him to take the appropriate precautions, either by including the necessary clauses in the contracts which he concludes
         with them or by effecting appropriate insurance (AOB Reuter, paragraph 36).
      
However, in a situation in which (i) the exporter obtains an export refund by means of a certificate of release for consumption
         – which under EU rules must be drawn up by an international control and supervisory agency – and (ii) it transpires that,
         unknown to the exporter, that agency has drawn up a false certificate making it possible for the insurer covering the risks
         inherent in the export operation not to indemnify a loss associated with non-performance of that operation, Article of
         Regulation No 3665/does not prevent the national authority – in application of a national rule providing for the joint
         and several liability of an international control and supervisory agency for the financial consequences of the certificates
         that it has drawn up – from deciding to recover from that agency the amounts resulting from the application to the exporter
         of the penalty laid down in Article 11(1)(a).
      
It must, however, be recalled that a penalty, even of a non-criminal nature, cannot be imposed unless it rests on a clear
         and unambiguous legal basis (Case C-110/Emsland-Stärke [2000] ECR I-11569, paragraph 56; Käserei Champignon Hofmeister, paragraph 52; and Case C‑274/ED & F Man Sugar [2006] ECR I‑3269, paragraph 15).
      
In light of the foregoing, the answer to the second question is that, in circumstances such as those in issue in the main
         proceedings, in which EU sectoral rules did not yet require Member States to provide for effective penalties in cases in which
         an international control and supervisory agency approved by a Member State has issued false certificates, Article of Regulation
         No 2988/does not prevent Member States from applying a penalty to that agency in its capacity as a person who has ‘taken
         part in the irregularity’ or as a person who is ‘under a duty to take responsibility’ for the irregularity within the meaning
         of Article 7, provided, however, that the application of such a penalty rests on a clear and unambiguous legal basis, a matter
         which falls to be determined by the referring court.
      
 The third question
By its third question, the referring court asks whether the communication, to an international control and supervisory agency
         which has issued a certificate for release for consumption in respect of an export operation, of an investigative report drawing
         attention to an irregularity in connection with that operation, the presentation to the agency of a request to produce additional
         documents for the purpose of checking whether the release for consumption actually took place and the sending of a registered
         letter imposing a penalty on that agency for having taken part in an irregularity constitute acts notified to the person in
         question relating to investigation or legal proceedings concerning the irregularity, as referred to in the third subparagraph
         of Article 3(1) of Regulation No 2988/95.
      
In the circumstances of the case before the referring court, it should be stated that, in the absence of EU sectoral rules
         providing for penalties to be applied to international control and supervisory agencies which have taken part in an irregularity
         that has been detrimental to the EU’s financial interests, the decision whether to apply the penalty laid down in Article
         11(1)(a) of Regulation No 3665/to such an agency, on the basis of its joint and several liability with the exporter under
         national law, is a matter of choice for the Member States in the context of their strategy for countering fraud and falls
         within their competence. However, in such a situation, the Member States must observe the general principles of EU law and
         the general rules laid down in Regulation No 2988/and any EU sectoral rules which may be applicable to other operators.
         
      
Thus, when it decides to apply such a penalty to a control and supervisory agency on the basis of the latter’s joint and several
         liability with the exporter under national law, the national authority is acting within the scope of Regulation No 2988/95.
      
Since Regulation No 3665/does not lay down any rules concerning the limitation period applicable to an action for recovery
         of export refunds unduly received, it is appropriate to refer to the first subparagraph of Article 3(1) of Regulation No 2988/(Case C‑281/Bayerische Hypotheken- und Veriensbank [2009] ECR I-91, paragraph 16), since that provision is directly applicable in the Member States, including in the field of
         export refunds on agricultural products, in the absence of EU sectoral rules providing for a shorter limitation period, which
         may not be less than three years, or of national rules providing for a longer limitation period (Handlbauer, paragraph 35).
      
Under the third subparagraph of Article 3(1) of Regulation No 2988/95, the limitation period is interrupted by any act of
         the competent authority, notified to the person in question, relating to investigation or legal proceedings concerning the
         irregularity. In addition, the limitation period starts again following each interrupting act.
      
In general, limitation periods fulfil the function of ensuring legal certainty. Such a function would not be wholly fulfilled,
         if the limitation period referred to in Article 3(1) of Regulation No 2988/could be interrupted by any act relating to
         a general check by the national authorities which bears no relation to any suspicion concerning the existence of irregularities
         regarding sufficiently precisely circumscribed transactions (Handlbauer, paragraph 40).
      
However, when the national authorities send a person reports drawing attention to an irregularity in which that person is
         said to have played a part in connection with a specific export operation, ask the person for further information concerning
         that operation or apply a penalty to the person in connection with that operation, those authorities adopt acts relating to
         investigation or legal proceedings concerning the irregularity which are sufficiently specific for the purposes of the third
         subparagraph of Article 3(1) of Regulation No 2988/95.
      
The answer to the third question is therefore that, in circumstances such as those in issue in the main proceedings, the communication,
         to an international control and supervisory agency which has issued a certificate for release for consumption in respect of
         a specific export operation, of an investigative report drawing attention to an irregularity in connection with that operation,
         the presentation to that agency of a request to produce additional documents for the purpose of checking whether the release
         for consumption actually took place and the sending of a registered letter imposing a penalty on that agency for having taken
         part in an irregularity within the meaning of Article 1(2) of Regulation No 2988/constitute acts, notified to the person
         in question and relating to investigation or legal proceedings concerning the irregularity, which are sufficiently specific
         to interrupt the limitation period for proceedings within the meaning of the third subparagraph of Article 3(1) of Regulation
         No 2988/95. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Articles and of Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 2988/of December on the protection of the European Communities
            financial interests do not apply in such a way that an administrative penalty may be imposed on the basis of those provisions
            alone since, if, in connection with the protection of the European Union’s financial interests, an administrative penalty
            is to be applied to a category of persons, a necessary precondition is that, prior to commission of the irregularity in question,
            either the European Union legislature has adopted sectoral rules laying down such a penalty and the conditions for its application
            to that category of persons or, where such rules have not yet been adopted at European Union level, the law of the Member
            State where the irregularity was committed has provided for the imposition of an administrative penalty on that category of
            persons.
2.      In circumstances such as those in issue in the main proceedings, in which European Union sectoral rules did not yet require
            Member States to provide for effective penalties in cases in which an international control and supervisory agency approved
            by a Member State has issued false certificates, Article of Regulation No 2988/does not prevent Member States from applying
            a penalty to that agency in its capacity as a person who has ‘taken part in the irregularity’ or as a person who is ‘under
            a duty to take responsibility’ for the irregularity within the meaning of Article 7, provided, however, that the application
            of such a penalty rests on a clear and unambiguous legal basis, a matter which falls to be determined by the referring court.
3.      In circumstances such as those in issue in the main proceedings, the communication, to an international control and supervisory
            agency which has issued a certificate for release for consumption in respect of a specific export operation, of an investigative
            report drawing attention to an irregularity in connection with that operation, the presentation to that agency of a request
            to produce additional documents for the purpose of checking whether the release for consumption actually took place and the
            sending of a registered letter imposing a penalty on that agency for having taken part in an irregularity within the meaning
            of Article 1(2) of Regulation No 2988/constitute acts, notified to the person in question and relating to investigation
            or legal proceedings concerning the irregularity, which are sufficiently specific to interrupt the limitation period for proceedings
            within the meaning of the third subparagraph of Article 3(1) of Regulation No 2988/95.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 