
Case C-108/Bovemij Verzekeringen NV
v
Benelux-Merkenbureau
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Gerechtshof te ’s-Gravenhage) 
(Trade Marks – Directive 89/104/EEC – Article 3(3) – Distinctive character – Acquisition through use – Taking into account all or a substantial part of the Benelux territory – Taking into account the linguistic regions of Benelux – Word mark EUROPOLIS)
Summary of the Judgment
Approximation of laws – Trade marks – Directive 89/– Registration of a trade mark refused or trade mark declared invalid
            – Marks devoid of any distinctive character, descriptive marks and customary marks 
(Council Directive 89/104, Art. 3(3))
Article 3(3) of First Directive 89/relating to trade marks must be interpreted as meaning that the registration of a trade
         mark can be allowed on the basis of that provision only if it is proven that that trade mark has acquired distinctive character
         through use throughout the territory of the Member State or, in the case of Benelux, throughout the part of the territory
         of Benelux in which there exists a ground for refusal.
      
As regards a mark consisting of one or more words of an official language of a Member State or of Benelux, if the ground for
         refusal exists only in one of the linguistic areas of the Member State or, in the case of Benelux, in one of its linguistic
         areas, it must be established that the mark has acquired distinctive character through use throughout that linguistic area.
         In the linguistic area thus defined, it must be assessed whether the relevant class of persons, or at least a significant
         proportion thereof, identifies the product or service in question as originating from a particular undertaking because of
         the trade mark.
      
(see paras 23, 28, operative part 1-2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
September (*)
      
(Trade Marks – Directive 89/104/EEC – Article 3(3) – Distinctive character – Acquisition through use – Taking into account all or a substantial part of the Benelux territory – Taking into account the linguistic regions of Benelux – Word mark EUROPOLIS)
In Case C-108/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Gerechtshof te ’s‑Gravenhage (Netherlands), made by decision
         of January 2005, received at the Court on March 2005, in the proceedings:
      
Bovemij Verzekeringen NV
v
Benelux-Merkenbureau,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
Composed of P. Jann, President of Chamber, K. Schiemann, N. Colneric, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur) and E. Levits, Judges,
      
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on February 2006,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Bovemij Verzekeringen NV, by E.M. Matser, advocaat,
–        the Benelux-Merkenbureau, by C. van Nispen and E. D. Huisman, advocaten,
–        the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster and M. de Grave, acting as Agents,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by S. Malynicz, Barrister,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by W. Wils and N.B. Rasmussen, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 3(3) of First Council Directive 89/104/EEC of
         December to approximate the laws of the Member States relating to trade marks (OJ L 40, p. 1; ‘the Directive’).
      
This reference was made in the course of proceedings between Bovemij Verzekeringen NV (‘Bovemij’) and Benelux-Merkenbureau
         (Benelux Trade Mark Office, ‘BMB’) regarding the latter’s refusal to register the sign EUROPOLIS as a trade mark.
      
 Legal context
Article of the Directive provides:
      
‘This Directive shall apply to every trade mark in respect of goods or services which is the subject of registration or of
         an application in a Member State for registration as an individual trade mark, a collective mark or a guarantee or certification
         mark, or which is the subject of a registration or an application for registration in the Benelux Trade Mark Office or of
         an international registration having effect in a Member State.’
      
Article 3(1) of the Directive provides:
      
‘The following shall not be registered or if registered shall be liable to be declared invalid:
(a)      …
(b)      trade marks which are devoid of any distinctive character;
(c)      trade marks which consist exclusively of signs or indications which may serve, in trade, to designate the kind, quality, quantity,
         intended purpose, value, geographical origin, or the time of production of the goods or of rendering of the service, or other
         characteristics of the goods;
      
(d)      trade marks which consist exclusively of signs or indications which have become customary in the current language or in the
         bona fide and established practices of the trade;
      
…’.
Under Article 3(3) of the Directive:
      
‘A trade mark shall not be refused registration or be declared invalid in accordance with paragraph 1(b), (c) or (d) if, before
         the date of application for registration and following the use which has been made of it, it has acquired a distinctive character.
         Any Member State may in addition provide that this provision shall also apply where the distinctive character was acquired
         after the date of application for registration or after the date of registration.’
      
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
On May 1997, Bovemij applied to BMB to register the sign EUROPOLIS as a word mark for the following classes of services
         within the meaning of the Nice Agreement concerning the International Classification of Goods and Services for the Purposes
         of the Registration of Marks of June 1957, as revised and amended:
      
Class 36: Insurance; financial affairs; monetary affairs; real estate affairs;
Class 39: Transport; packaging and storing of goods; travel arrangements.
By letter of October 1997, BMB informed Bovemij that it was provisionally refusing registration of the application. It
         gave the following reasons:
      
‘The sign EUROPOLIS is composed of the common prefix EURO (for Europe) and the noun POLIS and is exclusively descriptive of
         the services named in classes and relating to a policy in Europe. The sign therefore has no distinctive character ...
         ’.
      
By letter of April Bovemij lodged an objection contesting the provisional refusal to register the mark, contending
         that the sign concerned had been lawfully used as a trade mark in trade since by Europolis BV, a subsidiary company of
         Bovemij. In support of its submission, Bovemij sent three brochures of Europolis BV concerning bicycle insurance and offered
         to send any further necessary supplementary evidence.
      
By letter of May 1998, BMB stated that it saw no reason to alter its provisional refusal in the light of Bovemij’s objection
         and that there was no trade acceptance of the sign through use, since the duration of the use was insufficient for that purpose
         and the documents submitted showed only use of the sign as a trade name.
      
By letter of May BMB informed Bovemij of its decision ‘definitively refusing’ registration of the sign.
      
Bovemij applied to the Gerechtshof te ’s-Gravenhage (Regional Court of Appeal, The Hague) for an order that BMB register the
         sign submitted in the trade mark register. In support of that action, Bovemij argued, primarily, that the sign EUROPOLIS has
         intrinsic distinctive character and, in the alternative, that that sign had become accepted through use before the date of
         application. BMB disputed those arguments.
      
As regards the principal argument put forward by Bovemij, the Gerechtshof found that the sign filed consists of a combination
         of the word ‘POLIS’ and the prefix ‘EURO’. The Dutch word ‘polis’ normally refers to an insurance agreement. It is a generic
         name which covers many different types of insurance. ‘EURO’ is the name (already known at the time of the filing) of the currency
         currently valid in the Benelux countries and a popular abbreviation of the words ‘Europe’ or ‘European’. According to the
         Gerechtshof, it is such a frequently used concept that it must be denied any independent distinguishing character. In that
         court’s opinion, ‘EURO’ can also have the meaning, in normal speech, of an essential characteristic of services, namely their
         European quality, origin or purpose. The prefix ‘EURO’ thus gives the sign in question in the main proceedings the meaning
         of insurance with a European aspect. 
      
The Gerechtshof therefore took the view that the sign EUROPOLIS consists exclusively of signs and indications that may be
         used in trade to designate characteristics of the product, and that that sign has no intrinsic distinctive character.
      
As regards the argument put forward in the alternative, according to which the sign EUROPOLIS has acquired distinctive character
         through use, Bovemij submitted that, for acceptance of a sign through use – provided that the other conditions are satisfied
         – it suffices that that sign is regarded as a mark in a substantial part of the Benelux territory, which may be solely the
         Netherlands.
      
BMB contended in that respect that the acceptance through use requires that, as a result of its use, the sign is perceived
         as a trade mark throughout the Benelux territory, namely the Kingdom of Belgium, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Grand
         Duchy of Luxembourg.
      
The Gerechtshof stated that the parties did not agree on the territory which must be taken into consideration for the purposes
         of establishing acceptance through use.
      
It pointed out that, for the Benelux countries, that question must be examined as at the date of the application, so that
         only use of the sign EUROPOLIS until May may be taken into account.
      
In that context, the Gerechtshof stayed the proceedings and referred the following questions to the Court of Justice for a
         preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Must Article 3(3) of the Directive be interpreted as meaning that in order to acquire distinctive character (in the present
         case through a Benelux trade mark) as a result of use, as referred to in that provision, it is necessary that the sign be
         regarded as a trade mark, before the date of application, by the relevant public throughout the Benelux territory and, therefore,
         in Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg?
      
If the answer to Question is in the negative:
(2)      Is the condition for registration laid down in Article 3(3) of the Directive satisfied, for the purposes of that provision,
         if the sign, as result of the use made of it, is regarded as a trade mark by the relevant section of the public in a substantial
         part of the Benelux territory and can this substantial part be, for example, the Netherlands alone?
      
(3)      (a)   When assessing distinctive character acquired through use, within the meaning of Article 3(3) of the Directive, of a sign
         – consisting of one or more words of an official language in the territory of a Member State (or, as in the case in point,
         the Benelux territory) – is it necessary to take into account the language regions within that territory?
      
(b)      For registration as a mark, should the other requirements for registration be satisfied, is it sufficient if/required that
         the sign be regarded as a trade mark by the relevant section of the public in a substantial part of the language region of
         the Member State (or, as in the case in point, of the Benelux territory) in which that language is an official language?’
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 The first and second questions
By the first two questions, which should be considered together, the referring court asks essentially which territory must
         be taken into account in order to assess whether a sign has acquired a distinctive character through use, within the meaning
         of Article 3(3) of the Directive, in a Member State or in a group of Member States which have common legislation on trade
         marks, such as Benelux.
      
It must first of all be recalled that, as regards the trade marks registered at BMB, the Benelux territory must be treated
         like the territory of a Member State, since Article of the Directive regards Benelux trade marks as trade marks registered
         in a Member State (Case C-375/General Motors [1999] ECR I-5421, paragraph 29).
      
Article 3(3) of the Directive does not provide an independent right to have a trade mark registered. It is an exception to
         the grounds for refusal listed in Article 3(1)(b) to (d) of the Directive. Its scope must therefore be interpreted in light
         of those grounds for refusal.
      
In order to assess whether those grounds for refusal must be disregarded because of the acquisition of distinctive character
         through use under Article 3(3) of the Directive, only the situation prevailing in the part of the territory of the Member
         State concerned (or, as the case may be, in the part of the Benelux territory) where the grounds for refusal have been noted
         is relevant (see, to that effect, as regards Article 7(3) of Council Regulation (EC) No 40/of December on the Community
         trade mark (OJ L 11, p. 1), a provision essentially identical to Article 3(3) of the Directive, judgment of June in Case C-25/P Storck v OHIM [2006] ECR I-0000, paragraph 83).
      
Consequently, the answer to the first two questions must be that Article 3(3) of the Directive must be interpreted as meaning
         that the registration of a trade mark can be allowed on the basis of that provision only if it is proven that that trade mark
         has acquired distinctive character through use throughout the territory of the Member State or, in the case of Benelux, throughout
         the part of the territory of Benelux in which there exists a ground for refusal.
      
 The third question
By its third question, the referring court essentially asks to what extent the linguistic areas in a Member State or, as the
         case may be, in Benelux, must be taken into account to assess the acquisition of a distinctive character through use in the
         case of a trade mark consisting of one or more words in the official language of a Member State or of Benelux.
      
In the case in the main proceedings, BMB and the referring court took the view that the mark applied for is descriptive and
         devoid of any distinctive character, grounds for refusal listed in Article 3(1)(b) and (c) of the Directive. They reached
         that conclusion on the ground, inter alia, that the Dutch word ‘polis’ usually refers to an insurance contract. The grounds
         for refusal found in the case in the main proceedings therefore exist only in the part of Benelux where Dutch is spoken.
      
In light of the answer to the first two questions, it follows that, to assess whether a mark has acquired distinctive character
         through use which would justify disregarding the grounds for refusal under Article 3(3) of the Directive, it is necessary
         to take into account the part of Benelux where Dutch is spoken.
      
In the linguistic area thus defined, the competent authority must assess whether the relevant class of persons, or at least
         a significant proportion thereof, identifies the product or service in question as originating from a particular undertaking
         because of the trade mark (see, to that effect, Joined Cases C-108/and C-109/Windsurfing Chiemsee [1999] ECR I-2779, paragraph 52, and Case C-299/Philips [2002] ECR I-5475, paragraph 61).
      
Consequently, the answer to Question must be that, as regards a mark consisting of one or more words of an official language
         of a Member State or of Benelux, if the ground for refusal exists only in one of the linguistic areas of the Member State
         or, in the case of Benelux, in one of its linguistic areas, it must be established that the mark has acquired distinctive
         character through use throughout that linguistic area. In the linguistic area thus defined, it must be assessed whether the
         relevant class of persons, or at least a significant proportion thereof, identifies the product or service in question as
         originating from a particular undertaking because of the trade mark. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article 3(3) of First Council Directive 89/104/EEC of December to approximate the laws of the Member States relating
            to trade marks must be interpreted as meaning that the registration of a trade mark can be allowed on the basis of that provision
            only if it is proven that that trade mark has acquired distinctive character through use throughout the part of the territory
            of the Member State or, in the case of Benelux, throughout the part of the territory of Benelux in which there exists a ground
            for refusal.
2.      As regards a mark consisting of one or more words of an official language of a Member State or of Benelux, if the ground for
            refusal exists only in one of the linguistic areas of the Member State or, in the case of Benelux, in one of its linguistic
            areas, it must be established that the mark has acquired distinctive character through use throughout that linguistic area.
            In the linguistic area thus defined, it must be assessed whether the relevant class of persons, or at least a significant
            proportion thereof, identifies the product or service in question as originating from a particular undertaking because of
            the trade mark.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 