
Order of the Court (Eighth Chamber) of February — Yorma’s v OHIM 
(Case C‑191/P)
Appeal — Community trade mark — Regulation (EC) No 40/— Article 8(1)(b) — Opposition proceedings — Application for Community figurative mark with the word element ‘yorma’s’ — Earlier Community word mark NORMA — Relative ground for refusal — Likelihood of confusion
1.                     Appeals — Grounds — Incorrect assessment of the facts and evidence — Inadmissibility — Review by the Court of the assessment
            of the facts and evidence — Possible only where the clear sense of the evidence has been distorted (Art. 256(1), second para.,
            TFEU; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.) (see para. 36)
2.                     Community trade mark — Definition and acquisition of the Community trade mark — Relative grounds for refusal — Opposition
            by the proprietor of an earlier identical or similar mark registered for identical or similar goods or services — Likelihood
            of confusion with the earlier mark — Criteria for assessment (Council Regulation No 40/94, Art. 8(1)(b)) (see para. 43)
Re: 
Appeal against the judgment of the General Court (First Chamber) of February in Case T‑213/Yorma’s 
v 
OHIM
 — 
Norma Lebensmittelfilialbetrieb (YORMA’S) 
dismissing the application for annulment of the decision of the First Board of Appeal of OHIM of February refusing
                  registration of the figurative sign with the word element ‘yorma’s’ as a Community trade mark for certain services in Classes
                  and and upholding the opposition brought by the proprietor of the earlier Community word mark ‘NORMA’ — Likelihood of
                  confusion of two marks — Incorrect assessment of the similarity of the marks and services concerned — Infringement of Article 8(1)(b)
                  of Regulation (EC) No 40/94.
               
Operative part
1.
	The appeal is dismissed. 
2.
	Yorma’s AG is ordered to pay the costs. 
Top  
 