
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-192/Commission of the European CommunitiesvKingdom of Denmark
«(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Articles EC and EC – Prohibition on marketing of foodstuffs to which vitamins and minerals have been added – Justification – Public health – Nutritional need)»
Opinion of Advocate General Mischo delivered on December Judgment of the Court, September Summary of the Judgment
Free movement of goods – Quantitative restrictions – Measures having equivalent effect – National legislation subjecting the marketing of foodstuffs enriched with nutrients to proof of the population's nutritional
                     need – Not permissible – Justification – Protection of public health – No justification – Breach of the principle of proportionality
                  (Arts EC and EC) A Member State fails to fulfil its obligations under Article EC if it applies an administrative practice which entails
         that foodstuffs enriched with vitamins and minerals and lawfully produced or marketed in other Member States can be marketed
         in that State only if it is shown that such enrichment with nutrients meets a need of that State's population.While Community law does not, in principle, preclude a Member State from prohibiting, save for prior authorisation, the marketing
         of foodstuffs incorporating nutrients, such as vitamins or minerals other than those whose use is lawful under Community legislation,
         since it is for the Member States, in default of harmonisation and to the extent that uncertainties continue to exist in the
         current state of scientific research, to decide on their intended level of protection of human health and life, that discretion
         must, however, be exercised in accordance with the principle of proportionality. It is, moreover, for the national authorities
         to show in each case, in the light of national nutritional habits and in the light of the results of international scientific
         research, that their rules are necessary for the protection of public health and, in particular, that the marketing of the
         products in question poses a real risk thereto.In that regard, the systematic prohibition on the marketing of enriched products which do not meet a nutritional need of the
         population does not enable Community law to be observed in regard to the identification and assessment of a real risk to public
         health, which requires a detailed assessment, case-by-case, of the effects which the addition of the minerals and vitamins
         in question could entail.see paras 42, 44-46, 56-57, operative part
      
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURTSeptember (1)
((Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Articles EC and EC – Prohibition on marketing of foodstuffs to which vitamins and minerals have been added – Justification – Public health – Nutritional need))
 In Case C-192/01, 
            
Commission of the European Communities, represented by H. C. Støvlbæk, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, 
v
Kingdom of Denmark, represented by J. Molde, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
defendant, 
 APPLICATION for a declaration that, by applying an administrative practice which entails that enriched foodstuffs lawfully
            produced or marketed in other Member States may be marketed in Denmark only if it is shown that such enrichment with nutrients
            meets a need in the Danish population, the Kingdom of Denmark has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC,
            
THE COURT,,
 composed of: J.-P. Puissochet, President of the Sixth Chamber, acting for the President, M. Wathelet, R. Schintgen and C.W.A. Timmermans (Presidents of Chambers), C. Gulmann, A. La Pergola, F. Macken (Rapporteur), N. Colneric, S. von Bahr, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues and A. Rosas, Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: J. Mischo, Registrar: H. von Holstein, Deputy Registrar, 
            
having regard to the Report for the Hearing, after hearing oral argument from the parties at the hearing on October 2002,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on December 2002, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By an application lodged at the Court Registry on May 2001, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         under Article EC for a declaration that, by applying an administrative practice which entails that enriched foodstuffs
         lawfully produced or marketed in other Member States may be marketed in Denmark only if it is shown that such enrichment with
         nutrients meets a need in the Danish population, the Kingdom of Denmark has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article
         EC. 
         
            
 It is common ground that, at the date relevant to this action, there were no provisions of Community legislation laying down
         the conditions under which nutrients, such as vitamins and minerals, could be added to foodstuffs for daily consumption. 
         
            
 As regards foodstuffs intended for particular nutritional uses, certain of them have been the subject of directives adopted
         by the Commission under Council Directive 89/398/EEC of May on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating
         to foodstuffs intended for particular nutritional uses (OJ L 186, p. 27). 
         
National legislation
            
 Article of lov n° om fødevarer m.m. (Law No on Foodstuffs) of July (Lovtidende A 1998, p. 2826), which replaced
         Law No of June 1973, leaving the law on additives unchanged, provides that: For the purposes of this law, a food additive is any substance which, without itself being a food or a usual ingredient of
         compound foods, is intended to be added to foods in order to modify their nutritional value, their shelf-life, colour, flavour,
         taste or for technical or other purposes.
         
            
 Under Article 15(1) of Law No 471, only substances authorised by the Minister for Food (hereinafter  
         the Minister) may be used or sold as additives. 
         
            
 According to Article 15(2) of that law, the Minister may draw up rules relating to the conditions of use of additives,  
         inter alia the aim, the quantities and the products with which they are associated, as well as rules relating to the identity and purity
         of additives. 
         
            
 Bekendtgørelse n° om tilsætningsstoffer til fødevarer (Decree No on Food Additives) of April (Lovtidende A
         2000, p. 1861), imposes the obligation to declare additives to the Food and Veterinary Office (hereinafter  
         the Office) six months before their use. 
         
            
 Under Article of Decree No 282: 
         
1.
 The following additives may be used six months after their declaration to the Food and Veterinary Office:
          bacterial cultures,moulds and yeasts,enzymes, andnutrients.
         
2.
 The use of an additive under paragraph is always subject to the condition that the Office has not previously prohibited
         the declared additive.
         
3.
 The Office may authorise the use of the additive prior to the expiry of the time-limit of six months from the date of the
         declaration.
         
            
 Before the entry into force of Decree No 282, such declaration was made to the Minister in accordance with the provisions
         of Article 16(2) of Law No 471. 
         
            
 As regards the addition of vitamins and minerals to foodstuffs, the functioning of the Danish system of prior authorisation
         is characterised by the existence of an administrative practice, based on the provisions of Law No and of Decree No mentioned in paragraphs to of this judgment, which makes authorisation of the addition of such ingredients subject to
         one or more of the criteria laid down in accordance with the general principles for the addition of essential nutrients to
         foods, taken from the Codex Alimentarius, established in by the FAO (United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation)
         and the WHO (World Health Organisation) (hereinafter  
         the Danish administrative practice). 
         
            
 By virtue of the Danish administrative practice additives such as vitamins and minerals may be lawfully added only in the
         following cases: 
         
─
 the addition of the additive is required to correct (or prevent) a situation where a large part of the population has an insufficient
            intake of the nutrient in question (for example, the addition of iodine to salt); 
          the addition of the additive is required to correct (or prevent) a situation where a large part of the population has an insufficient
         intake of the nutrient in question (for example, the addition of iodine to salt); 
         
─
 the addition of the additive must have the purpose of restoring any loss of a product's nutritional value during industrial
            processing (for example, the addition of vitamin C to fruit juices); 
          the addition of the additive must have the purpose of restoring any loss of a product's nutritional value during industrial
         processing (for example, the addition of vitamin C to fruit juices); 
         
─
 the addition relates to new foodstuffs, or similar products, which may be used in place of and in the same way as a traditional
            product (for example, the addition of vitamin A to margarine, which is a butter substitute); 
          the addition relates to new foodstuffs, or similar products, which may be used in place of and in the same way as a traditional
         product (for example, the addition of vitamin A to margarine, which is a butter substitute); 
         
─
 the addition relates to foodstuffs that constitute a meal in themselves or are intended as special-purpose foods (for example,
            breast milk substitutes, baby foods or slimming products). 
          the addition relates to foodstuffs that constitute a meal in themselves or are intended as special-purpose foods (for example,
         breast milk substitutes, baby foods or slimming products). 
         
Pre-litigation procedure
            
 In 1998, a complaint casting doubt on the compliance of the Danish administrative practice with the provisions of Articles
         EC and EC was made to the Commission by an economic operator because of obstacles to the marketing of a foodstuff lawfully
         marketed in other Member States. 
         
            
 On November 1999, the Commission sent a letter of formal notice to the Kingdom of Denmark, in which it drew the attention
         of that Member State to the fact that the Danish administrative practice constitutes an unjustified obstacle to trade for
         the purposes of Articles EC to EC, since the Office applies the said practice in such a way as to prohibit the marketing
         in Denmark of foodstuffs to which nutrients, in particular vitamins and minerals, have been added, unless there is a nutritional
         need for those elements in the Danish population. 
         
            
 In their answer of December 1999, the Danish authorities maintained that, in light of the fact that the degree of harmfulness
         of vitamins and of minerals cannot be determined with sufficient certainty and in accordance with the judgment in Case 174/Sandoz [1983] ECR 2445, Member States have only to show that the enrichment of the foodstuffs with vitamins and minerals does not
         meet a real need, in order to found their reliance on Article EC. 
         
            
 Since it was not satisfied by that reply, the Commission, on September 2000, issued a reasoned opinion requesting the Kingdom
         of Denmark to comply with its obligations under Articles EC and EC within two months of the date of notification of
         that opinion.  The Commission claimed, in particular, that a prohibition on marketing by virtue of the Danish administrative
         practice on the ground that the addition of vitamins and minerals does not meet any nutritional need constitutes an unjustified
         interference with trade for the purposes of those provisions.  For such interference to be justified under Article EC,
         the Danish authorities would have to show that the product to which the nutrients were added constitutes a real threat to
         public health if it was marketed and consumed on the Danish market.  According to the Commission, that means that those authorities
         would have to outline the scientific data upon which they based their refusal of authorisation, as well as the reasons why
         the vitamin and mineral content of the relevant products represents a threat to public health. 
         
            
 By letter of November 2000, the Danish authorities replied to the reasoned opinion. They claimed that the Court had clearly
         indicated in its judgment in  
         Sandoz, cited above, that Member States, when they apply a prohibition on addition of vitamins, are not required to establish a
         real risk associated with the relevant product, a task which is impossible under existing circumstances. According to those
         authorities, in order to ensure observance of the principle of proportionality, Member States have only to establish that
         the addition of the nutrient in question does not meet a real need. 
         
            
 Since it was not convinced by the Danish authorities' reply to the reasoned opinion, the Commission brought this action. 
         The action Arguments of the parties
         
            
 The Commission submits that the Danish administrative practice constitutes an obstacle to the free movement of goods. 
         
            
 The Danish Government does not dispute the fact that its practice constitutes an obstacle to the free movement of goods, but
         it contends that it is justified under Article EC. 
         
            
 The Commission submits that the general prohibition, in the absence of a nutritional need in the Danish population, of the
         marketing of food products to which vitamins or minerals have been added is not justified by any of the grounds set out in
         Article EC and, in particular, the protection of human life and health.  The absence of nutritional need is not, according
         to the Commission, a justification under Article EC. 
         
            
 Whilst fully recognising the necessity for the Member States to establish a food policy intended to improve the state of the
         population's general health, the Commission maintains, none the less, that general preoccupations relating to the desired
         composition of the nutritional regime of the population of those States cannot constitute a lawful justification for obstacles
         to trade between them. 
         
            
 As regards the judgment in  
         Sandoz, cited above, the Commission maintains that the prohibition on marketing at issue in the proceedings which gave rise to that
         judgment was justified not by the absence of a nutritional need, but by the fact that the presence of two particular vitamins
         in the products in question in those proceedings posed a risk to public health. 
         
            
 The Commission submits that the interpretation by the Danish authorities of the judgment in  
         Sandoz is based on an erroneous  
         a contrario   deduction from paragraph thereof.  It maintains that that paragraph establishes only that a prohibition on marketing of
         foodstuffs to which vitamins have been added is contrary to the principle of proportionality when the addition meets a nutritional
         need.  Conversely, that judgment cannot be validly relied upon to support the argument that, in all cases where there is no
         nutritional need in the relevant population, the addition of vitamins to foodstuffs poses a risk to public health. 
         
            
 The Commission points out that a Member State which seeks to justify, by relying on Article EC, a prohibition on marketing
         a product lawfully manufactured and/or marketed in other Member States, such as that in issue in this case, must, in accordance
         with that provision, show that such prohibition is necessary for the protection of public health. 
         
            
 Referring to paragraph of the judgment of the EFTA Court of April in Case E-3/EFTASurveillance Authority v  
         Norway (EFTA Court Report 2000/01, p. 73), the Commission submits that the mere finding of the absence of a nutritional need is
         not enough to justify a general prohibition on foodstuffs enriched with vitamins or minerals.  Such a prohibition should at
         the very least be made subject to the condition that the risks to public health posed by the addition of such vitamins be
         proved by a detailed analysis of those risks. 
         
            
 According to the Commission, the Member State must show, in each case, by referring to the scientific data justifying the
         refusal of authorisation, the reasons why the vitamin and mineral content of the foodstuffs in question is a threat to public
         health. 
         
            
 As regards this case, the Commission claims, first, that general considerations such as those invoked by the Danish authorities
         with regard to the potential risk from excessive consumption of vitamins do not constitute sufficient proof of the existence
         of a risk to public health in relation to the addition of vitamins to foodstuffs.  Secondly, it argues that the fact that
         there is a specific risk associated with the ingestion of certain vitamins, such as vitamins A or D, does not justify a general
         or systematic prohibition on the enrichment of foodstuffs in all cases other than those covered by the Codex Alimentarius.
         
         
            
 For its part, the Danish Government maintains that the Court has already observed in the judgment in  
         Sandoz that, where Member States apply a prohibition on addition of vitamins, they do not have to show an actual risk associated
         with each foodstuff, such a task being impossible in the current state of scientific knowledge.  According to that government,
         in order to comply with the principle of proportionality, it is sufficient to establish that the enrichment of foodstuffs
         does not meet a nutritional need in the population concerned. 
         
            
 As regards the establishment of a risk to public health, the Danish Government submits that it is also clear from the judgment
         in  
         Sandoz that it is sufficient to determine that the ingestion of high doses of vitamins and minerals can have harmful effects, that
         scientific research is not yet in a position to lay down with certainty the critical limits or to determine the precise effects
         of such ingestion and that, therefore, the existence of a danger to human health cannot be excluded, since the consumer ingests
         additional quantities which it is not possible to foresee or monitor. 
         
            
 According to it, a specific evaluation of the danger on a case-by-case basis finds no support in the Court's case-law and
         would not be possible in practice.  The Danish Government claims that, in order to maintain a genuine view of the overall
         quantities of vitamins and minerals absorbed by the population through the consumption of foodstuffs, it is necessary to implement
         an overall policy of prevention, which takes into consideration the fact that the sources of absorption of such nutrients
         are many and which takes account of the complex interaction occurring in the course of the ingestion thereof and in the course
         of absorption of other substances important for the organism. 
         
            
 In that regard, the Danish Government refers to various scientific studies on vitamins and minerals which, according to it,
         show the harmful effect of the ingestion of those nutrients not only in large doses, but also in relatively low doses because
         of the way in which those nutrients combine.
         
            
 Thus, with regard to vitamins A, D and B 6, the Danish Government claims that, even in relatively low doses, it can be established
         that they have a toxic effect. 
         
            
 As regards the judgment in  
         EFTA Surveillance Authority v  
         Norway, cited above, to which the Commission refers, the Danish Government submits that it can be explained by the specific circumstances
         surrounding the treatment of the originating application submitted by the Kellogg's company in that case. 
         
            
 According to the Danish Government, for a prohibition on marketing to be justified on the basis of Article EC, it is not
         necessary to prove that the quantities of nutrients added to a given product are so large as to constitute a risk to public
         health. 
         
            
 It maintains, in addition, that the Court has already accepted, in particular in  
         Sandoz and in Case C-473/Toolex [2000] ECR I-5681, that the scientific uncertainty, which underlies the precautionary principle, can justify a prudent approach
         of Member States in relation to the existence of potential dangers. 
         
            
 The Danish Government adds that its administrative practice is directly inspired by the Codex Alimentarius to which the Court's
         case-law frequently refers. 
         
            
 In short, that government claims that its administrative practice is justified by the fact that there is a potential risk
         to public health inasmuch as vitamins and minerals are added to foodstuffs although, in Denmark, there is no nutritional need.
         
          Findings of the Court
         
            
 The free movement of goods between Member States is a fundamental principle of the EC Treaty which finds its expression in
         the prohibition, set out in Article EC, of quantitative restrictions on imports between Member States and all measures
         having equivalent effect. 
         
            
 The prohibition on measures having an effect equivalent to restrictions set out in Article EC covers all commercial rules
         enacted by the Member States which are capable of hindering, directly or indirectly, actually or potentially, intra-Community
         trade (see, in particular, Case 8/Dassonville [1974] ECR 837, paragraph 5; Case 178/Commission v  
         Germany [1987) ECR (
         Beer purity law), paragraph 27; and Case C-12/Commission v  
         Spain [2003] ECR I-459, paragraph 71). 
         
            
 It is not disputed that the Danish administrative practice is a measure having equivalent effect to quantitative restrictions
         within the meaning of Article EC. 
         
            
 Indeed, that practice, which requires that the marketing of foodstuffs enriched with vitamins and minerals coming from other
         Member States where they are lawfully manufactured or marketed be made subject to proof of a nutritional need in the Danish
         population, makes the marketing of such foodstuffs more difficult, if not impossible, and, consequently, hinders trade between
         the Member States. 
         
            
 As regards the question whether that administrative practice may none the less be justified on the basis of Article EC,
         it is for the Member States, in default of harmonisation and to the extent that uncertainties continue to exist in the current
         state of scientific research, to decide on their intended level of protection of human health and life and on whether to require
         prior authorisation for the marketing of foodstuffs, always taking into account the requirements of the free movement of goods
         within the Community (see  
         Sandoz, paragraph 16; Case C-42/Bellon [1990] ECR I-4863, paragraph 11; and Case C-400/Harpegnies [1998] ECR I-5121, paragraph 33). 
         
            
 That discretion relating to the protection of public health is particularly wide where it is shown that uncertainties continue
         to exist in the current state of scientific research as to certain substances, such as vitamins, which are not as a general
         rule harmful in themselves but may have special harmful effects solely if taken to excess as part of the general nutrition,
         the composition of which cannot be foreseen or monitored (see  
         Sandoz, paragraph 17). 
         
            
 Community law does not therefore, in principle, preclude a Member State from prohibiting, save for prior authorisation, the
         marketing of foodstuffs incorporating nutrients, such as vitamins or minerals other than those whose use is lawful under Community
         legislation. 
         
            
 However, in exercising their discretion relating to the protection of public health, the Member States must comply with the
         principle of proportionality.  The means which they choose must therefore be confined to what is actually necessary to ensure
         the safeguarding of public health;  they must be proportional to the objective thus pursued, which could not have been attained
         by measures which are less restrictive of intra-Community trade (see  
         Sandoz, paragraph 18;  
         Bellon, paragraph 14; and  
         Harpegnies, paragraph 34). 
         
            
 Furthermore, since Article EC provides for an exception, to be interpreted strictly, to the rule of free movement of goods
         within the Community, it is for the national authorities which invoke it to show in each case, in the light of national nutritional
         habits and in the light of the results of international scientific research, that their rules are necessary to give effective
         protection to the interests referred to in that provision and, in particular, that the marketing of the products in question
         poses a real risk to public health (see, to that effect,  
         Sandoz, paragraph 22; Case 227/Van Bennekom [1983] ECR 3883, paragraph 40;  
         Beer purity law, cited above, paragraph 46; and Case C-228/Commission v  
         Italy [1993] ECR I-2701, paragraph 27). 
         
            
 A prohibition on the marketing of foodstuffs to which nutrients have been added must therefore be based on a detailed assessment
         of the risk alleged by the Member State invoking Article EC (see, to that effect,  
         EFTA Surveillance Authority v  
         Norway, cited above, paragraph 30). 
         
            
 A decision to prohibit marketing, which indeed constitutes the most restrictive obstacle to trade in products lawfully manufactured
         and marketed in other Member States, can only be adopted if the real risk alleged for public health appears sufficiently established
         on the basis of the latest scientific data available at the date of the adoption of such decision.  In such a context, the
         object of the risk assessment to be carried out by the Member State is to appraise the degree of probability of harmful effects
         on human health from the addition of certain nutrients to foodstuffs and the seriousness of those potential effects. 
         
            
 It is clear that such an assessment of the risk could reveal that scientific uncertainty persists as regards the existence
         or extent of real risks to human health.  In such circumstances, it must be accepted that a Member State may, in accordance
         with the precautionary principle, take protective measures without having to wait until the reality and seriousness of those
         risks are fully demonstrated (see, to that effect, Case C-157/National Farmers' Union and Others [1998] ECR I-2211, paragraph 63).  However, the risk assessment cannot be based on purely hypothetical considerations (see,
         to that effect,  
         EFTA Surveillance Authority v  
         Norway, paragraph 29, and Case C-236/Monsanto Agricoltura Italia and Others [2003] ECR I-8105, paragraph 106).
         
            
 In assessing the risk in question, it is not only the particular effects of the marketing of an individual product containing
         a definite quantity of nutrients which are relevant.  It could be appropriate to take into consideration the cumulative effect
         of the presence on the market of several sources, natural or artificial, of a particular nutrient and of the possible existence
         in the future of additional sources which can reasonably be foreseen (see  
         EFTA Surveillance Authority v  
         Norway, paragraph 29). 
         
            
 In many cases, the assessment of those factors will demonstrate that there is a high degree of scientific and practical uncertainty
         in that regard.  A proper application of the precautionary principle presupposes, in the first place, the identification of
         the potentially negative consequences for health of the proposed addition of nutrients, and, secondly, a comprehensive assessment
         of the risk to health based on the most reliable scientific data available and the most recent results of international research
         (see, to that effect,  
         EFTA Surveillance Authority v  
         Norway, paragraph 30, and  
         Monsanto Agricoltura Italia and Others, paragraph 113). 
         
            
 Where it proves to be impossible to determine with certainty the existence or extent of the alleged risk because of the insufficiency,
         inconclusiveness or imprecision of the results of studies conducted, but the likelihood of real harm to public health persists
         should the risk materialise, the precautionary principle justifies the adoption of restrictive measures (see, to that effect,
          
         EFTA Surveillance Authority v  
         Norway, paragraph 31). 
         
            
 Such measures must not be allowed unless they are non-discriminatory and objective (see, to that effect,  
         EFTA Surveillance Authority v  
         Norway, paragraph 32). 
         
            
 It must be added that, in such a context, the criterion of the nutritional need of the population of a Member State can play
         a role in its detailed assessment of the risk which the addition of nutrients to foodstuffs may pose for public health.  However,
         contrary to the interpretation of the  
         Sandoz judgment suggested by the Danish Government, the absence of such a need cannot, by itself, justify a total prohibition, on
         the basis of Article EC, of the marketing of foodstuffs lawfully manufactured and/or marketed in other Member States. 
         
            
 In the present case, the Danish administrative practice is disproportionate since, apart from the four restrictively defined
         cases of what is considered to constitute a nutritional need and which are mentioned in paragraph of this judgment, it
         systematically prohibits the marketing of all foodstuffs to which vitamins and minerals have been added, without distinguishing
         according to the different vitamins and minerals added or according to the level of risk which their addition may possibly
         pose to public health. 
         
            
 Indeed, the systematic prohibition under the Danish administrative practice on the marketing of enriched products which do
         not meet a nutritional need of the population does not enable Community law to be observed in regard to the identification
         and assessment of a real risk to public health, which requires a detailed assessment, case-by-case, of the effects which the
         addition of the minerals and vitamins in question could entail. 
         
            
 In light of the foregoing, it must be declared that, by applying an administrative practice which entails that enriched foodstuffs
         lawfully produced or marketed in other Member States can be marketed in Denmark only if it is shown that such enrichment with
         nutrients meets a need in the Danish population, the Kingdom of Denmark has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article
         EC. 
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party's pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Kingdom of Denmark has
         been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT
 hereby:  
         
1.
 Declares that  
            by applying an administrative practice which entails that enriched foodstuffs lawfully produced or marketed in other Member
               States can be marketed in Denmark only if it is shown that such enrichment with nutrients meets a need in the Danish population,
               the Kingdom of Denmark has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC;
2.
 Orders the Kingdom of Denmark to pay the costs. 
Puissochet
Wathelet 
Schintgen 
Timmermans
Gulmann 
La Pergola 
Macken
Colneric 
von Bahr 
Cunha Rodrigues
Rosas 
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on September 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
J.-P. Puissochet  
Registrar
For the President
 –
            
 Language of the case: Danish.
Top  
 