
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-298/P 
Italian Republic
v
Commission of the European Communities
(Appeal – State aid – Transport of goods by road – Effect on trade between Member States and distortion of competition – Existing aid or new aid – Principles of proportionality and the protection of legitimate expectations – Statement of reasons)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Actions for annulment – Natural or legal persons – Measures of direct and individual concern to them – Examination by the
            Community judicature of its own motion
(EC Treaty, Art. (now, after amendment, Art. EC))
2.        Actions for annulment – Natural or legal persons – Measures of direct and individual concern to them – Commission decision
            prohibiting a sectoral aid scheme – Application made by an undertaking which is a beneficiary of individual aid granted under
            that scheme and which is to be repaid – Admissibility
(EC Treaty, Art. 173, fourth para. (now, after amendment, Article 230, fourth para., EC)) 
3.        State aid – Commission decision finding aid which has not been notified incompatible with the common market – Obligation to
            state reasons – Scope
(EC Treaty, Arts 93(3) and (now Arts 88(3) EC and EC)) 
4.        State aid – Effect on trade between Member States – Adverse effect on competition – Aid the individual amounts of which are
            relatively small but awarded in a sector characterised by strong competition
(EC Treaty, Art. 92(1) (now, after amendment, Art. 87(1) EC)) 
5.        State aid – Adverse effect on competition – State measures aimed at approximating the conditions of competition in a particular
            sector of the economy to those prevailing in other Member States
(EC Treaty, Art. 92(1) (now, after amendment, Art. 87(1) EC)) 
6.        State aid – Recovery of unlawful aid – Breach of the principle of proportionality – None – Discretionary power of the Commission
(EC Treaty, Art. 93(2), first para. (now Art. 88(2), first para., EC)) 
7.        State aid – Recovery of unlawful aid – No rule, prior to the entry into force of Regulation No 659/1999, prescribing a limitation
            period for the exercise by the Commission of its powers – Compliance with the requirements of legal certainty
(EC Treaty, Art. 93(2), first para. (now Art. 88(2), first para., EC)) 
8.        Community law – Interpretation – Acts of the institutions – Statement of reasons – To be taken into account
1.        Where a decision is not of individual concern to a natural or legal person within the meaning of Article of the Treaty
         (now, after amendment, Article EC), which is an essential condition for having locus standi in proceedings seeking judicial
         review of a Community act, such proceedings are inadmissible and that inadmissibility therefore constitutes a ground involving
         a question of public policy which may, and even must, be raised of its own motion by the Community judicature.
      
(see para. 35)
2.        Persons other than those to whom a decision is addressed may only claim to be individually concerned if that decision affects
         them by reason of certain attributes which are peculiar to them or by reason of circumstances in which they are differentiated
         from all other persons and by virtue of these factors distinguishes them individually just as in the case of the person addressed.
         Consequently, an undertaking cannot, in principle, contest a Commission decision prohibiting a sectoral aid scheme if it is
         concerned by that decision solely by virtue of belonging to the sector in question and being a potential beneficiary of the
         scheme.
      
Such a decision is, vis-à-vis the undertaking should it seek to contest the decision, a measure of general application covering
         situations which are determined objectively and entails legal effects for a class of persons envisaged in a general and abstract
         manner. However, the position is different for an undertaking which is not only concerned by the decision at issue by virtue
         of being an undertaking in the sector concerned and a potential beneficiary of the aid scheme in question, but also by virtue
         of being an actual recipient of individual aid granted under that scheme, the recovery of which has been ordered by the Commission.
      
(see paras 36-37, 39)
3.        In the course of the Commission’s assessment of new aid which, pursuant to Article 93(3) of the Treaty (now Article 88(3)
         EC), is to be notified to it before being put into effect, the Commission is required to establish, not whether such aid has
         a real impact on trade between Member States and on competition, but whether that aid could affect that trade. If the Commission
         had to demonstrate in its decision the real effect of aid already granted, such a requirement would have the effect of favouring
         Member States which grant aid in breach of the obligation to notify laid down in that article, to the detriment of those which
         do notify aid at the planning stage. 
      
(see para. 49)
4.        The relatively small amount of State aid or the relatively small size of the undertaking which receives it do not as such
         exclude the possibility that intra-Community trade might be affected. Aid of a relatively small amount is liable to affect
         competition and trade between Member States where there is strong competition in the sector in which the undertakings which
         receive it operate.
      
(see para. 54)
5.        The fact that a Member State seeks to approximate, by unilateral measures, conditions of competition in a particular sector
         of the economy to those prevailing in other Member States cannot deprive the measures in question of their character as State
         aid. 
      
(see para. 61)
6.        Abolishing unlawful aid by means of recovery is the logical consequence of a finding that it is unlawful. Consequently, the
         recovery of State aid unlawfully granted, for the purpose of restoring the previously existing situation, cannot in principle
         be regarded as disproportionate to the objectives of the Treaty in regard to State aid.
      
By repaying the aid, the recipient forfeits the advantage which it had enjoyed over its competitors on the market, and the
         situation prior to payment of the aid is restored. It also follows from that function of repayment of aid that, as a general
         rule, save in exceptional circumstances, the Commission will not exceed the bounds of its discretion if it asks the Member
         State to recover the sums granted by way of unlawful aid since it is only restoring the previous situation.
      
(see paras 75-76)
7.        In order to fulfil its function, a limitation period must be fixed in advance, the fixing of its duration and the detailed
         rules for its application coming within the powers of the Community legislature. As the latter had acted to fix a period of
         limitation in connection with the monitoring of aid granted under the Treaty only by means of Regulation No 659/1999, which
         entered into force only on April 1999, limitation cannot be relied on as regards a Commission decision requiring that unlawful
         aid prior to that date be recovered.
      
However, the fundamental requirement of legal certainty has the effect of preventing the Commission from indefinitely delaying
         the exercise of its powers. In that regard, a delay by the Commission in deciding that an aid is illegal and must be abolished
         and recovered by a Member State could in exceptional circumstances establish a legitimate expectation on the part of the recipients
         of that aid so as to prevent the Commission from requiring that Member State to order the refund of the aid.
      
In any event, in the case of State aid that has not been notified, such a delay may be imputed to the Commission only from
         the time when it learned of the existence of the aid incompatible with the common market.
      
(see paras 89-91)
8.        The operative part of an act is indissociably linked to the statement of reasons for it, so that, when it has to be interpreted,
         account must be taken of the reasons which led to its adoption. 
      
(see para. 97)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)April 2004(1)
(Appeal  –  State aid  –  Transport of goods by road  –  Effect on trade between Member States and distortion of competition  –  Existing aid or new aid  –  Principles of proportionality and the protection of legitimate expectations  –  Statement of reasons)
 In Case C-298/P,
            
Italian Republic, represented by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by G. Aiello, avvocato dello Stato, with an address for service
            in Luxembourg,
            
applicant,
 APPEAL against the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities (Fourth Chamber, Extended Composition)
            of June in Joined Cases T‑298/97, T‑312/97, T‑313/97, T‑315/97, T‑600/to T‑607/97, T‑1/98, T‑3/to T‑6/and
            T‑23/Alzetta and Others v Commission [2000] ECR II‑2319, seeking to have that judgment set aside,
            
 the other parties to the proceedings being:
            Commission of the European Communities, represented by V. Di Bucci, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            defendant at first instance,Impresa Edo Collorigh Edo and Others,  represented by V. Cinque, avvocato,Mauro Alzetta and Others,Masotti Srl and Others,Impresa Anna Maria Baldo and Others,SUTES SpA and Others,Ditta Pietro Stagno and Others,Ditta Carlo Fabris & C. Snc,Ditta Franco D'Odorico,Ditta Fiorindo Birri,Ditta Maria Cecilia Framalicco,Autotrasporti Claudio Di Viola & C. Snc, andImpresa Amedeo Musso,
applicants at first instance,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
 composed of: V. Skouris, acting for the President of the Sixth Chamber, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, J.‑P. Puissochet, R. Schintgen
            and F. Macken (Rapporteur), Judges,  
            
 Advocate General: S. Alber,Registrar: M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator,
            
 after hearing oral argument from the parties at the hearing on March 2003,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By application lodged at the Registry of the Court of Justice on August 2000, the Italian Republic brought an appeal pursuant
         to Article of the EC Statute of the Court of Justice against the judgment of June in Joined Cases T‑298/97, T‑312/97,
         T‑313/97, T‑315/97, T‑600/to T‑607/97, T‑1/98, T‑3/to T‑6/and T‑23/Alzetta and Others v Commission [2000] ECR II‑(hereinafter ‘the contested judgment’), in which the Court of First Instance partially dismissed the action
         for the partial annulment of Commission Decision 98/182/EC of July concerning aid granted by the Friuli-Venezia Giulia
         Region (Italy) to road haulage companies in the Region (OJ L 66, p. 18, hereinafter ‘the contested decision’). 
         
Legal framework and factual background
Legal framework
            
 The legal framework of the dispute was set out in the contested judgment as follows:
         
‘The general provisions on State aid set out in Articles of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) and and
               of the EC Treaty (now Articles EC and EC) apply within the field of transport, subject to the special provisions
               of Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC), which state that aids meeting the needs of coordination of transport or
               representing reimbursement for the discharge of certain obligations inherent in the concept of a public service are compatible
               with the Treaty.
            
Article of Council Regulation (EEC) No 1107/of June on the granting of aids for transport by rail, road and inland
               waterway (OJ, English Special Edition (II), p. 360), as last amended by Council Regulation (EC) No 543/of March
               (OJ L 84, p. 6), which is based on Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) and Articles
               and of the Treaty, confirms that Articles to of the Treaty are to apply in the field concerned. The regulation
               also lays down certain special rules on the aid in question in so far as they relate specifically to activities in that sector.
               It thus sets out the cases in and conditions on which Member States are entitled to adopt coordination measures or impose
               obligations inherent in the concept of a public service which involve the granting of State aid pursuant to Article of
               the Treaty.
            
Regarding the coordination of transport, Article 3(1)(d) of Regulation No 1107/authorises, until the entry into force of
               Community rules on access to the transport market, aid granted as an exceptional and temporary measure in order to eliminate,
               as part of a reorganisation plan, excess capacity causing serious structural problems, and thus to contribute towards meeting
               the needs of the transport market more effectively.
            
In the course of introducing a common transport policy, the international road haulage market was partially liberalised within
               the Community by Council Regulation No 1018/of July on the establishment of a Community quota for the carriage
               of goods by road between Member States (Journal Officiel L 175, p. 13), which introduced a quota system in 1969. In and 1992, for example, the Community quota consisted of and authorisations distributed among the various Member
               States in accordance with a specific formula. The Italian Republic was allocated authorisations in and in
               1992. Community authorisations permitted their holders to carry goods between Member States for a period of one year. This
               system was kept in force up to January 1993, the date on which this activity was fully liberalised by Council Regulation
               (EEC) No 881/of March on access to the market in the carriage of goods by road within the Community to or from
               the territory of a Member State or passing across the territory of one or more Member States (OJ L 95, p. 1).
            
Regarding the market for the carriage of goods within a Member State, Council Regulation (EEC) No 4059/of December laying down conditions under which non-resident carriers may operate national road haulage services within a Member State
               (OJ L 390, p. 3) made cabotage, that is to say, the carriage of goods within one Member State by a carrier established
               in another Member State, subject, with effect from July 1990, to a transitional system in the form of a progressively increasing
               Community quota. The total initial quota consisted of cabotage authorisations valid for a period of two months, allocated
               among the Member States according to a given formula. Within this framework, authorisations were allocated to the Italian
               Republic. Council Regulation (EEC) No 3118/of October laying down conditions under which non-resident carriers
               may operate national road haulage services within a Member State (OJ L 279, p. 1) provided for the continuance of this
               transitional system, in the form of a total initial Community quota of authorisations (including for the Italian
               Republic), increasing by 30% a year until the definitive introduction of the full liberalisation of cabotage activities with
               effect from July 1998.’
            
Factual background
            
 The facts set out in this paragraph are taken from the findings of fact made by the Court of First Instance in the contested
         judgment as follows: 
         
‘Articles 4, and of Friuli-Venezia Giulia Regional Law No of May 1981, on action to promote and develop transport
               of concern to the Friuli‑Venezia Giulia Region and the carriage of goods by road for hire or reward (“Law No 28/1981”), provided
               for certain aid for road haulage contractors established within that region.
            
The system introduced by Law No 28/was replaced by Regional Law No of January on action to promote and develop
               transport of concern to the Friuli-Venezia Giulia Region and the carriage of goods by road for hire or reward (… hereinafter
               “Law No 4/1985”). Articles to of Law No 4/introduced a system of regional aid that was essentially identical to the
               system set up by Law No 28/1981.
            
These laws provided for three measures in favour of road haulage contractors established in the Friuli-Venezia Giulia Region:
(a)
annual financing, over a maximum period of ten years, of up to 60% (for individual contractors) and 70% (for cooperatives
                     and groups) of the reference rate laid down by Ministerial Decree, of interest on loans contracted for the purpose of (Articles
                     of Laws No 28/and 4/1985):
                  
–
developing the contractor’s infrastructure (construction, purchase, expansion, completion and modernisation of premises required
                           for its operations, including those to be used for the warehousing, storage and handling of goods);
                        
–
purchasing, developing and renewing fixed and movable equipment, together with internal and road transport vehicles;
(b)
financing the cost of leasing, for a period of three or five years, new vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers and their swap-bodies,
                     suitable for the operation of road haulage, together with the installations, machinery and equipment for the use, maintenance
                     and repair of vehicles and for the handling of goods, up to the level of 25% (for individual contractors) and 30% (for cooperatives
                     and groups) of the purchase price of the assets. This aid, laid down in Article of Law No 28/and Article of Law No
                     4/1985, was reduced to 20% and then to 15% of the purchase price by subsequent regional laws;
                  
(c)
annual financing, for groups and other forms of association, of up to 50% of investment to be used for the construction or
                     purchase of installations and equipment required in pursuing the aims of the group or association, or contributing to the
                     operation and development of service centres for housing, maintenance and repair of vehicles or related facilities and equipment
                     (Article of Law No 28/and Article of Law No 4/1985).
                  
… the amount of credits earmarked for the aid referred to in Article of Law No 4/1985, for the period from to 1995,
               amounted to ITL million (EUR 6.million), and applications had been [accepted]. On average, the level of aid disbursed
               ranged from 13% to 26% of the cost of the loans and interest. The budget for the period to was ITL million (EUR
               0.million), and applications had been accepted during this period (section II of the contested decision).
            
… the budget allocated for the aid covered by Article of Law No 4/amounted to ITL million (EUR 11.million)
               for the period from to 1995, and applications had been accepted, with an average financing rate of around 19%,
               over that period. In 1993, applications had been accepted and the level of aid was 10%. From to 1985, applications
               had been [granted] and aid amounting to ITL million (EUR 2.million) had been disbursed (contested decision, section
               II).
            
According to the information sent by the Italian Government to the Commission [of the European Communities] after the initiation
               of the administrative procedure, aid granted under Article of Law No 4/was for investment in the combined transport
               sector (section II, seventh paragraph, of the contested decision). According to the contested decision (point VIII, seventh
               paragraph), that aid was between 10% to 15% of the total amount of aid allocated.
            
…
By letter of February the Commission informed the Italian Government of its decision to initiate the procedure provided
               by Article 93(2) of the Treaty in respect of the system of aid for commercial road hauliers laid down by Law No 4/and
               Law No 28/(OJ C 98, p. 16). It asked the Italian authorities and interested third parties to submit their observations
               and furnish all documents, information and data required in order to examine the compatibility of the aid in question with
               the common market. The Commission received the Italian Government’s observations on April …
            
On July 1997, the Commission closed the proceeding by adopting the contested decision. …’
            
 Section VI of the reasons for the contested decision states that, since the aid in dispute seeks to improve the competitive
         position of commercial road haulage companies in the Friuli‑Venezia Giulia Region (hereinafter ‘the Region’), by reducing
         their normal business running costs, whereas such costs have to be borne in full by their competitors outside the region,
         it benefited those companies and that specific activity in such a way that it was liable to produce a distortion of competition.
         
            
 First, the Commission makes a distinction, in section VII, third to eleventh paragraphs, of the reasons for the contested
         decision, between the road haulage market at local, regional and national level, on the one hand, and the international road
         haulage market, on the other. It points out that the former was not open to Community competition until Regulation No 4059/entered into force on July 1990. Consequently, aid granted before that date to carriers operating exclusively at local,
         regional or national level could not affect intra‑Community trade and therefore did not constitute State aid for the purposes
         of Article 92(1) of the Treaty. However, aid granted to those carriers after that date is State aid for the purposes of that
         provision, since it was capable of affecting trade between Member States.
         
            
 With regard to the international road haulage market, the Commission states, in section III, fourth paragraph, of the reasons
         for the contested decision, that it has been open to intra‑Community competition since 1969, when Regulation No 1018/entered
         into force. It infers from this, in section VII, last paragraph, of those reasons, that the aid provided for by Laws Nos 28/and 4/had strengthened the financial position and hence the scope of commercial haulage companies in the Region vis-à-vis
         their competitors since for companies engaged in international transport and was accordingly capable of affecting trade
         between Member States. That aid therefore constitutes State aid for the purposes of Article 92(1) of the Treaty and the local
         or limited nature of the competition represented by the regional hauliers cannot preclude the application of that provision.
         
            
 Next, in examining, in section VIII, ninth paragraph, of the contested decision, whether the aid thus characterised as State
         aid qualifies for a derogation, the Commission considers that the aid granted under Article of Law No 4/for financing
         equipment designed for combined transport can benefit from the exemption provided for in Article 3(1)(e) of Regulation (EEC)
         No 1107/70. None of the other derogations provided for by that article or by the Treaty was applicable to the other aid granted
         by the Region.
         
            
 Finally, section VIII, last paragraph, of the reasons for the contested decision states that aid granted under Laws Nos 28/and 4/to commercial road haulage companies in the Region engaged in local, regional or national transport operations
         from July onwards, as well as to those engaged in international transport operations, is incompatible with the common
         market within the meaning of Article of the Treaty. The Commission therefore concludes, in section IX of those reasons,
         that, since the Italian Government implemented the aid scheme in question without having fulfilled the obligation to notify
         it, the scheme should be regarded as illegal and recovery of the aid in question should be regarded as necessary in order
         to restore the fair conditions of competition which existed before that aid was granted.
         
            
 The operative part of the contested decision is worded as follows:
         ‘Article Subsidies granted under Laws No 28/and No 4/of the Friuli-Venezia Giulia Region (hereinafter referred to as “the
         subsidies”) up to July to companies exclusively engaged in transport operations at local, regional or national level
         do not constitute State aid within the meaning of Article 92(1) of the Treaty.
          Article The subsidies not covered by Article of this Decision constitute aid within the meaning of Article 92(1) of the Treaty and
         are illegal since they were introduced in breach of Article 93(3).
          Article The subsidies for financing equipment specifically adapted for, and used solely for, combined transport constitute aid within
         the meaning of Article 92(1) of the Treaty but are compatible with the common market by virtue of Article 3(1)(e) of Regulation
         (EEC) No 1107/70.
          Article The subsidies granted from July onwards to companies engaged in transport operations at a local, regional or national
         level and to companies engaged in transport operations at an international level are incompatible with the common market since
         they do not fulfil any of the conditions for derogation provided for in Article 92(2) and (3) of the Treaty, or the conditions
         provided for in Regulation (EEC) No 1107/70.
          Article Italy shall abolish and recover the aid referred to in Article 4. The aid shall be reimbursed in accordance with the provisions
         of domestic law, together with interest, calculated by applying the reference rates used for assessment of regional aid, as
         from the date on which the aid was granted and ending on the date on which it is actually repaid.
         …
          Article This Decision is addressed to the Italian Republic.’
         
            
 Following the adoption of the contested decision, the Region, which had suspended the granting of the aid in question from
         January onwards, abolished the system of aid provided for by Law No 4/and took the steps necessary to recover
         the aid already disbursed.
         
Procedure, forms of order sought and pleas in law before the Court of First Instance and the contested judgment
            
 It was in those circumstances that, by applications lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on December (T‑298/97), December (T‑312/and T‑313/97), December (T‑315/97), December (T‑600/to T‑607/97),
         January (T‑1/98), January (T‑3/to T‑6/98) and January (T‑23/98), certain of the undertakings in receipt
         of the aid in question brought an action for the partial annulment of the contested decision.
         
            
 By order of the President of the Fourth Chamber (Extended Composition) of September 1998, the Italian Republic was granted
         leave to intervene in support of the applicant undertakings at first instance (hereinafter ‘the applicants’).
         
            
 The Italian Republic also brought an action, by application lodged at the Registry of the Court of Justice on October 1997,
         registered under number C‑372/97, for the partial annulment of the contested decision or, in the alternative, the annulment
         of that decision only in so far as, in Article 5, it requires that Member State to recover the aid granted from July onwards. Those proceedings were stayed, by order of the Court of November 1998, pending delivery of the contested judgment.
         
            
 By their actions before the Court of First Instance, the applicants claimed that the Court should partially annul the contested
         decision or, in the alternative, annul it only in so far as, in Article 5, it requires the Italian Republic to recover the
         aid granted from July onwards, together with interest. In support of their claims, they put forward essentially four
         pleas for annulment.
         
            
 The first plea for annulment put forward alleged infringement of Article 92(1) of the Treaty. The applicants maintained that
         the Commission had erred in law by merely mentioning the simple possibility that trade between Member States might be affected,
         without demonstrating the existence of a real, concrete risk of distortion of competition. In this case, since the aid in
         question was of a modest amount, its recipients engaged in mainly regional operations and it had a compensatory function,
         that aid was not likely to affect trade between Member States or affect competition. The applicants also complained that the
         contested decision was vitiated by a failure to state reasons. 
         
            
 The Court of First Instance rejected that first plea in law on the grounds specified in paragraphs to of the contested
         judgment. It is apparent from those grounds, inter alia, that, on the one hand, the Commission was not required to establish
         that the aid in question had a real effect on trade between Member States and competition, and that, on the other hand, neither
         the allegedly trivial amount of that aid nor the relatively small size of the recipient undertakings and the fact that they
         operate at a local level necessarily led to the conclusion that the aid in question had no effect on the market and intra‑Community
         trade. Moreover, the complaint concerning inadequacy of the statement of reasons for the contested decision was also rejected
         by the Court of First Instance on the ground that, in that decision, the Commission had stated, concisely but clearly, the
         reasons why the aid in question was such as to affect trade between Member States and distort competition.
         
            
 The second plea for annulment put forward by the applicants alleged, firstly, infringement by the Commission of Articles 92(3)(a)
         and (c) of the Treaty and 3(1)(d) of Regulation No 1107/so far as concerns the interpretation of the derogating provisions
         of those articles and, secondly, failure to state reasons for the contested decision in that regard.
         
            
 The Court of First Instance rejected that second plea, holding, in paragraphs to of the contested judgment, that the
         contested decision cannot be regarded as vitiated by an error of law on that point or, moreover, by a failure to state reasons.
         
            
 The third plea for annulment put forward by the applicants maintained that, since the aid in question had been instituted
         by laws predating the liberalisation of the transport sector, it should not be classified as new aid, but should be regarded
         as existing aid.
         
            
 The Court of First Instance upheld that plea only in so far as it relates to aid granted to undertakings engaged solely in
         local, regional or national transport and rejected it so far as concerns those operating in the international road haulage
         sector. The grounds on which the Court of First Instance based its reasoning are the following:
         
‘According to established case-law, existing aid is aid introduced before the Treaty came into force or before the accession
               of the Member State concerned to the European Communities and aid which has been properly put into effect under the conditions
               laid down in Article 93(3) of the Treaty ([Case C‑387/92] Banco Exterior de España [[1994] ECR I‑877], paragraph 19, and Case C‑295/Piaggio [1999] ECR I-3735, paragraph 48).
            
Likewise, a system of aid established in a market that was initially closed to competition must, when that market is liberalised,
               be regarded as an existing aid system, since at the time of its establishment it did not come within the scope of Article
               92(1) of the Treaty, which, having regard to the requirements set out in that provision regarding effect on trade between
               Member States and repercussions on competition, applies only to sectors open to competition. 
            
…
In the present case, as the international road haulage sector had been opened up to competition by Regulation No 1018/with
               effect from 1969, the systems of aid in question, established in and 1985, came within the scope of Article 92(1) of
               the Treaty from the time of their introduction and should therefore be regarded as new systems of aid which should thus have
               been notified to the Commission pursuant to Article 93(3) of the Treaty.
            
On the other hand, as the cabotage market was liberalised by Regulation No 4059/only from July 1990, the systems of aid
               in question did not, at the time of their introduction in and 1985, come within the scope of Article 92(1) of the Treaty,
               as regards aid granted in the local, regional or national transport sector. 
            
It follows that aid to undertakings engaged solely in such a type of transport must be classified as existing aid and can
               be the subject, if at all, only of a decision finding it incompatible as to the future. 
            
Pursuant to Article 93(1) and (2) of the Treaty and in accordance with the principle of legal certainty, the Commission is,
               as part of its constant review of existing aid, only empowered to require the elimination or modification of such aid within
               a period which it is to determine. That aid can, therefore, lawfully be implemented as long as the Commission has not found
               it to be incompatible with the common market (Case C-47/Italy v Commission [1992] ECR I-4145, paragraphs and 25, and Banco Exterior de España, cited above, paragraph 20). 
            
…
The contested decision must therefore be annulled in so far as Article thereof declares aid granted with effect from July
               to undertakings engaged solely in local, regional or national transport to be illegal, and in so far as Article requires
               recovery of that aid.’
            
            
 The fourth plea for annulment put forward by the applicants was based on the fact that Article 4, to which Article of the
         contested decision refers in providing for the recovery of aid incompatible with the Treaty, unequivocally finds that the
         aid disbursed from July 1990, a date which applies not only to aid granted to undertakings engaged exclusively in local,
         regional or national transport, but also to aid granted to those engaged in international road haulage, was incompatible with
         the common market. They complain that the Commission acted in breach both of the principles of proportionality and the protection
         of legitimate expectations and of the obligation to state reasons so far as the recovery of the aid is concerned.
         
            
 The Court of First Instance also rejected that plea in law, on the grounds set out in paragraphs to of the contested
         judgment, which are based on the consideration that Article of the contested decision must be interpreted as covering the
         aid granted to undertakings engaged in local, regional or national transport from July onwards and that granted to
         undertakings engaged in international road haulage since the introduction of the aid systems in question.
         
            
 The Court of First Instance also held that, since the aid in question had not been notified to the Commission, the applicants
         had not established the existence of any specific factor which would give grounds for assuming that the obligation to reimburse
         individual aid granted to undertakings engaged in international road haulage was, in view of the effect of such aid on competition,
         manifestly disproportionate to the objectives of the Treaty or any exceptional circumstance of such a kind as to create legitimate
         expectations as to the lawfulness of such aid paid to undertakings engaged in international road haulage. It also concluded
         that the statement of reasons for the contested decision is adequate in that regard.
         
            
 The operative part of the contested judgment is worded as follows:
         
‘1.
Annuls Article of Commission Decision 98/182/EC of July concerning aid granted by the Friuli-Venezia Giulia Region
               (Italy) to road haulage companies in the Region in so far as it declares illegal aid granted after July to undertakings
               engaged exclusively in local, regional or national transport;
            
2.
Annuls Article of Decision 98/in so far as it requires the Italian Republic to recover that aid;
3.
Dismisses the remainder of the application;
4.
Orders each party to bear its own costs.’
The appeal
            
 By its appeal, the Italian Republic claims that the Court should:
         
–
partially set aside the contested judgment;
–
in the alternative, annul the contested decision in so far as it imposes the obligation to recover the subsidies granted,
               together with interest;
            
–
order the Commission to pay the costs.
            
 The Commission contends that the Court should:
         
–
dismiss the appeal;
–
set aside the contested judgment or, in the alternative, set it aside in so far as it partially annulled the contested decision;
–
order the Italian Republic and Impresa Edo Collorigh and Others (hereinafter ‘Collorigh and Others’), which were among the
               applicants at first instance, to pay the costs.
            
            
 In the pleading which they filed in response to the notification of the appeal, Collorigh and Others claim in essence that
         the Court should:
         
–
set aside the contested judgment in so far as it:
–
finds incompatible with the common market the aid granted to undertakings engaged in international road haulage operations
                     which received subsidies granted pursuant to Laws Nos 28/and 4/1985;
                  
–
classifies as ‘new aid’ the subsidies paid to undertakings which engaged in international road haulage operations during the
                     period from to 1995;
                  
–
orders the competent authorities of the Italian Republic to recover the allegedly illegal aid;
–
in the alternative, annul the contested decision in so far as it imposes the obligation to recover the subsidies granted,
               together with interest;
            
–
in the further alternative, annul the contested decision by limiting to the minimum amount the obligation to refund, taking
               account of the profit actually made by the undertakings concerned and of the tax burdens on them.
            
The cross‑appealArguments of the parties
            
 By its cross‑appeal, which must be examined first, the Commission claims that the Court of First Instance infringed both its
         obligation to satisfy itself of its own motion as to the admissibility of the actions brought at first instance and the fourth
         paragraph of Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, the fourth paragraph of Article EC), which lays down
         the criterion of individual concern. In the Commission’s view, the Court of First Instance should have held that those actions
         had to be declared inadmissible for lack of any such individual concern, since the applicants are unable to rely either on
         any attributes peculiar to them or on any circumstances by which they are distinguished from all other actual or potential
         recipients of the aid in question.
         
            
 Taking the view that the contested decision is a measure of general application, the Commission claims that it is not of individual
         concern to the applicants which are undertakings which have not claimed and cannot claim the slightest specific factor by
         which they are distinguished from other interested undertakings which did not participate in the formal procedure for reviewing
         the aid in question. More specifically, that decision did not infringe any of those applicants’ specific rights which were
         different from those of other undertakings in receipt of that aid. 
         
            
 In the Commission’s view, that analysis is confirmed by the case‑law (see, inter alia, Case 282/DEFI v Commission [1986] ECR and Joined Cases 67/85, 68/and 70/Van der Kooy and Others v Commission [1988] ECR 219) and is not invalidated by the judgment in Joined Cases C‑15/and C‑105/Italy and Sardegna Lines v Commission [2000] ECR I‑8855). In particular, the undertaking concerned in the case which gave rise to the latter judgment was in a
         different position, since it was not only affected by the Commission’s decision by virtue of being a potential beneficiary
         of the aid scheme, ‘but also by virtue of being an actual beneficiary of individual aid granted under that scheme, the recovery
         of which has been ordered by the Commission’.
         
            
 The Commission points out, inter alia, that, firstly, the order for recovery of the aid already paid out is only one of the
         aspects of the contested decision, which continues to apply to all recipients, including those which are only potentially
         so. It maintains, secondly, that it will be possible to determine the actual existence of an obligation imposed on each undertaking
         to repay the aid received only at the conclusion of complex investigations. Finally, if all the undertakings which received
         aid granted under schemes declared illegal and incompatible with the common market and recovery of which was ordered by a
         Commission decision were allowed to bring actions contesting that decision before the Court of First Instance, in cases where
         those undertakings did not bring actions, any reference for a preliminary ruling concerning the recovery of such aid would
         be declared inadmissible (see Case C‑188/TWD Textilwerke Deggendorf [1994] ECR I‑833, paragraphs and 26). The Commission is of the opinion that the perverse effect of such a situation would
         be to oblige recipient undertakings to contest the decision before the Court of First Instance within the limited period laid
         down for bringing an action for annulment, even before knowing whether, under national law, they will actually be required
         to repay the aid received, such an effect potentially weakening the judicial protection of those undertakings.
         
            
 The Commission is of the view that this plea of inadmissibility constitutes a ground involving a question of public policy. Consequently,
         since the Court of First Instance should have ascertained of its own motion whether the contested decision is of individual
         concern to the applicants, the Court of Justice must declare such a breach of that obligation. In the alternative, the Commission
         contends that the Court of Justice should itself examine the question of the admissibility of the actions brought at first
         instance. Giving judgment in accordance with the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, the
         latter could dismiss those actions as inadmissible.
         
Findings of the Court
            
 As a preliminary point, it must be observed that the Commission has abandoned its claims made in the alternative for the contested
         judgment to be set aside in so far as it partially annulled the contested decision.
         
            
 It must be recalled that Article of the Treaty, by virtue of which the Court of Justice is to review the legality of Community
         acts, provides that any natural or legal person may on grounds of lack of competence, infringement of an essential procedural
         requirement, infringement of this Treaty or of any rule of law relating to its application, or misuse of powers institute
         proceedings against a decision addressed to that person or against a decision which, although in the form of a regulation
         or a decision addressed to another person, is of direct and individual concern to the former.
         
            
 Where a decision is not of individual concern to a natural or legal person within the meaning of that provision, which is
         an essential condition for having locus standi in proceedings seeking judicial review of a Community act, such proceedings are inadmissible and that inadmissibility therefore
         constitutes a ground involving a question of public policy which may, and even must, be raised of its own motion by the Community
         judicature (see, with regard to a party having no interest in bringing or in maintaining an appeal, Case C‑19/P Rendo and Others v Commission [1995] ECR I‑3319, paragraph 13). 
         
            
 According to settled case‑law, persons other than those to whom a decision is addressed may only claim to be individually
         concerned if that decision affects them by reason of certain attributes which are peculiar to them or by reason of circumstances
         in which they are differentiated from all other persons and by virtue of these factors distinguishes them individually just
         as in the case of the person addressed (see, inter alia, judgments in Case 25/Plaumann v Commission [1963] ECR 95; Case C‑321/P Greenpeace Council and Others v Commission [1998] ECR I‑1651, paragraphs and 28, and Italy and Sardegna Lines v Commission, cited above, paragraph 32). 
         
            
 The Court has thus held that an undertaking cannot, in principle, contest a Commission decision prohibiting a sectoral aid
         scheme if it is concerned by that decision solely by virtue of belonging to the sector in question and being a potential beneficiary
         of the scheme. Such a decision is, vis-à-vis the undertaking should it seek to contest the decision, a measure of general
         application covering situations which are determined objectively and entails legal effects for a class of persons envisaged
         in a general and abstract manner (Van der Kooy and Others v Commission, cited above, paragraph 15; Case C-6/Federmineraria and Others v Commission [1993] ECR I‑6357, paragraph 14, and Italy and Sardegna Lines v Commission, paragraph 33).
         
            
 However, it is appropriate to recall the position adopted by the Court in the judgment in Italy and Sardegna Lines v Commission  with regard to Commission Decision 98/95/EC of October concerning aid granted by the Region of Sardinia (Italy) to
         shipping companies in Sardinia (OJ L 20, p. 30), which required the Italian Republic to recover from each beneficiary
         of the loans and leases in question the element of aid which they contained. In paragraphs and of that judgment, the
         Court held that, since Sardegna Lines was not only concerned by Decision 98/by virtue of being an undertaking in the shipping
         sector in Sardinia and a potential beneficiary of the aid scheme for Sardinian shipowners, but also by virtue of being an
         actual beneficiary of individual aid granted under that scheme, the recovery of which had been ordered by the Commission,
         it was individually concerned by that decision and its action directed against that decision was admissible.
         
            
 Contrary to what the Commission claims, that is precisely the case here, since the applicants are in a different position
         from that of applicants for whom a Commission decision is in the nature of a measure of general application. The former are
         not only concerned by the contested decision by virtue of being undertakings in the road haulage sector in the region and
         potential beneficiaries of the aid scheme in question, but also by virtue of being actual recipients of individual aid granted
         under that scheme, the recovery of which has been ordered by the Commission. As paragraphs and of the contested judgment
         show, the number of applications accepted and the amount budgeted for the aid in question during the periods from to
         and from to were specified in section II of the reasons for the contested decision and the Commission must
         therefore have known of the existence of those actual recipients. 
         
            
 Since it follows from the foregoing that, in this case, the actions brought by the applicants were admissible, the Court of
         First Instance did not err in law by not raising of its own motion, as a ground of inadmissibility, the point that those applicants
         were not individually concerned by the contested decision. 
         
            
 Accordingly, the Commission’s cross‑appeal must be dismissed as unfounded.
         
Substance
            
 In support of its appeal, the Italian Republic raises two pleas in law. By its first plea, it claims essentially that the
         Court of First Instance infringed Article 92(1) of the Treaty. By the first part of that plea, it submits that the Court of
         First Instance erred in law in interpreting that provision. By the second and third parts of that plea, it maintains that
         it was as a consequence of an error of assessment that the Court of First Instance held that the aid granted to undertakings
         engaged in international road haulage (hereinafter ‘the aid in dispute’) affected intra‑Community trade and competition and
         must therefore be regarded as new systems of aid and subject, as such, to the obligation to notify laid down in Article 93(3)
         of the Treaty. By the fourth part of that plea, it maintains that the contested judgment is vitiated by an inadequate statement
         of reasons as regards the effect of the aid in dispute on that trade. By its second plea, concerning the demand for recovery
         of that aid, the Italian Republic alleges that the Court of First Instance made an error of assessment and acted in breach
         of the principles of proportionality and the protection of legitimate expectations.
         
The first plea in law The first part of the first plea in law, alleging that the Court of First Instance erred in law in interpreting Article 92(1)
         of the Treaty
         
– Arguments of the parties
         
            
 The Italian Republic and Collorigh and Others maintain that the Court of First Instance erred in law by holding that Article
         92(1) of the Treaty must not be restrictively interpreted as requiring that the aid referred to by that provision have a real,
         concrete effect on intra‑Community trade. In their view, the Court of First Instance should have interpreted it as requiring
         that the Commission establish and specify in concrete terms whether any undertakings had suffered harm and, if so, how many
         were concerned.
         
            
 However, in the Commission’s view, it was not required, any more than the Court of First Instance was so required, to ascertain
         whether the aid measures had, in reality, harmed other Community undertakings. No such examination is required either by the
         wording of Article of the Treaty, which simply makes reference to a threat of distortion of competition, or by the scheme
         of that provision. Moreover, such an examination is almost impossible to carry out, in particular in fragmented markets characterised
         by the presence of a very large number of operators. 
         
– Findings of the Court
         
            
 It must be noted in that regard that Article 92(1) of the Treaty defines the aid regulated by it as being any aid granted
         by a Member State or through State resources in any form whatsoever which distorts or threatens to distort competition by
         favouring certain undertakings or the production of certain goods, in so far as it affects trade between Member States.
         
            
 The procedural rules laid down by the Treaty vary depending on whether aid is existing aid or new aid.
         
            
 With regard to existing aid, under the provisions of Article 93(1) and (2) of the Treaty and in accordance with the principle
         of legal certainty, in the context of its constant review of such aid, if, after giving notice to the parties concerned to
         submit their comments, the Commission finds that that aid is not compatible with the common market having regard to Article
         of the Treaty, or that such aid is being misused, it is to decide that the State concerned must abolish or alter such aid
         within a period of time to be determined by the Commission. Such aid may therefore be lawfully put into effect as long as
         the Commission has not found it to be incompatible (see judgments in Italy v Commission, cited above, paragraphs and 25, and Banco Exterior de España, cited above, paragraph 20).
         
            
 With regard to new aid, Article 93(3) of the Treaty provides that the Commission is to be informed, in sufficient time to
         enable it to submit its comments, of any plans to grant or alter aid. It then undertakes an initial examination of the planned
         aid. If, following that examination, it considers that any such plan is not compatible with the common market, it must without
         delay initiate the procedure provided for in paragraph of that article. In such circumstances, the Member State concerned
         must not put its proposed measures into effect until the procedure has resulted in a final decision. New aid is therefore
         subject to a precautionary review by the Commission and may not, in principle, be put into effect until such time as the latter
         has declared it compatible with the Treaty.
         
            
 As the Court of First Instance held inter alia, in paragraphs to of the contested judgment, in the course of the Commission’s
         assessment of new aid which, pursuant to Article 93(3) of the Treaty, is to be notified to it before being put into effect,
         the Commission is required to establish, not whether such aid has a real impact on trade between Member States and on competition,
         but whether that aid could affect that trade. If the Commission had to demonstrate in its decision the real effect of aid
         already granted, such a requirement would have the effect of favouring Member States which grant aid in breach of the obligation
         to notify laid down in Article 93(3) of the Treaty, to the detriment of those which do notify aid at the planning stage (Case
         C-301/France v Commission [1990] ECR I-307, ‘Boussac Saint Frères’, paragraphs and 33).
         
            
 Consequently, the Court of First Instance was fully entitled to hold, in paragraph of the contested judgment, that it was
         not necessary to establish that certain Community undertakings had been adversely affected by the granting of the aid in dispute. This
         first part of the first plea, alleging that the Court of First Instance erred in law in interpreting Article 92(1) of the
         Treaty, must therefore be rejected as unfounded.
         
 The second part of the first plea in law, relating to the impact of the aid in dispute on intra‑Community trade and competition
         
– Arguments of the parties
         
            
 The Italian Republic and Collorigh and Others maintain that the Court of First Instance should have concluded, having regard
         inter alia to certain relevant documents in the file, that the aid in dispute had no impact on intra‑Community trade and competition.
         In the first place, due to the fact that, on the one hand, that aid represented a very modest total amount and, on the other
         hand, the road hauliers of the Region constituted a completely marginal group of the intra‑Community transport sector, the
         impact of that aid was bound to be absolutely insignificant. In the second place, the international road haulage sector, which
         was characterised by quotas and bilateral agreements, could not at that stage yet be regarded as being completely liberalised.
         Moreover, the Court of First Instance should have demonstrated that the Community quota in force on the international road
         haulage market had not been exhausted, although, in this instance, it has been. In the third place, in the view of Collorigh
         and Others, the Court of First Instance should have ruled out the possibility that the system of aid in dispute might strengthen
         the financial position of the recipient undertakings, since the objective of that aid was to compensate for the competition
         from Austrian, Croatian and Slovenian operators. 
         
            
 The Commission contends, firstly, that the application of a system of aid which is such as to favour not only one undertaking
         but an entire sector, in particular where the presence of a large number of small undertakings is a feature of the market
         structure, is bound to affect trade. As the Court of First Instance rightly points out in paragraph of the contested judgment,
         in such a context, the effects on competition and trade of even relatively modest aid may not be negligible, and such aid
         cannot be regarded as of little importance.
         
            
 Secondly, in the international road haulage sector, there existed in Italy, even before 1969, a certain degree of competition
         under the bilateral agreements concluded by the Italian Republic. In and 1985, when the systems of aid in dispute were
         instituted, the Community quotas allowed all hauliers in possession of the required authorisations to establish any transport
         link between two Member States and created or strengthened a competitive relationship between undertakings established in
         different Member States, as the Court of First Instance pointed out in paragraph of the contested judgment. Indeed, on
         this same point, the Court of First Instance correctly stated the reasons which led it to consider that the advantages granted
         to the international road haulage undertakings constitute State aid for the purposes of the Treaty. 
         
– Findings of the Court
         
            
 In the first place, it should be recalled that, according to settled case‑law, the relatively small amount of aid or the relatively
         small size of the undertaking which receives it do not as such exclude the possibility that intra-Community trade might be
         affected (see Case C-142/Belgium v Commission [1990] ECR I-959, ‘Tubemeuse’, paragraph 43; Joined Cases C‑278/to C‑280/Spain v Commission [1994] ECR I‑4103, paragraph 42, and Case C‑280/Altmark Trans and Regierungspräsidium Magdeburg [2003] ECR I‑7747, paragraph 81). Aid of a relatively small amount is liable to affect competition and trade between Member
         States where there is strong competition in the sector in which the undertakings which receive it operate (see Case 259/France v Commission [1987] ECR 4393, paragraph 24, and Case C‑351/Spain v Commission [2002] ECR I‑8031, paragraph 63).
         
            
 The Court of First Instance, having declared that that case‑law applied to the present case, was fully entitled to hold, firstly,
         in paragraphs and of the contested judgment, that the small size of the recipient undertakings and the relatively small
         amount of aid allocated did not mean that there was no effect on competition and trade where, as in the road haulage sector,
         the presence of a large number of small‑sized undertakings was a feature of the market structure. Secondly, as the Court of
         First Instance pointed out in paragraph of the contested judgment, although hauliers from the Region played only a small
         part in that sector, the limited nature of the competition cannot preclude the application of Article 92(1) of the Treaty. It
         therefore concluded, in the same paragraph, that the aid in dispute strengthened the financial position and hence the scope
         of commercial haulage companies in the Region vis-à-vis their competitors and might accordingly affect trade between Member
         States.
         
            
 Since the Italian Republic has not put forward any evidence that the Court of First Instance failed, in this case, to have
         regard to the principles recognised by the Court of Justice in the case‑law mentioned in paragraph of the present judgment,
         that argument concerning the impact of the aid in dispute on intra‑Community trade and competition must be rejected as unfounded.
         
            
 In the second place, the argument put forward by the Italian Republic and Collorigh and Others that the Court of First Instance
         should have concluded that the international road haulage sector, characterised as it was by the existence of quotas and bilateral
         agreements, could not yet be regarded as being fully liberalised on the date of the contested decision and that, consequently,
         the aid in dispute could not be regarded as affecting competition, must be rejected as unfounded.
         
            
 In paragraph of the contested judgment, the Court of First Instance noted that, by virtue of the relevant provisions of
         Regulation No 1018/68, Community authorisations issued in the carrier’s name and usable only for one vehicle were granted
         under national quotas, for a period of one year in the case of international road haulage, holders of an international road
         haulage authorisation being entitled, during those periods of validity, to transport goods without limitation, with one vehicle,
         between Member States of their choice.
         
            
 The Court of First Instance was therefore fully entitled to conclude that the quota schemes in force on the international
         road haulage market from to allowed the introduction, within the limit of the quotas laid down, of an effective
         competitive situation which was capable of being affected by the grant of the aid in dispute.
         
            
 In that regard, the Court of First Instance was also fully entitled to hold, in paragraph of the contested judgment, that,
         even assuming that the Community quota had been exhausted, that factor would not necessarily have led to the conclusion that
         the aid in dispute had no effect on intra-Community trade and competition. In view of the free choice given by quota schemes
         to holders of Community authorisations as regards the Member States between which they may provide international haulage services,
         exhaustion of the quotas would in any event not furnish any information as to the use made of them, in particular in the case
         of such haulage services from or to Italy or, more specifically, the Region.
         
            
 In the third place, according to settled case-law, the fact that a Member State seeks to approximate, by unilateral measures,
         conditions of competition in a particular sector of the economy to those prevailing in other Member States cannot deprive
         the measures in question of their character as aid (Joined Cases 6/and 11/Commission v France [1969] ECR 523, paragraphs and 21, and Case C-6/Italy v Commission [1999] ECR I-2981, paragraph 21).
         
            
 It follows that the Court of First Instance was fully entitled to hold, in paragraph of the contested judgment, that the
         aid in dispute could be justified neither by the existence of higher discount rates in Italy nor by competition from operators
         established in Austria, Croatia or Slovenia. The argument put forward by Collorigh and Others that the Court of First Instance
         should have ruled out the possibility that the system of aid in question strengthened the financial position of the recipient
         undertakings, since that aid was such as to compensate for that competition, must be rejected as unfounded. 
         
            
 Accordingly, the second part of the first plea in law, relating to the impact of the aid in dispute on intra‑Community trade
         and competition, must be rejected in its entirety as unfounded.
         
 The third part of the first plea in law, alleging error of assessment of the aid in dispute as new aid 
         
– Arguments of the parties
         
            
 The Italian Republic and Collorigh and Others dispute the assessment made by the Court of First Instance in paragraph of the contested judgment that, since the aid in dispute came within the scope of Article 92(1) of the Treaty from the time
         of its introduction, it therefore had to be regarded as new systems of aid which should thus have been notified pursuant to
         Article 93(3) of the Treaty. In their view, the Court of First Instance should have found that such aid, which was instituted
         in and in a market which was not fully liberalised, had to be classified as existing aid and could be the subject
         only, if at all, of a decision finding it incompatible as to the future.
         
            
 The Commission, on the other hand, while not disputing the interpretation of existing aid adopted by the Court of First Instance
         in paragraphs and of the contested judgment, nevertheless points out that it is a very broad understanding of the
         concept of existing aid. In any event, since the aid in dispute had been instituted in and in a sector open to competition,
         it came within the scope of Article 92(1) of the Treaty and had to be regarded as new aid.
         
– Findings of the Court
         
            
 In this case, as the Court of First Instance has already correctly pointed out in paragraph of the contested judgment, the
         international road haulage sector had already been partially opened up to Community competition from onwards by Regulation
         No 1018/and has been fully liberalised since January 1993.
         
            
 The Court of First Instance inferred from that, in paragraph of the contested judgment, that the aid in dispute strengthened
         the financial position and hence the scope of commercial haulage companies in the Region vis-à-vis their competitors and might
         accordingly affect trade between Member States.
         
            
 Having been instituted in and 1985, that aid therefore came within the scope of Article 92(1) of the Treaty from the
         time of its introduction. It follows that, in finding in paragraph of the contested judgment that the aid in question
         had therefore to be regarded as new systems of aid which should thus have been notified pursuant to Article 93(3) of the Treaty,
         the Court of First Instance did not err in law.
         
            
 Accordingly, the third part of the first plea in law, alleging an error of assessment of the aid in dispute as new aid, must
         be rejected.
         
 The fourth part of the first plea in law, alleging failure to state grounds for the contested judgment
         
            
 So far as concerns the fourth part of the first plea in law, alleging failure to state grounds for the contested judgment
         as regards the impact of the aid in dispute on intra‑Community trade, it should be pointed out that the Court of First Instance
         set out in detail, in paragraphs to of the contested judgment, the reasons which had led the Commission to take the
         view that such aid was liable to affect trade between Member States and distort competition.
         
            
 Accordingly, the fourth part of the first plea in law, alleging failure to state grounds for the contested judgment, must
         be rejected as unfounded.
         
            
 In the light of the foregoing considerations, none of the four parts of the first plea in law can be upheld and, accordingly,
         that plea in law must be rejected in its entirety as unfounded.
         
The second plea in law
            
 By its second plea in law, which comprises three parts, the Italian Republic complains that the Court of First Instance erred
         in law in so far as it held that the contested decision, in requiring the recovery of the aid in dispute, together with interest,
         is compatible with the principles of proportionality and the protection of legitimate expectations and that it failed to have
         regard to the extent of the obligation to recover that aid. 
         
 The first part of the second plea in law, alleging breach of the principle of proportionality
         
– Arguments of the parties
         
            
 By the first part of the second plea in law, Collorigh and Others maintain that the Court of First Instance should have found
         that the Commission failed to provide evidence that recovery of the aid in dispute was either reasonable or necessary. The
         Italian Republic, for its part, points out that, although that aid had an insignificant impact on the situation of the recipient
         undertakings, its repayment would place a very heavy burden on them, liable to result in economic disaster for many of them.
         
– Findings of the Court
         
            
 According to settled case‑law, correctly cited by the Court of First Instance in paragraph of the contested judgment,
         abolishing unlawful aid by means of recovery is the logical consequence of a finding that it is unlawful. Consequently, the
         recovery of State aid unlawfully granted, for the purpose of restoring the previously existing situation, cannot in principle
         be regarded as disproportionate to the objectives of the Treaty in regard to State aids (see Tubemeuse, cited above, paragraph 66, and Case C‑169/Spain v Commission [1997] ECR I-135, paragraph 47).
         
            
 By repaying the aid, the recipient forfeits the advantage which it had enjoyed over its competitors on the market, and the
         situation prior to payment of the aid is restored (see Case C‑350/Commission  v Italy [1995] ECR I‑699, paragraph 22). It also follows from that function of repayment of aid that, as a general rule, save in
         exceptional circumstances, the Commission will not exceed the bounds of its discretion, recognised by the case-law of the
         Court, if it asks the Member State to recover the sums granted by way of unlawful aid since it is only restoring the previous
         situation (see Case C‑75/Belgium v Commission [1999] ECR I‑3671, paragraph 66, and Case C‑310/Italy v Commission [2002] ECR I‑2289, paragraph 99).
         
            
 With regard to the argument put forward by Collorigh and Others that repayment of the aid in dispute would place a very heavy
         burden on the recipient undertakings, liable to cause many of them to disappear from the market and so giving rise to a serious
         employment and social crisis, making such recovery of the aid impossible in practice, it is sufficient to point out that the
         circumstances relied on by Collorigh and Others are by no means sufficient to demonstrate the impossibility of recovering
         the aid in dispute. They are merely potential internal difficulties.
         
            
 In accordance with the case‑law of the Court, the apprehension of internal difficulties cannot justify a failure by a Member
         State to comply with its obligations under Community law (see, inter alia, Case C‑404/Commission v Portugal [2000] ECR I‑4897, paragraph 52; Case C‑310/Italy v Commission, cited above, paragraph 105, and Case C‑404/Commission v Spain [2003] ECR I‑6695, paragraph 55).
         
            
 In those circumstances, the Court of First Instance was fully entitled to conclude, in paragraph of the contested judgment,
         that no specific evidence had been put forward to show that the obligation to reimburse the aid in dispute is disproportionate
         to the objectives of the Treaty. 
         
            
 Accordingly, the first part of the second plea in law, by which the Italian Republic alleges that the Court of First Instance
         failed to observe the principle of proportionality, must be rejected.
         
 The second part of the second plea in law, alleging breach of the principle of the protection of legitimate expectations
         
– Arguments of the parties
         
            
 Although the Italian Republic does not dispute the Court’s case‑law which, in general, does not permit a Member State which
         has granted aid incompatible with the common market to plead the legitimate expectations of the recipients in order to avoid
         the obligation to recover that aid, it does claim, by the second part of its second plea in law, that that principle could
         be reformulated, in particular in cases such as this where the measure has been applied over a very long period without giving
         rise to any objection and has even been lawful and compatible with the Treaty for a large proportion of that period. 
         
            
 The Italian Republic maintains, firstly, that a limitation, by the operative part of the contested decision, of the temporal
         effect of the obligation to recover the aid in dispute would be justifiable in this case, since that was aid which had been
         instituted and paid out for more than years at the time when the Commission initiated the procedure, namely in November
         1995, and, secondly, that the contested judgment constitutes a reformatio in pejus of that decision, thus failing to observe the principles of the protection of legitimate expectations and legal certainty. It
         is precisely to prevent the adoption of acts regarding legal and economic situations which have been consolidated over time
         that Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 659/of March laying down detailed rules for the application of
         Article of the EC Treaty (OJ L 83, p. 1) rightly provides that the power of the Commission to act to recover illegal
         aid is to be subject to a limitation period of years which starts to run from the date on which the aid was granted. Although
         that provision is not applicable, ratione temporis, to this case, some helpful criteria may be drawn from it for the purpose of placing reasonable limits on the temporal scope
         for recovery of the aid in dispute. 
         
            
 Collorigh and Others concur with that view, while pointing out that the assertion by the Court of First Instance in paragraph
         of the contested judgment, that the undertakings in receipt of that aid were precluded from relying on any exceptional
         circumstances on the basis of which they might legitimately have assumed that aid to be lawful, and therefore from declining
         to repay it, is incorrect. In their opinion, the Court of First Instance took into account many factors which could certainly
         be described as exceptional circumstances. 
         
            
 The Commission replies that, in paragraphs and of the contested judgment, the Court of First Instance rightly refused
         to find that there were exceptional circumstances of such a kind as to create legitimate expectations as to the lawfulness
         of the aid in dispute.
         
            
 In the Commission’s view, the Italian Republic has not put forward any convincing argument to refute that conclusion. First,
         in the absence of any limitation period, the claim that the measures had been applied for or years when the Commission
         initiated the formal review procedure is irrelevant and the reference to Article of Regulation No 659/is misplaced.
         Second, it is wrong to claim that the measure in question was ‘lawful and compatible with the Treaty for a long period of
         time’. On the contrary, that measure was never lawful since it was not notified. Moreover, when the Commission had the opportunity
         to examine it, it found it to be incompatible with the common market and its decision was confirmed by the contested judgment
         which is not criticised in that respect. Finally, contrary to what is claimed by the Italian Republic, that incompatibility
         did not occur suddenly but characterised the aid in dispute from the date on which it was instituted.
         
– Findings of the Court
         
            
 It must be pointed out that a recipient of illegally granted aid is not precluded from relying on exceptional circumstances
         on the basis of which it had legitimately assumed the aid to be lawful and thus declining to refund that aid. If such a case
         is brought before a national court, it is for that court to assess the material circumstances, if necessary after obtaining
         a preliminary ruling on interpretation from the Court of Justice (Case C‑5/Commission v Germany [1990] ECR I‑3437, paragraph 16, and Case C‑310/Italy v Commission, cited above, paragraph 103).
         
            
 In the present case, the Court of First Instance first of all found, in paragraph of the contested judgment, that the
         aid in dispute had been granted without having been notified to the Commission beforehand, contrary to the obligation imposed
         on Member States by Article 93(3) of the Treaty.
         
            
 Secondly, the Court of First was fully entitled to conclude, in the same paragraph of the contested decision, that the fact
         that the recipient undertakings are small undertakings cannot justify a legitimate expectation on their part as to the lawfulness
         of that aid.
         
            
 Finally, in so far as the Italian Republic claims that, since the recipient undertakings had relied on the lawfulness of aid
         instituted and paid out over many years, the Court of First Instance should have concluded that that long period had given
         rise to legitimate expectations on the part of those recipients with regard to recovery of the aid in dispute, which, as the
         Court of Justice has already held, justified a temporal limitation of the power held by the Commission, it is sufficient to
         reply that, in order to fulfil its function, such a limitation period must be fixed in advance, the fixing of its duration
         and the detailed rules for its application coming within the powers of the Community legislature (see, to that effect, Case
         52/Geigy v Commission [1972] ECR 787, paragraph 21). On the date of the contested decision, the latter had not yet acted to fix a period of limitation
         in connection with the monitoring of aid granted under the Treaty, since Regulation No 659/1999, having only entered into
         force on April 1999, does not apply to the facts of this case.
         
            
 However, the fundamental requirement of legal certainty has the effect of preventing the Commission from indefinitely delaying
         the exercise of its powers (see Geigy v Commission, cited above, paragraphs and 21, and Joined Cases C‑74/P and C‑75/P Falck and Acciaierie di Bolzano v Commission [2002] ECR I‑7869, paragraph 140). In that regard, a delay by the Commission in deciding that an aid is illegal and must
         be abolished and recovered by a Member State could in certain circumstances establish a legitimate expectation on the part
         of the recipients of that aid so as to prevent the Commission from requiring that Member State to order the refund of the
         aid (see Case 223/RSV v Commission [1987] ECR 4617, paragraph 17). However, the facts of the case giving rise to that judgment were exceptional and bear no
         resemblance to those in the present case. The measure at issue in that judgment concerned a sector which had for some years
         been receiving State aid approved by the Commission and its object was to meet the additional costs of an operation which
         had already received authorised aid (Case C‑334/Germany v Commission [2003] ECR I‑1139, paragraph 44).
         
            
 In any event, in the case of State aid that has not been notified, such a delay may be imputed to the Commission only from
         the time when it learned of the existence of the aid incompatible with the common market.
         
            
 In this case, it is common ground that the Commission learned of the aid in dispute only in September 1995. In view, firstly,
         of the fact that such aid had not been authorised by the Commission and, secondly, of the fact that the Commission was not
         aware of the complex situation in which that aid had been granted, it was therefore necessary, before reaching a decision,
         to carry out an investigation. In those circumstances, the time which elapsed between September and the date of adoption
         of the contested decision, namely July 1997, is reasonable. Consequently, the Court of First Instance cannot be considered
         to have failed to observe the principle of the protection of legitimate expectations in that regard. 
         
            
 Accordingly, the second part of the second plea in law must be rejected.
         
 The third part of the second plea in law, relating to the extent of the obligation to recover the aid in dispute
         
– Arguments of the parties
         
            
 By the third part of its second plea in law, the Italian Republic maintains that Article of the contested decision, to which
         Article refers in providing for recovery of the aid incompatible with the Treaty, makes no distinction between the aid to
         undertakings engaged in local, regional or national transport and the aid to those engaged in international road haulage and
         that Article unequivocally finds that all the aid paid out from July onwards by the Region is incompatible. Consequently,
         the principle that, in circumstances where the operative part of a decision is equivocal, it is possible to make reference
         to the reasons for that decision is irrelevant in this case.
         
            
 The Commission replies that it is not clear whether the date of July 1990, mentioned in Article of the contested decision,
         refers only to the subsidies granted to undertakings engaged in local, regional or national transport or whether it also refers
         to those granted to undertakings engaged in international road haulage. However, as the Court of First Instance correctly
         pointed out in paragraphs and of the contested judgment, the reasons for the contested decision dispel any doubt in
         that regard and make it clear that the temporal limit of July applies only to the aid granted to the first category
         of undertakings and does not concern the undertakings in the second category. Indeed, the analysis set forth by the Court
         of First Instance in paragraph of that judgment, which is based on taking the operative part of the contested decision
         as a whole into consideration, invalidates that view put forward by the Italian Republic.
         
– Findings of the Court
         
            
 Contrary to what the Italian Republic claims, the Court of First Instance, in paragraph of the contested judgment, rightly
         found that Article of the contested decision is worded equivocally as regards the requirement of recovery, which could refer
         either to all the aid in dispute granted since its introduction or only to the aid granted from July onwards. 
         
            
 In any event, it should be pointed out that, in paragraph of the contested judgment, the Court of First Instance started
         from the general principle that the operative part of an act is indissociably linked to the statement of reasons for it, so
         that, when it has to be interpreted, account must be taken of the reasons which led to its adoption (see, inter alia, Case
         C‑355/P TWD v Commission [1997] ECR I‑2549, paragraph 21, and Case C‑404/Commission v Portugal, cited above, paragraph 41).
         
            
 In that regard, in paragraphs and of the contested judgment, the Court of First Instance concluded, firstly, that,
         in the light of the reasons for the contested decision, and in particular section VIII, last paragraph, of those reasons,
         Article of that decision must be interpreted as meaning that the aid granted under Laws Nos 28/and 4/with effect
         from July to undertakings engaged in local, regional or national transport and that granted to undertakings engaged
         in international road haulage since the introduction of the aid in dispute are incompatible with the common market.
         
            
 Secondly, in paragraph of the contested judgment, the Court of First Instance held that that interpretation is clear from
         a reading of the operative part of the contested decision taken as a whole. Such an analysis does not reflect an error of
         assessment on the part of the Court of First Instance.
         
            
 It follows that the third part of the second plea in law, relating to the extent of the obligation to recover the aid in dispute,
         must be rejected.
         
            
 In the light of the foregoing considerations, the second plea in law in support of the appeal must be rejected in its entirety.
         
            
 Since none of the pleas in law put forward by the Italian Republic in support of its appeal can be upheld, the appeal must
         be dismissed.
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, which applies to the appeal procedure by virtue of Article of those Rules,
         the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings.
         However, under the first subparagraph of Article 69(3) of those Rules, where each party succeeds on some and fails on other
         heads, the Court may order that the parties bear their own costs. Since the Italian Republic and Collorigh and Others have
         failed in their pleas in the main appeal and the Commission has failed in its pleas in the cross-appeal, they must each be
         ordered to bear their own costs.
         
On those grounds,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
 hereby:
         
 
1.
Dismisses the appeal and the cross‑appeal;
 
2.
Orders the Italian Republic, Impresa Edo Collorigh and Others and the Commission of the European Communities to pay their
                     own costs.
                  
Skouris
Cunha Rodrigues
Puissochet
Schintgen
Macken
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on April 2004.
         
R. Grass
V. Skouris
Registrar
President of the Sixth Chamber
 –
            
Language of the case: Italian.
Top  
 