
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-318/Bacardi-Martini SAS and Cellier des DauphinsvNewcastle United Football Company Ltd(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the High Court of Justice of England and Wales, Queen's Bench Division)
         
«(Reference for a preliminary ruling – Freedom to provide services – Refusal to display advertisements for alcoholic drinks at a sporting event taking place in a Member State whose law allows
               television advertising for alcoholic drinks but being broadcast on television in another Member State whose law prohibits
               such advertising – Relevance of the questions for the outcome of the main proceedings)»
            
Opinion of Advocate General Tizzano delivered on September I - Judgment of the Court, January I - Summary of the Judgment
Preliminary rulings – Jurisdiction of the Court – Limits – Question aimed at enabling the national court to assess the compatibility with Community law of legislation of another Member
                     State – Special vigilance on the part of the Court
                  (Art. EC)In order that the Court may perform its task in accordance with the Treaty in the context of a reference for a preliminary
         ruling, it is essential for national courts to explain, when the reasons do not emerge beyond any doubt from the file, why
         they consider that a reply to their questions is necessary to enable them to give judgment. Thus it is essential that the
         national court should give at the very least some explanation of the reasons for the choice of the Community provisions which
         it requires to be interpreted and of the link it establishes between those provisions and the national legislation applicable
         to the dispute.Moreover, the Court must display special vigilance when, in the course of proceedings between individuals, a question is referred
         to it with a view to permitting the national court to assess the compatibility with Community law of the legislation of another
         Member State, and must be informed in some detail of the national court's reasons for considering that an answer to that question
         is necessary to enable it to give judgment.Where the national court confines itself to repeating the arguments of the parties to the main proceedings without indicating
         whether and to what extent it considers that an answer to its question is necessary to enable it to give judgment, and the
         Court consequently does not have the material before it to show that it is necessary to rule on the question referred, the
         question is inadmissible.see paras 44-49, 53-JUDGMENT OF THE COURTJanuary (1)
((Reference for a preliminary ruling – Freedom to provide services – Refusal to display advertisements for alcoholic drinks at a sporting event taking place in a Member State whose law allows
                  television advertising for alcoholic drinks but being broadcast on television in another Member State whose law prohibits
                  such advertising – Relevance of the questions for the outcome of the main proceedings))
               
In Case C-318/00, 
            REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the High Court of Justice of England and Wales, Queen's Bench Division, for
            a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending before that court between
            
 Bacardi-Martini SAS, Cellier des Dauphins
and
 Newcastle United Football Company Ltd,
on the interpretation of Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC),
THE COURT,,
composed of: G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias, President, J.-P. Puissochet and M. Wathelet (Presidents of Chambers), C. Gulmann, D.A.O. Edward, P. Jann (Rapporteur), V. Skouris, F. Macken, N. Colneric, S. von Bahr and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: A. Tizzano, Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
Bacardi-Martini SAS and Cellier des Dauphins, by N. Green QC and M. Hoskins, Barrister, instructed by Townleys and subsequently
               by Hammond Suddards Edge, Solicitors, 
               
─
the United Kingdom Government, by R.V. Magrill and subsequently G. Amodeo, acting as Agents, and K. Beal, Barrister, 
               
─
the French Government, by G. de Bergues and R. Loosli-Surrans, acting as Agents, 
               
─
the Commission of the European Communities, by K. Banks, acting as Agent, 
               
having regard to the national court's reply to a request for clarification pursuant to Article 104(5) of the Rules of Procedure,
               received at the Court on February 2002,having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
            
after hearing the oral observations of Bacardi-Martini SAS and Cellier des Dauphins, represented by N. Green and M. Hoskins;
               the United Kingdom Government, represented by G. Amodeo and K. Beal; the French Government, represented by R. Loosli-Surrans;
               and the Commission, represented by H. van Lier, acting as Agent, at the hearing on May 2002,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2002,
gives the following
Judgment
            
By order of July 2000, received at the Court on August 2000, the High Court of Justice of England and Wales, Queen's
         Bench Division, referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC two questions on the interpretation of
         Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC). 
         
            
The questions were raised in proceedings between Bacardi-Martini SAS and Cellier des Dauphins (
         the claimants) and Newcastle United Football Company Ltd (
         Newcastle) for compensation for the damage allegedly suffered as a result of Newcastle's interference in the performance of contracts
         they had concluded with Dorna Marketing (UK) Ltd (
         Dorna) for the display of advertisements. 
         
Legal background
            
The French Loi No 91/relative à la lutte contre le tabagisme et l'alcoholisme (Law No 91/on combating smoking and alcoholism)
         of January (
          Journal officiel de la République française  (JORF), January 1991, p. 615,  
         the Loi Évin) amended Article L.of the Code des débits de boissons (Code of licensed premises), subsequently Article L.3323-of the
         Code de la santé publique (Code of Public Health). 
         
            
That provision authorises certain forms, listed exhaustively, of direct or indirect promotion or advertising for alcoholic
         drinks. 
         
            
Under the Loi Évin, all advertising for alcoholic drinks, defined as drinks whose alcohol content exceeds 1.degrees, which
         is not expressly authorised is prohibited. Since the advertising of alcoholic drinks on television is not expressly authorised,
         it is prohibited. 
         
            
That prohibition is confirmed by Article of Decree No 92-of March applying Article 27(1) of the Law of September
         relating to freedom of communication and defining the general principles concerning the rules applicable to advertising
         and sponsorship (JORF, March 1992, p. 4313), which provides: Advertising relating to products the advertising of which on television is prohibited by law and to the following products
         and economic sectors shall be prohibited:
         
─
drinks having an alcohol content greater than 1.2°; 
         
...
         
            
The Conseil supérieur de l'audiovisuel (CSA) is an independent administrative authority responsible for guaranteeing the exercise
         of freedom of communication. Among other things, it monitors advertisements broadcast by audiovisual communication services.
         The CSA can impose administrative penalties on broadcasters who fail to comply with their obligations under the Loi Évin.
         
         
            
In the CSA adopted a code of conduct containing principles relating to the television broadcasting on French stations
         of sporting events taking place in France or abroad at which advertisements for alcoholic drinks appear. The principles set
         out in the code, which has been amended on several occasions, have no legislative force but, as stated in the preamble to
         the code, are accepted as an interpretation voluntarily agreed in good faith. 
         
            
According to the CSA's code of conduct, as worded at the material time, French producers and advertisers may not be treated
         differently from their foreign competitors, subject only to any limits imposed by the national law of the place of the event.
         
         
            
The code proceeds from the principle that the broadcaster must refrain from adopting an indulgent approach to advertisements
         for alcoholic drinks. 
         
            
To that end, it distinguishes between  
         multinational events and  
         other events taking place abroad. 
         
            
In the case of  
         multinational events, pictures of which are transmitted in a large number of countries and thus cannot be regarded as aimed principally at a French
         audience, where French broadcasters broadcast pictures whose conditions of filming are not within their control, they cannot
         be accused of an indulgent approach to the advertisements concerned even if they appear on the screen. 
         
            
In the case of  
         other events, where the law of the host country allows the advertising of alcoholic drinks at sporting venues but the transmission is
         aimed specifically at a French audience, it is for all the parties negotiating contracts with the holder of the transmission
         rights to use all available means to prevent brand names relating to alcoholic drinks from appearing on the screen. 
         
            
The British Code of Advertising does not prohibit the advertising of alcoholic drinks, nor does it restrict the means of advertising
         them. However, it limits the permitted content of the advertisements in several respects. 
         The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
The claimants are companies incorporated under French law which  
          inter alia  produce and market alcoholic drinks. Newcastle is a company incorporated under English law which owns and manages a football
         club and stadium. 
         
            
In the context of an agreement concluded in between a football association and several football clubs, including Newcastle,
         of the one part and Dorna of the other part, Dorna was appointed to sell and display advertisements around the touchline of
         the clubs' pitches for each home match played by the clubs' first teams. 
         
            
Under two contracts concluded in November between the claimants and Dorna, Dorna undertook to provide the claimants with
         advertising time on its electronic revolving display system during a match between Newcastle and Metz, a French football club,
         which was to be played in Newcastle on December in the third round of the UEFA Cup (Union of European Football Associations).
         
         
            
That match was to be televised in the United Kingdom and France. Newcastle had undertaken, by an agreement with CSI Ltd (
         CSI), a company incorporated under English law which  
          inter alia  sells television broadcasting rights for sporting events, to permit and/or procure the live broadcast of the match on French
         television. 
         
            
The advertisements for alcoholic drinks which were to be shown during the match in accordance with the contracts between the
         claimants and Dorna complied with the requirements of English law. 
         
            
Shortly before the start of the match, Newcastle became aware that Dorna had sold the claimants advertising space in order
         to display advertisements for alcoholic drinks during the match. Newcastle consequently informed Dorna that, since the match
         was to be broadcast by a French television station, the French legislation restricting the advertising of alcoholic drinks
         applied, and that Dorna should therefore remove the advertisements for the claimants from its display panels in order to comply
         with that legislation. 
         
            
Since the advertisements in question could no longer be removed from the revolving displays so shortly before the start of
         the match, the display system was programmed in such a way that during the match they appeared for only one to two seconds
         on each occasion instead of the seconds provided for in the contracts. The match was broadcast live on French television,
         as CSI had sold the transmission rights to the French television station Canal +. 
         
            
On July the claimants brought proceedings against Dorna and Newcastle in the High Court of Justice of England and
         Wales, Queen's Bench Division, seeking  
          inter alia  damages and injunctions. The proceedings against Dorna were subsequently withdrawn. 
         
            
In support of the claims against Newcastle, the claimants argue that breach of the contracts concluded between themselves
         and Dorna is attributable to Newcastle, that Newcastle's interference with those contracts cannot be justified by the relevant
         provisions of the Loi Évin because those provisions are not compatible with Article of the Treaty, and that Newcastle is
         therefore liable for the damage caused to the claimants on the ground of inducing breach of contract. 
         
            
The claimants consider that the relevant provisions of the Loi Évin, in particular as interpreted and applied by the CSA,
         infringe Article of the Treaty in that they constitute a restriction on the cross-border provision of services, since they
         restrict advertising for alcoholic drinks at sporting events taking place in Member States other than France where those events
         are televised in France, and/or prohibit or restrict the televising in France of sporting events taking place in other Member
         States where advertisements for alcoholic drinks are displayed at the venue of the event. 
         
            
According to the claimants, the public interest which the provisions of the Loi Évin seek to safeguard is adequately protected
         by the rules on the advertising of alcoholic drinks applicable in the United Kingdom. 
         
            
The claimants submit, moreover, that the restrictions imposed in accordance with the provisions of the Loi Évin are disproportionate
         for several reasons. 
         
            
In its defence, Newcastle submits  
          inter alia  that instructing Dorna to remove the advertisements for the claimants on the basis of the provisions of the Loi Évin was
         justified because those provisions are compatible with Article of the Treaty. 
         
            
The High Court observes, first, that various French courts have given divergent decisions on the applicability of the Loi
         Évin to cross-border broadcasts of sporting events. Second, it refers to an expert report submitted to it on the effects in
         practice of the relevant provisions of the Loi Évin. It appears in particular that matches preceding the quarter-finals of
         the UEFA Cup are regarded as  
         other events within the meaning of the CSA code of conduct. 
         
            
Having satisfied itself that the issues raised before it did not have to be examined from the point of view of Council Directive
         89/552/EEC of October on the coordination of certain provisions laid down by law, regulation or administrative action
         in Member States concerning the pursuit of television broadcasting activities (OJ L 298, p. 23), the High Court considered
         that the provision of Community law which applied was Article of the Treaty. 
         
            
However, it found it inappropriate, as an English court, to make a definitive ruling on the lawfulness of a French law with
         respect to Article of the Treaty, particularly without the French Government having been able to submit observations on
         the point. 
         
            
In those circumstances, the High Court decided to stay proceedings and refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary
         ruling: 
         
1.
 Are Articles L.to L.of the Code des débits de boissons (the so-called  
         Loi Évin provisions), Article of Decree No 92-of March and the provisions of the code of conduct of March contrary
         to Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) in so far as they prevent or restrict 
         
(a)
the advertising of alcoholic drinks at sporting events taking place in Member States other than France when the events are
         to be televised in France and 
         
(b)
the broadcasting in France of sporting events taking place in other Member States at which there is advertising of alcoholic
         beverages? 
         
2.
 If not, is the manner in which these provisions are interpreted and applied in practice by the Conseil supérieur de l'audiovisuel
         contrary to Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) in so far as they prevent or restrict 
         
(a)
the advertising of alcoholic drinks at sporting events taking place in Member States other than France when the events are
         to be televised in France and 
         
(b)
the broadcasting in France of sporting events taking place in other Member States at which there is advertising of alcoholic
         beverages?
         
            
Since it considered that it was not clear on the basis of the documents submitted to the Court why an answer to the questions
         referred was necessary to enable the national court to give judgment in the main proceedings, the Court, pursuant to Article
         104(5) of the Rules of Procedure, requested the national court to explain more fully the basis on which Newcastle could rely
         on the Loi Évin ─ assuming it to be compatible with Article of the Treaty ─ as a defence to the claim against it. 
         
            
In answer to that request, the High Court stated that the claims brought against Newcastle were based on  
         the tort of inducing breach of contract. It was well established in English law that a party could submit that such an interference with a contract was justified.
         The question of what constitutes justification in this context was a matter for the national court to decide, taking account
         of all the circumstances. 
         
            
In the present case, Newcastle had submitted that it was entitled to give instructions to remove the advertisements in the
         stadium,  
          inter alia  because  
         such instructions were given in the reasonable anticipation that a failure to give them would result in a breach of French
         law. 
         
            
The claimants for their part submitted that this defence was unacceptable as a matter of Community law, since the Loi Évin
         was in any event contrary to Article of the Treaty. 
         
            
The High Court therefore considered that it was appropriate to seek a preliminary ruling from the Court on the issue of Community
         law raised. 
         AdmissibilityObservations submitted to the Court
         
            
The French Government and the Commission submit that the questions referred are inadmissible. According to the French Government,
         there is no extra-territorial application of French law. It is the French television station which bought the television rights
         which would have had to answer for a possible breach of French law when the match which was played in England was broadcast
         in France. In relying on the application of French law, Newcastle's sole motive was the fear of losing the payment for the
         television rights. 
         
            
The Commission adds that the High Court has not explained whether and how such financial considerations could justify inducing
         a breach of contract. More generally, the High Court has given the Court no indication of how the answers to the questions
         referred could help it to decide the case before it. 
         
            
According to the claimants, on the other hand, the admissibility of the reference for a preliminary ruling derives from the
         fact that the national court must examine all the justifications put forward. It is not disputed that Newcastle's decision
         was motivated by the existence and effects of the French law. The claimants submit that this attempt at justification is invalid
         in that the Loi Évin is incompatible with Article of the Treaty. 
         
            
The United Kingdom Government agrees with that argument and adds that, if it were an express or implied term of the contract
         between Newcastle and CSI that the broadcast of the match would comply with French law, the compatibility of the French law
         with Article of the Treaty would indeed be of relevance for the main proceedings. In any event, the requirement imposed
         on the French broadcaster to negotiate compliance with the Loi Évin when matches taking place abroad are broadcast gives that
         law extraterritorial effect. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
It is settled case-law that it is solely for the national court before which the dispute has been brought, and which must
         assume responsibility for the subsequent judicial decision, to determine in the light of the particular circumstances of the
         case both the need for a preliminary ruling in order to enable it to deliver judgment and the relevance of the questions which
         it submits to the Court. Consequently, where the questions submitted concern the interpretation of Community law, the Court
         of Justice is, in principle, bound to give a ruling (see,
          inter alia , Case C-415/Bosman  [1995] ECR I-4921, paragraph 59; Case C-379/PreussenElektra  [2001] ECR I-2099, paragraph 38; and Case C-153/Der Weduwe  [2002] ECR I-11319, paragraph 31). 
         
            
However, the Court has also held that, in exceptional circumstances, it can examine the conditions in which the case was referred
         to it by the national court (see, to that effect,  
          PreussenElektra , paragraph 39). The spirit of cooperation which must prevail in preliminary ruling proceedings requires the national court
         for its part to have regard to the function entrusted to the Court of Justice, which is to contribute to the administration
         of justice in the Member States and not to give opinions on general or hypothetical questions (
          Bosman , paragraph 60, and  
          Der Weduwe , paragraph 32). 
         
            
Thus the Court has held that it has no jurisdiction to give a preliminary ruling on a question submitted by a national court
         where it is quite obvious that the interpretation or the assessment of the validity of a provision of Community law sought
         by that court bears no relation to the actual facts of the main action or its purpose,  or where the problem is hypothetical,
         or where the Court does not have before it the factual or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions
         submitted to it (see  
          Bosman , paragraph 61; Case C-437/EKW and Wein & Co  [2000] ECR I-1157, paragraph 52; and Case C-36/Idéal Tourisme  [2000] ECR I-6049, paragraph 20). 
         
            
In order that the Court may perform its task in accordance with the Treaty, it is essential for national courts to explain,
         when the reasons do not emerge beyond any doubt from the file, why they consider that a reply to their questions is necessary
         to enable them to give judgment (Case 244/Foglia  [1981] ECR 3045, paragraph 17). Thus the Court has held that it is essential that the national court should give at the very
         least some explanation of the reasons for the choice of the Community provisions which it requires to be interpreted and of
         the link it establishes between those provisions and the national legislation applicable to the dispute (order in Case C-116/Laguillaumie  [2000] ECR I-4979, paragraph 16). 
         
            
Moreover, the Court must display special vigilance when, in the course of proceedings between individuals, a question is referred
         to it with a view to permitting the national court to decide whether the legislation of another Member State is in accordance
         with Community law (
          Foglia , paragraph 30). 
         
            
In the present case, as the questions referred are intended to enable the national court to assess the compatibility with
         Community law of the legislation of another Member State, the Court must be informed in some detail of that court's reasons
         for considering that an answer to the questions is necessary to enable it to give judgment. 
         
            
It appears from the High Court's account of the legal context that it has to apply English law in the main proceedings. It
         nevertheless considers that  
         the issue of the legality of the Loi Évin provisions is central to resolution of the proceedings before [it]. It does not, however, state positively that an answer to that question is necessary to enable it to give judgment. 
         
            
On being requested by the Court to explain more fully the basis on which Newcastle could rely on the Loi Évin, the High Court
         has essentially confined itself to repeating the defendant's argument that it could reasonably anticipate that a failure to
         give instructions to remove the advertisements in the stadium would result in a breach of French law. 
         
            
On the other hand, the High Court has not said whether it itself considered that Newcastle could reasonably suppose that it
         was obliged to comply with the French legislation, and there is nothing else to that effect before the Court. 
         
            
The United Kingdom Government has contended that the premiss for concluding that the questions referred are material could
         be the existence of an obligation on the part of Newcastle, in terms of its contract with CSI for the broadcast of the Newcastle-Metz
         match by a French television station, to comply with the French legislation. On this point, it suffices to state that the
         national court has not mentioned the existence of any such contractual obligation. 
         
            
Furthermore, as the Advocate General rightly observes in point of his Opinion, even if the national court were to consider
         that Newcastle could reasonably suppose that compliance with the French legislation required it to intervene in the contracts
         in question, it is not clear why that would no longer be the case if the provision with which Newcastle wished to ensure compliance
         turned out to be contrary to Article of the Treaty. 
         
            
The order for reference contains no information on this point either. 
         
            
In those circumstances, the conclusion must be that the Court does not have the material before it to show that it is necessary
         to rule on the compatibility with the Treaty of legislation of a Member State other than that of the court making the reference.
         
         
            
The questions referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling are therefore inadmissible. 
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the United Kingdom and French Governments and by the Commission, which have submitted observations to
         the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action
         pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT,
in answer to the questions referred to it by the High Court of Justice of England and Wales, Queen's Bench Division, by order
         of July 2000, hereby rules: 
         
Rodriguez Iglesias
Puissochet 
Wathelet 
Gulmann
Edward 
Jann 
Skouris
Macken 
Colneric 
von Bahr
Cunha Rodrigues 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on January 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
G.C. Rodriguez Iglesias  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: English.
Top  
 