
Case C-314/Krzysztof Filipiak
v
Dyrektor Izby Skarbowej w Poznaniu
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Wojewódzki Sąd Administracyjny w Poznaniu)
(Income tax legislation – Right to deduct social security contributions from the basis of assessment for tax – Right to a tax reduction on the basis of health insurance contributions paid – Refusal where contributions are paid in a Member State other than the State of taxation – Whether compatible with Articles EC and EC – Judgment of the national constitutional court – Unconstitutionality of provisions of national law – Deferral of the date on which those provisions are to lose their binding force – Primacy of Community law – Implications for the national court)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Freedom to provide services – Restrictions – Tax legislation
            – Income tax 
(Arts EC and EC)
2.        Community law – Primacy – Contrary national law – Existing rules automatically inapplicable 
1.        Articles EC and EC preclude national legislation under which the possibility for a resident taxpayer to obtain, first,
         a deduction from the basis of assessment in the amount of social security contributions paid in the tax year and, second,
         a reduction of the income tax which he is liable to pay by the amount of health insurance contributions paid in that period,
         exists solely when those contributions are paid in the Member State of taxation, while such advantages are refused in the
         case where those contributions are paid in another Member State, even though those contributions were not deducted in that
         other Member State.
      
Such legislation introduces a difference in the treatment of resident taxpayers. Any taxpayer who is resident in the Member
         State of taxation but pursues his economic activity in another Member State in which he is subject to compulsory social insurance
         and health insurance cannot deduct the amount of the contributions which he pays from his basis of assessment or to reduce
         the tax payable in the Member State of taxation by the amount of those contributions, and is therefore less favourably treated
         than any other taxpayer who is resident in that State but who restricts his economic activity to within the borders of that
         State and pays his compulsory social security and health insurance contributions to the competent public authority of that
         State. With regard to the taxation of their income in the Member State of taxation, however, resident taxpayers are not in
         objectively different situations capable of justifying such a difference in treatment according to the place in which contributions
         are paid, since they are subject to an unlimited tax liability in that Member State. Thus, the taxation of their income in
         that Member State should be carried out in accordance with the same principles and, consequently, on the basis of the same
         tax advantages. In those circumstances, the refusal to grant to the resident taxpayer the tax advantages in question may deter
         that taxpayer from taking advantage of the freedom of establishment and freedom to provide services under Articles EC and
         EC, and amounts to a restriction on those freedoms. 
      
(see paras 66-71, 74, operative part 1)
2.        To the extent that Community law prevails over provisions of national law, the primacy of Community law obliges the national
         court to apply Community law and to refuse to apply conflicting provisions of national law, irrespective of the judgment of
         the national constitutional court which has deferred the date on which those provisions, held to be unconstitutional, are
         to lose their binding force.
      
(see para. 85, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Income tax legislation – Right to deduct social security contributions from the basis of assessment for tax – Right to a tax reduction on the basis of health insurance contributions paid – Refusal where contributions are paid in a Member State other than the State of taxation – Whether compatible with Articles EC and EC – Judgment of the national constitutional court – Unconstitutionality of provisions of national law – Deferral of the date on which those provisions are to lose their binding force – Primacy of Community law – Implications for the national court)
In Case C‑314/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC by the Wojewódzki Sąd Administracyjny w Poznaniu (Poland), made by
         decision of May 2008, received at the Court on July 2008, in the proceedings
      
Krzysztof Filipiak
v
Dyrektor Izby Skarbowej w Poznaniu,
      
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, President of the Second Chamber, acting for the President of the Third Chamber, A. Rosas
         (Rapporteur) and A. Ó Caoimh, Judges,
      
Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        the Polish Government, by M. Dowgielewicz, acting as Agent,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by R. Lyal and K. Herrmann, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling relates to the interpretation of Articles EC and EC. 
      
The reference has been made in the context of proceedings between Mr Filipiak, a Polish national who is subject to unlimited
         tax liability in Poland, and the Dyrektor Izby Skarbowej w Poznaniu (Director of the Poznań Tax Chamber) (‘the Dyrektor’)
         concerning the refusal of the Polish tax authorities to grant Mr Filipiak entitlement to tax advantages in respect of the
         payment of social security and health insurance contributions in the tax year, in the case where the contributions were paid
         in a Member State other than the State of taxation, even though such tax advantages are granted to taxpayers whose contributions
         are paid in the Member State of taxation.
      
 National law
Article of the Polish Constitution provides:
      
‘The Republic of Poland is a democratic State subject to the rule of law and implementing the principles of social justice’.
Under Article of the Polish Constitution:
      
‘1.       The Constitution is the supreme law of the Republic of Poland. 
2.       The provisions of the Constitution shall apply directly, unless the Constitution provides otherwise’. 
Article of the Polish Constitution provides:
      
‘1.       All persons are equal before the law. All persons shall have the right to equal treatment by public authorities. 
2.       No one shall be discriminated against in political, social or economic life for any reason whatsoever.’
Article of the Polish Constitution states:
      
‘1.       After publication thereof in the Journal of Laws of the Republic of Poland (Dziennik Ustaw), a ratified international agreement shall constitute part of the domestic legal order and shall be directly applicable,
         unless its application depends on the enactment of a statute. 
      
2.       An international agreement ratified upon prior consent granted by statute shall have precedence over that statute if such
         an agreement cannot be reconciled with the provisions of that statute.
      
3.       If an agreement, ratified by the Republic of Poland, establishing an international organisation so provides, the laws established
         by that organisation shall be applied directly and have precedence in the event of a conflict of laws’. 
      
Under Article of the Polish Constitution:
      
‘The Trybunał Konstytucyjny [Polish Constitutional Court] shall adjudicate on the following matters:
(1)      the conformity of statutes and international agreements with the Constitution;
(2)      the conformity of a statute with ratified international agreements whose ratification required prior consent granted by statute;
(3)      the conformity of legal provisions issued by central State authorities with the Constitution, ratified international agreements
         and statutes;
      
(4)      the conformity with the Constitution of the purposes or activities of political parties;
(5)      complaints concerning constitutional infringements, as specified in Article 79(1)’.
Paragraphs to of Article of the Polish Constitution are worded as follows:
      
‘1.       Judgments of the Constitutional Court shall be of universally binding application and shall be final. 
…
3.       A judgment of the Constitutional Court shall take effect from the day of its publication; however, the Constitutional Court
         may specify another date for the end of the binding force of a normative act. Such time period may not exceed months in
         the case of a statute or months in the case of any other normative act. …
      
4.       A judgment of the Constitutional Court on the non-conformity with the Constitution, an international agreement or statute,
         of a normative act on the basis of which a legally effective judgment of a court, a final administrative decision or settlement
         of other matters has been issued, shall constitute a basis for reopening proceedings, or for quashing the decision or other
         settlement in a manner and in accordance with principles specified in provisions applicable to the given proceedings.’
      
Article 3(1) of the Law of July on income tax payable by natural persons (ustawa z dnia lipca r. o podatku
         dochodowym od osób fizycznych, Dz. U of 2000, No 14, heading 176; ‘the Law on income tax’), which sets out the general rule
         of unlimited tax liability, provides:
      
‘Natural persons who are resident in the territory of the Republic of Poland shall be liable to tax on all of their income,
         wherever it arises …’.
      
Article 26(1)(2) of that Law provides:
      
‘Without prejudice to Article 24(3), Articles to 30c and Article 30e, the basis of assessment shall be income determined
         in accordance with Article 9, Article 24(1), (2), (4), (4a) to (4e) and (6), or with Article 24b(1) and (2), or with Article
         25, after deduction of the amount:
      
…
(2) of the contributions specified in the Law of October on the social security system [Dz. U n° 137, heading 887,
         as amended; “the Law on social security”]:
      
(a)      paid directly, in the tax year, for retirement and other pension insurance, sickness and accident insurance of the taxpayer
         or persons working with him,
      
(b)      deducted, in the tax year … from the taxpayer’s funds …’.
Article 27b of the Law on income tax states:
      
‘1.       Income tax assessed in accordance with Articles or 30c shall be reduced by the amount of health insurance contributions
         referred to in the Law of August on publicly funded health-care benefits (ustawa z dnia sierpnia r. o świadczeniach
         opieki zdrowotnej finansowanych ze środków publicznych, Dz. U n° 210, heading 2135; “the Law on publicly funded health-care
         benefits”):
      
(1)      paid in the tax year directly by the taxpayer in accordance with the provisions on publicly funded health-care benefits,
(2)      collected during the tax year by the person liable to pay the tax in accordance with those provisions,
...
2.       The amount of the health insurance contributions deductible from tax shall not exceed 7.75% of the basis on which those contributions
         are assessed.
      
…’.
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
It is apparent from the order for reference that, at the material time of the dispute in the main proceedings, Mr Filipiak,
         a Polish citizen, was pursuing an economic activity in the Netherlands as a partner in a partnership under Netherlands law,
         the organisational structure of which corresponded to that of a general partnership under Polish law.
      
It is also apparent from the order for reference that Mr Filipiak is subject to unlimited tax liability in Poland, which suggests
         that his place of residence is in Poland, pursuant to Article of the Law on income tax.
      
Mr Filipiak paid in the Netherlands the social security and health insurance contributions required of him by Netherlands
         legislation. 
      
By letter of June 2006, Mr Filipiak requested from the director of the tax office of Nowy Tomyśl advice in writing on the
         scope and manner of application of tax law. 
      
In his request for that advice, Mr Filipiak observes that the provisions of the Law on income tax do not allow him to deduct
         the social security contributions paid in the Netherlands from his basis of assessment and to reduce the tax by the amount
         of the health insurance contributions also paid in the Netherlands. He claims that such provisions are discriminatory and,
         that being the case, that those provisions should be disregarded and Community law should be applied directly.
      
By decisions of August 2007, the director of the Nowy Tomyśl tax office replied to the request for advice and expressed
         the view that Mr Filipiak’s position was unfounded.
      
The director stated that, pursuant to Article 26(1)(2) of the Law on income tax, the only contributions which could be deducted
         from the basis of assessment were those specified in the Law on social security and that, pursuant to Article 27b(1) of the
         Law on income tax, the only health insurance contributions which could be deducted from tax were those specified in the Law
         on publicly funded health-care benefits. As the contributions paid under Netherlands law did not satisfy the criteria laid
         down in those provisions, they could not be deducted in Poland from the basis of assessment and from income tax respectively.
      
After consideration of the complaints raised before him by Mr Filipiak, the Dyrektor upheld the decisions of the director
         of the Nowy Tomyśl tax office of August 2007. 
      
Mr Filipiak brought an action against those decisions before the Wojewódzki Sąd Administracyjny w Poznaniu (Regional Administrative
         Court, Poznań) (Poland) on the grounds that they infringe, inter alia, Articles 26(1)(2) and 27b(1) of the Law on income tax,
         Article 39(2) EC, Article 3(1) of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/of the Council of June on the application of social
         security schemes to employed persons, to self-employed persons and to members of their families moving within the Community,
         as amended and updated by Council Regulation (EC) No 118/of December (OJ L 28, p. 1), as amended by Regulation
         (EC) No 647/of the European Parliament and of the Council of April (OJ L 117, p. 1) (‘Regulation No 1408/71’),
         and various provisions of the Polish Constitution. 
      
The Wojewódzki Sąd Administracyjny w Poznaniu takes the view that the prerequisites for an infringement of the freedom of
         movement for workers provided for in Article EC are not satisfied in the present case. That court states in this regard
         that, since the applicant in the main proceedings is a businessman who is a member of a general partnership based in the Netherlands,
         he is self-employed and does not work on the orders or under the control of another person. He cannot therefore be regarded
         as a ‘worker’ within the meaning of Article EC.
      
The referring court considers that it is essential to examine whether the provisions at issue are compatible with a provision
         which was not relied on by Mr Filipiak, namely Article EC, where the effect of those provisions is that a taxpayer who
         is subject to unlimited tax liability in Poland on the entirety of his income and who pursues an economic activity in another
         Member State is not allowed to deduct from his basis of assessment the amount of the compulsory social security contributions
         paid in the Netherlands and is not allowed to reduce his income tax by the amount of the compulsory health insurance contributions
         also paid in the Netherlands, even though those contributions were not deducted in that Member State.
      
The referring court states that the Trybunał Konstytucyjny has already ruled on the compatibility of Articles 26(1)(2) and
         27b of the Law on income tax with the Polish Constitution. 
      
By judgment of November (K 18/06, Dz. U of 2007, No 211, heading 1549), the Trybunał Konstytucyjny held that, to the
         extent to which the tax provisions at issue do not allow taxpayers specified in Article 27(9) of the Law on income tax to
         deduct social security and health insurance contributions from income deriving from an activity pursued outside the Republic
         of Poland and from the tax payable thereon where those contributions were not deducted in the Member State in which that activity
         was pursued, those provisions are not compatible with the principle of equality before the law laid down in Article of
         the Polish Constitution, in conjunction with the principle of social justice, set out in Article of that Constitution. 
      
In the same judgment, pursuant to Article 190(3) of the Polish Constitution, the Trybunał Konstytucyjny decided to defer the
         date on which the provisions held to be unconstitutional would lose all binding force to a date other than that of publication
         of the judgment, namely to November 2008.
      
In those circumstances, the Wojewódzki Sąd Administracyjny w Poznaniu decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following
         questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Must the first and second paragraphs of Article EC be construed as precluding the provisions of Article 26(1)(2) of [the
         Law on income tax], under which the right to a reduction of the basis of assessment for income tax by the amount of compulsory
         social security contributions is restricted to contributions paid on the basis of provisions of national law, and the provisions
         of Article 27b(1) of that Law, under which the right to a reduction of income tax by the amount of compulsory health insurance
         contributions is restricted to contributions paid on the basis of provisions of national law, in the case where a Polish national,
         who is subject to unlimited liability to tax in Poland on income taxed there, has paid in another Member State compulsory
         social security and health insurance contributions in respect of an economic activity pursued in that other State, and those
         contributions have not been deducted either from income or from tax in that other Member State? 
      
2.      Must the principle of the primacy of Community law following from Article EC and the first and second paragraphs of Article
         EC be construed as taking precedence over the provisions of national law referred to in Article 91(2) and (3) and Article
         190(1) and (3) of the Polish Constitution … in so far as the entry into force of a judgment of the Polish Constitutional Court
         has been deferred on the basis of those provisions?’
      
 Admissibility
 Observations submitted to the Court 
The Polish Government expresses doubts as to whether it is open to the Court to give a ruling on the questions referred by
         the national court.
      
The Polish Government thus claims that the requested interpretation of Community law and the questions referred for a preliminary
         ruling by the referring court are not sufficiently linked to the subject-matter of the dispute in the main proceedings. The
         condition that the Court’s decision must be essential to enable the referring court to give judgment in the case before it
         is, it argues, not satisfied. A consideration of the elements of fact and law set out by the referring court leads to the
         conclusion that the dispute can, and indeed should, be examined solely on the basis of the provisions of national law.
      
The Polish Government observes in that regard that, by its first question, the referring court seeks to determine whether,
         when ruling in the dispute in the main proceedings, it ought to take account of the provisions at issue of the Law on income
         tax in so far as they adversely affect the right of the taxpayer to deduct in Poland social security and health insurance
         contributions which have been paid abroad. 
      
However, in its judgment of November the Trybunał Konstytucyjny has already answered that question by ruling that,
         in circumstances such as those in the main proceedings, a taxpayer must be able to deduct the amount of social security and
         health insurance contributions. 
      
According to the Polish Government, the effect of the judgment of November of the Trybunał Konstytucyjny holding the
         statutory provisions at issue to be incompatible with the Polish Constitution is that they may not be applied by the courts
         and tribunals, in other words they are wholly struck out of the legal system.
      
The fact that, in its judgment of November 2007, the Trybunał Konstytucyjny deferred the date on which the unconstitutional
         provisions were to lose their binding force does not imply that the provisions held to be unconstitutional must be applied
         up to the date specified by the Trybunał Konstytucyjny. The proposition that until that date the provisions at issue are compatible
         with the Constitution and that after that date they must be regarded as unconstitutional is, the Polish Government contends,
         not tenable. 
      
The Polish Government takes the view, consequently, that the referring court must apply Articles 26(1)(2) and 27b(1) of the
         Law on income tax while taking account of the interpretation of those provisions in the light of the Polish Constitution.
         In the main proceedings in the present case, the referring court should, on the basis of the interpretation made by the Trybunał
         Konstytucyjny and the principles of equality before the law and social justice, refuse to apply the provisions at issue in
         so far as they preclude any deduction of social security and health insurance contributions in cases where the contributions
         have not been deducted in the Member State of the European Union in which the economic activity has been pursued and the contributions
         have been paid.
      
Consequently, the Polish Government submits, it is not necessary, to enable a ruling to be given on the dispute in the main
         proceedings, to answer the question whether Article EC precludes provisions such as those at issue in the main proceedings.
      
As regards the second question referred for a preliminary ruling, it submits that the interpretation of Community law requested
         by the referring court is not necessary to enable it to give judgment in the dispute before it on the ground that that interpretation
         is obvious. 
      
The Polish Government states that the referring court appears to proceed on the basis that the deferral of the loss of binding
         force of the provisions at issue in the main proceedings, in conjunction with the rule that decisions of the Trybunał Konstytucyjny
         are final, prevents the referring court from reviewing the compatibility of the provisions at issue with Community law and
         from refusing to apply those provisions where it finds that they are not compatible with Community law. 
      
The Polish Government, however, considers that such a standpoint is inappropriate, regard being had to the fact that the different
         forms of judicial review, namely the review of the compatibility of the provisions at issue with the Polish Constitution and
         the review of the compatibility of those provisions with Community law, are autonomous.
      
The decision of the Trybunał Konstytucyjny deferring the loss of binding force of the provisions held to be unconstitutional
         does not prevent judicial review of the compatibility of those provisions with Community law and, where there is a conflict
         of laws, does not release the referring court from the obligation to refrain from applying those provisions in the event that
         they are considered to be incompatible with Community law. Article of the Polish Constitution imposes on national courts
         the obligation not to apply a provision of national law which is contrary to Community law.
      
Consequently, according to the Polish Government, quite apart from the possibility of not applying the provisions at issue
         because they have been held to be unconstitutional, the referring court which concludes that those provisions are incompatible
         with Article EC is fully, and autonomously, entitled to refuse to apply them in its resolution of the dispute, in accordance
         with national law and possibly with the case-law of the Court of Justice on the principle of the primacy of Community law.
      
 Appraisal by the Court 
According to settled case-law, in proceedings under Article EC, it is solely for the national court before which the dispute
         has been brought, and which must assume responsibility for the subsequent judicial decision, to determine in the light of
         the particular circumstances of the case both the need for a preliminary ruling in order to enable it to deliver judgment
         and the relevance of the questions which it submits to the Court. Consequently, where the questions submitted concern the
         interpretation of Community law, the Court is in principle bound to give a ruling (see, inter alia, Case C‑379/PreussenElektra [2001] ECR I‑2099, paragraph 38, and Case C‑544/Rüffler [2009] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 36).
      
Nevertheless, the Court has also held that, in exceptional circumstances, it can examine the conditions in which the case
         was referred to it by the national court, in order to confirm its own jurisdiction (see, to that effect, Case 244/Foglia [1981] ECR 3045, paragraph 21; PreussenElektra, paragraph 39; and Rüffler, paragraph 37). 
      
The Court may refuse to rule on a question referred for a preliminary ruling by a national court only where it is quite obvious
         that the interpretation of Community law that is sought bears no relation to the actual facts of the main action or its purpose,
         where the problem is hypothetical, or where the Court does not have before it the factual or legal material necessary to give
         a useful answer to the questions submitted to it (PreussenElektra, paragraph 39, and Rüffler, paragraph 38).
      
In that regard, it is clear from the order for reference that, irrespective of the question of the constitutionality of the
         provisions at issue in the main proceedings, the dispute in the main proceedings and the first question in the reference relate
         to the compatibility with Community law of legislation under which the right to a tax reduction on the basis of payment of
         health insurance contributions and the right to deduct from the basis of assessment social security contributions which have
         been paid are refused where those contributions have been paid in another Member State. 
      
The second question follows on from the first and seeks a ruling from the Court on the consequences for a national court of
         a finding that provisions which in other respects have been ruled to be incompatible with the Constitution are incompatible
         with Community law. The national court seeks to ascertain, in essence, whether, in the event that Article EC precludes
         provisions such as those at issue in the main proceedings, the primacy of Community law obliges the national courts to apply
         Community law and not to apply the national provisions at issue, and to do so even before the judgment of November of the Trybunał Konstytucyjny, in which that court held that those provisions were incompatible with certain provisions of
         the Polish Constitution, comes into effect.
      
In light of the foregoing, it is not manifestly obvious that the interpretation sought bears no relation to the actual facts
         of the main action or its purpose, that the problem is hypothetical, or that the Court does not have before it the factual
         or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions submitted to it. 
      
Accordingly, the questions referred are admissible.
      
 Substance
 The first question
By its first question, the referring court asks in essence whether Article EC precludes national legislation under which
         a taxpayer has the right to have the amount of the social security contributions paid in the tax year deducted from his basis
         of assessment and, further, the right to have his liability to income tax reduced on the basis of the health insurance contributions
         paid in that period, only in the case where those contributions have been paid in the Member State of taxation, while such
         advantages are refused in the case where those contributions have been paid in another Member State. 
      
 Observations submitted to the Court 
The position of the Polish Government in relation to the first question can essentially be inferred from its observations
         on admissibility which are set out in paragraphs to of this judgment. 
      
According to the Commission of the European Communities, the description by the referring court of Mr Filipiak’s situation
         suggests that the applicant in the main proceedings was able personally to perform tasks associated with the partnership’s
         activity and to exercise a degree of control. His situation would therefore at first sight come within the scope of Article
         EC. However, Article EC might also be relevant to a resolution of the dispute brought before the national court because
         it cannot be ruled out that Mr Filipiak, while residing in Poland, also provides services in the Netherlands. 
      
The Commission takes the view that the provisions at issue in the main proceedings, which deny resident taxpayers entitlement
         to tax advantages based on compulsory insurance contributions in cases where those contributions have been paid in a Member
         State other than the Republic of Poland, establish an unjustifiable restriction on both Article EC and Article EC. 
      
 Reply of the Court
It must be observed that, in its wording of the first question, the referring court confines its request for an interpretation
         of Article EC solely to the case in which compulsory social security and health insurance contributions paid in a Member
         State other than the Republic of Poland have not been deducted in that other Member State. An answer will be given to that
         question therefore on the assumption that the compulsory contributions paid in the Netherlands by a taxpayer such as Mr Filipiak
         could not be deducted in the Netherlands.
      
–       The applicable provisions of the EC Treaty 
In accordance with well-established case-law, the concept of ‘establishment’ within the meaning of Article EC is a very
         broad one, allowing a Community national to participate, on a stable and continuous basis, in the economic life of a Member
         State other than his State of origin (Case C‑55/Gebhard [1995] ECR I‑4165, paragraph 25, and Case C‑470/N [2006] ECR I‑7409, paragraph 26). Where a Community national lives in one Member State and has a shareholding in the capital
         of a company established in another Member State which gives him substantial influence over the company’s decisions and allows
         him to determine its activities, that may thus fall within the freedom of establishment (see, to that effect, N, paragraph 27; Case C‑347/Rewe Zentralfinanz [2007] ECR I‑2647, paragraphs and 70; and Case C‑360/Heinrich Bauer Verlag [2008] ECR I‑7333, paragraph 27). 
      
As the Commission has stated, the situation of a taxpayer such as Mr Filipiak, who is a member of a partnership under Netherlands
         law, the organisational structure of which corresponds to that of a general partnership under Polish law, suggests that that
         taxpayer was able personally to perform tasks associated with the economic activity of that partnership and that he had a
         degree of control over that activity. 
      
The order for reference does not, however, state whether Mr Filipiak’s situation comes within the scope of Article EC in
         accordance with the Court’s case-law, in other words whether he has, in the partnership which is based in another Member State,
         a holding which gives him substantial influence over that partnership’s decisions and allows him to determine its activities.
         In any event, it is for the national court to assess whether this is indeed the case and whether Mr Filipiak’s situation comes
         within the scope of Article EC.
      
Moreover, as the Commission has pointed out, the order for reference does not state whether a taxpayer such as Mr Filipiak,
         in addition to exercising control over the economic activity of the Netherlands partnership of which he is a member, also
         provides services in the Netherlands.
      
Consequently, while such a situation may come under Article EC, it may also come under the provisions of the Treaty on
         freedom to provide services because it cannot be ruled out that Mr Filipiak, while a taxpayer resident in Poland, not only
         has a degree of control over the economic activity of the Netherlands partnership of which he is a member, but also provides
         services in the Netherlands. 
      
The situation of a taxpayer such as Mr Filipiak may therefore be examined in light of the principle of freedom of establishment
         laid down in Article EC and of the principle of freedom to provide services provided for in Article EC.
      
–       Whether there is a restriction on the freedoms of movement
It is settled case-law that all of the Treaty provisions on freedom of movement for persons are intended to facilitate the
         pursuit by Community nationals of occupational activities of all kinds throughout the European Community, and preclude measures
         which might place them at a disadvantage when they wish to pursue an economic activity in the territory of another Member
         State (see, inter alia, Case C‑152/Commission v Germany [2008] ECR I‑39, paragraph 21, and Case C‑527/Renneberg [2008] ECR I‑7735, paragraph 43).
      
In accordance with well-established case‑law, the freedom of establishment which is granted by the Treaty to Community nationals
         and which includes the right for them to take up and pursue activities as self‑employed persons, under the conditions laid
         down for its own nationals by the law of the Member State, entails, in accordance with Article EC, for companies or firms
         formed in accordance with the law of a Member State and having their registered office, central administration or principal
         place of business within the European Community, the right to exercise their activity in the Member State concerned through
         a subsidiary, branch or agency (see Case C‑105/Lammers & Van Cleeff [2008] ECR I‑173, paragraph 18, and judgment of April in Case C‑406/Commission v Greece, not published in the ECR, paragraph 36).
      
The Court has also stated on several occasions that, even though, according to their wording, the provisions concerning freedom
         of establishment are mainly aimed at ensuring that foreign nationals are treated in the host Member State in the same way
         as nationals of that State, they also prohibit the State of origin from hindering the establishment in another Member State
         of one of its nationals or of a company incorporated under its legislation which comes within the definition contained in
         Article EC (see Case C‑251/Baars [2000] ECR I‑2787, paragraph 28; Case C‑9/de Lasteyrie du Saillant [2004] ECR I‑2409, paragraph 42, and Heinrich Bauer Verlag, paragraph 26). 
      
Furthermore, Article EC precludes the application of any national rules which have the effect of making the provision of
         services between Member States more difficult than the provision of services purely within a Member State (Case C‑318/Commission v Germany [2007] ECR I-6957, paragraph 81; Case C‑281/Jundt [2007] ECR I‑12231, paragraph 52; and Joined Cases C‑155/and C‑157/X and Passenheim-van Schoot [2009] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 32). 
      
The case in which tax provisions of a Member State which apply to cross‑border economic activities are less favourable than
         those which apply to an economic activity pursued within the borders of that Member State constitutes an example of a restriction
         which is prohibited by Articles EC and EC.
      
In a case such as that in the main proceedings, Article 26(1)(2) of the Law on income tax allows taxpayers subject to taxation
         in Poland to reduce their basis of assessment for income tax by the amount of compulsory social security contributions paid
         pursuant to the Law on social security. Article 27b of the Law on income tax allows taxpayers who are subject to taxation
         in Poland to reduce the amount of their income tax in line with the amount of compulsory health insurance contributions paid
         pursuant to the Law on publicly funded health-care benefits. 
      
Mr Filipiak, a Polish taxpayer who is pursuing his economic activity as a member of a partnership established in a Member
         State other than the Republic of Poland, is subject to compulsory social security and health insurance in the Netherlands,
         and not in Poland. In accordance with Article 13(2)(b) of Regulation No 1408/71, a person who is self-employed in the territory
         of one Member State is to be subjected to the legislation of that State even if he resides in the territory of another Member
         State. Under Article 13(1), a person is to be subject to the social security legislation of a single Member State only. 
      
The referring court has also stated that the social security and health insurance contributions paid by Mr Filipiak under
         Netherlands legislation are identical, in both their nature and purpose, to the contributions paid by Polish taxpayers under
         the Polish legislation relating to the social security system and publicly funded health‑care benefits.
      
Legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings introduces a difference in the treatment of resident taxpayers,
         namely that the possibility of health insurance contributions being deducted from the amount of income tax payable in Poland
         or the possibility of social security contributions being deducted from the basis of assessment in Poland depends on whether
         those contributions have or have not been paid under the compulsory national health insurance or social security schemes.
         
      
It follows that any taxpayer who is resident in Poland but pursues his economic activity in another Member State in which
         he is subject to compulsory social insurance and health insurance will not be able to deduct the amount of the contributions
         which he pays from his basis of assessment or to reduce the tax payable in Poland by the amount of those contributions. He
         will therefore be less favourably treated than any other taxpayer who is resident in Poland but who restricts his economic
         activity to within the borders of Poland and pays his compulsory social security and health insurance contributions to the
         competent Polish public authority. 
      
With regard to the taxation of their income in Poland, however, it should be borne in mind that resident taxpayers are not
         in objectively different situations capable of justifying such a difference in treatment according to the place in which contributions
         are paid. 
      
The situation of a taxpayer such as Mr Filipiak, resident in Poland and pursuing an economic activity in another Member State,
         where he is affiliated to compulsory social security and health insurance schemes, and that of a taxpayer who is also resident
         in Poland but pursues his economic activity within Poland, where he is affiliated to the compulsory national social security
         and health insurance schemes, are comparable as regards taxation principles since, in Poland, both are subject to unlimited
         tax liability. 
      
Thus, the taxation of their income in that Member State should be carried out in accordance with the same principles and,
         consequently, on the basis of the same tax advantages.
      
In those circumstances, the refusal to grant to the resident taxpayer the right either to deduct from the basis of assessment
         in Poland the amount of the compulsory social security contributions paid in another Member State or to reduce the tax payable
         in Poland by the amount of the compulsory health insurance contributions paid in a Member State other than the Republic of
         Poland may deter that taxpayer from taking advantage of the freedom of establishment and freedom to provide services under
         Articles EC and EC, and amounts to a restriction on those freedoms (see, to that effect, in relation to Article EC,
         Rüffler, paragraphs and 73).
      
It follows from settled case-law of the Court that provisions of national law which may discourage or deter the exercise of
         fundamental freedoms guaranteed by Articles EC and EC may, none the less, be justified by overriding reasons in the
         public interest. 
      
No possible justification has, however, been put forward by the Polish Government or been suggested by the referring court.
         
      
In light of the foregoing, the answer to the first question is that Articles EC and EC preclude national legislation
         under which the possibility for a resident taxpayer to obtain, first, a deduction from the basis of assessment in the amount
         of social security contributions paid in the tax year and, second, a reduction of the income tax which he is liable to pay
         by the amount of health insurance contributions paid in that period, exists solely when those contributions are paid in the
         Member State of taxation, while such advantages are refused in the case where those contributions are paid in another Member
         State, even though those contributions were not deducted in that other Member State. 
      
 The second question
By this question, the referring court asks, in essence, whether, in the event that the answer to the first question is that
         Article EC and/or Article EC preclude provisions of national law such as those at issue in the main proceedings, in
         those circumstances the primacy of Community law obliges the national court to apply Community law in the proceedings before
         it and not to apply the provisions of national law at issue, regardless of the judgment of the national constitutional court
         deciding to defer the loss of binding force of those provisions which it has held to be unconstitutional.
      
 Observations submitted to the Court 
The position of the Polish Government in relation to the second question can essentially be inferred from its observations
         on admissibility which are set out in paragraphs to of this judgment. 
      
The Commission contends that the second question is designed to ascertain whether the principle of the primacy of Community
         law and Articles EC and EC preclude the application of provisions of national law which allow the Trybunał Konstytucyjny
         to defer, in one of its judgments, the date on which a national law or regulation which has been held in that judgment to
         be unconstitutional will lose its validity. 
      
The Commission considers that there is no link between the second question and the resolution of the dispute in the main proceedings.
         In the case of Mr Filipiak, the deferral by the Trybunał Konstytucyjny of the date on which the provisions at issue will lose
         their validity does not prevent the referring court from respecting the principle of the primacy of Community law and thus
         declining to apply those provisions. 
      
The Commission concludes that the possibility, under Article 190(3) of the Polish Constitution, of deferring the date on which
         the provisions at issue will lose their validity, a possibility of which the Trybunał Konstytucyjny made use in its judgment
         of November 2007, does not infringe either the principle of the primacy of Community law or Articles EC and EC, because
         it is not contrary to the obligation, imposed on national authorities and national courts, not to apply provisions of national
         law which are contrary to Article EC.
      
The Commission accordingly takes the view that the principle of the primacy of Community law and Articles EC and EC
         must be interpreted as not precluding the application of provisions of national law which allow the Trybunał Konstytucyjny
         to defer, in a judgment, the date on which provisions of national law which have been held, in that judgment, to be unconstitutional
         will lose their binding force.
      
 Reply of the Court
In accordance with settled case-law, a national court which is called upon, within the exercise of its jurisdiction, to apply
         provisions of Community law is under a duty to give full effect to those provisions, if necessary refusing of its own motion
         to apply any conflicting provision of national legislation, even if adopted subsequently, and it is not necessary for the
         court to request or await the prior setting aside of such provision by legislative or other constitutional means (see, to
         that effect, Case 106/Simmenthal [1978] ECR 629, paragraph 24; Joined Cases C‑13/and C‑113/Debus [1992] ECR I‑3617, paragraph 32; Case C‑119/Lucchini [2007] ECR I‑6199, paragraph 61; and Case C‑115/ČEZ [2009] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 138). 
      
Pursuant to the principle of the primacy of Community law, a conflict between a provision of national law and a directly applicable
         provision of the Treaty is to be resolved by a national court applying Community law, if necessary by refusing to apply the
         conflicting national provision, and not by a declaration that the national provision is invalid, the powers of authorities,
         courts and tribunals in that regard being a matter to be determined by each Member State. 
      
In that context, it must be recalled that the Court has already held that the incompatibility with Community law of a subsequently
         adopted rule of national law does not have the effect of rendering that rule of national law non-existent. Faced with such
         a situation, the national court is obliged to disapply that rule, provided always that this obligation does not restrict the
         power of the competent national courts to apply, from among the various procedures available under national law, those which
         are appropriate for protecting the individual rights conferred by Community law (Joined Cases C‑10/to C‑22/IN.CO.GE.’and Others [1998] ECR I‑6307, paragraph 21). 
      
It follows that, in a situation such as that of the applicant in the main proceedings, the deferral by the Trybunał Konstytucyjny
         of the date on which the provisions at issue will lose their binding force does not prevent the referring court from respecting
         the principle of the primacy of Community law and from declining to apply those provisions in the proceedings before it, if
         the court holds those provisions to be contrary to Community law.
      
Since, as stated in paragraph of this judgment, the answer to the first question is that Articles EC and EC preclude
         national provisions such as those at issue in the main proceedings, the answer to the second question is that, in those circumstances,
         the primacy of Community law obliges the national court to apply Community law and to refuse to apply the conflicting provisions
         of national law, irrespective of the judgment of the national constitutional court which has deferred the date on which those
         provisions, held to be unconstitutional, are to lose their binding force. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Articles EC and EC preclude national legislation under which the possibility for a resident taxpayer to obtain, first,
            a deduction from the basis of assessment in the amount of social security contributions paid in the tax year and, second,
            a reduction of the income tax which he is liable to pay by the amount of health insurance contributions paid in that period,
            exists solely when those contributions are paid in the Member State of taxation, while such advantages are refused in the
            case where those contributions are paid in another Member State, even though those contributions were not deducted in that
            other Member State.
2.      In those circumstances, the primacy of Community law obliges the national court to apply Community law and to refuse to apply
            conflicting provisions of national law, irrespective of the judgment of the national constitutional court which has deferred
            the date on which those provisions, held to be unconstitutional, are to lose their binding force.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Polish.
      
Top  
 