
Case C-208/P
Jean-Marie Le Pen
v
European Parliament
(Appeal – Elections of Members of the European Parliament – Lack of uniform electoral procedure – Application of national law – Disqualification of a Member of the European Parliament from holding office following a criminal conviction – Measure by which the European Parliament ‘takes note’ of that disqualification – Action for annulment – Act not open to challenge – Inadmissibility)
Opinion of Advocate General Jacobs delivered on January Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), July 2005. 
Summary of the Judgment
1.     Appeals – Grounds of appeal – Mere repetition of the pleas and arguments submitted to the Court of First Instance – Inadmissibility
            – Challenge to the interpretation or application of Community law by the Court of First Instance – Admissible 
(Art. EC; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.; Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, Art. 112(1)(c))
2.     Actions for annulment – Measures against which actions may be brought – Concept – Measures producing binding legal effects
            – Declaration of the President of the European Parliament taking note that a seat is vacant following the application of national
            provisions by the national authorities – Excluded
(Art. EC; Act concerning the election of the representatives of the Assembly by direct universal suffrage, Art. 12(2))
1.     Under Article EC, the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice and Article 112(1)(c) of the
         Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, an appeal must indicate precisely the contested elements of the judgment which
         the appellant seeks to have set aside and also the legal arguments specifically advanced in support of the appeal. That requirement
         is not satisfied by an appeal which, without even including an argument specifically identifying the error of law allegedly
         vitiating the judgment under appeal, merely repeats or reproduces verbatim the pleas in law and arguments previously submitted
         to the Court of First Instance. However, provided that the appellant challenges the interpretation or application of Community
         law by the Court of First Instance, the points of law examined at first instance may be discussed again in the course of an
         appeal. Indeed, if an appellant could not thus base his appeal on pleas in law and arguments already relied on before the
         Court of First Instance, an appeal would be deprived of part of its purpose.
      
(see paras 39-40)
2.     In order to determine whether an act may be the subject of a challenge in an action for annulment under Article EC what
         should be taken into account is the substance of the act in question and the intention of its author; since the form in which
         an act or decision is adopted is in principle irrelevant. It cannot therefore be excluded that a written communication, or
         even a mere oral statement, are subject to review by the Court under Article EC.
      
However, the assessment of a declaration by the President of the Parliament in a plenary session that the seat of a member
         is vacant cannot be made in breach of the rules and procedures governing the election of members of Parliament. Since no uniform
         electoral procedure for the election of Members of that institution had been adopted at the material time, that procedure
         continued to be governed, pursuant to Article 7(2) of the Act concerning the election of the representatives of the Assembly
         by direct universal suffrage, by the provisions in force in each Member State. Where, under the legislative provisions of
         a Member State ineligibility brings the term of office as a Member of Parliament to an end, that institution will have had
         no choice but to take notice without delay of the declaration by the national authorities that the seat was vacant – a declaration
         which concerned a pre‑existing legal situation and resulted solely from a decision of those authorities.
      
It is clear from the wording of Article 12(2) of the Act, under which it was for the Parliament to ‘take note’ that a
         seat had fallen vacant pursuant to national provisions in force in a Member State, that the Parliament does not have any discretion
         in the matter. In that particular case, the role of the Parliament is not to declare that the seat is vacant but merely to
         take note that the seat is vacant, as already established by the national authorities, whereas in the other cases concerning,
         inter alia, the resignation or death of one of its members, that institution has a more active role to play since Parliament
         itself establishes that there is a vacancy and informs the Member State in question thereof. Furthermore, it was not for the
         Parliament – but for the competent national courts or the European Court of Human Rights as the case may be – to verify that
         the procedure laid down by the applicable national law or the fundamental rights of the person concerned were respected.
      
(see paras 46-50, 56)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Appeal – Elections of Members of the European Parliament – Lack of uniform electoral procedure – Application of national law – Disqualification of a Member of the European Parliament from holding office following a criminal conviction – Measure by which the European Parliament ‘takes note’ of that disqualification – Action for annulment – Act not open to challenge – Inadmissibility)
In Case C-208/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice lodged on May 2003,
Jean-Marie Le Pen, residing at Saint-Cloud (France), represented by F. Wagner, avocat,
      
appellant,
the other parties to the proceedings being:
European Parliament, represented by H. Krück and C. Karamarcos, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant at first instance,
French Republic, represented by R. Abraham, G. de Bergues and L. Bernheim, acting as Agents,
      
intervener at first instance,
 
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, R. Silva de Lapuerta, J. Makarczyk, P. Kūris and G.
         Arestis, Judges,
      
Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
By his appeal, Mr Le Pen seeks to have set aside the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities of
         April in Case T-353/Le Pen v Parliament [2003] ECR II-(‘the judgment under appeal’), by which the Court of First Instance dismissed as inadmissible his action
         for annulment of the decision in the form of a declaration of the President of the European Parliament of October on the disqualification of Mr Le Pen from holding office as a Member of the European Parliament (‘the contested act’).
      
By separate document, lodged at the Court Registry on June 2003, Mr Le Pen also made an application pursuant to Articles
         EC and EC for suspension of the operation of the contested act. That application was dismissed by order of the President
         of the Court of July in Case C-208/P-R Le Pen v Parliament [2003] ECR I-7939.
      
 Law 
 Community law
 The EC Treaty
Article 190(4) EC provides that the European Parliament will draw up a proposal for election of its members by direct universal
         suffrage in accordance with a uniform procedure in all the Member States, or in accordance with principles common to those
         States, and that the Council of the European Union, acting unanimously after obtaining the assent of the European Parliament,
         which is to act by a majority of its component members, is to lay down the appropriate provisions, which it is to recommend
         to those States for adoption in accordance with their respective constitutional requirements.
      
 The Act
On September the Council adopted Decision 76/787/ECSC, EEC, Euratom relating to the Act concerning the election of
         the representatives of the Assembly by direct universal suffrage (OJ L 278, p. 1); the Act was contained in the annex
         to that Decision (in its original version, ‘the Act’).
      
Under Article 3(1) of the Act, the Members of the Parliament ‘shall be elected for a term of five years.’
Article 6(1) of the Act sets out the functions with which the office of Member of the Parliament is incompatible, and
         provides, in paragraph 2, that ‘each Member State may, in the circumstances provided for in Article 7(2), lay down rules at
         national level relating to incompatibility’. Article 6(3) provides that Members of the Parliament to whom paragraphs and
         become applicable in the course of the term of office ‘shall be replaced in accordance with Article 12’.
      
Article 7(1) of the Act states that it is to be the responsibility of the Parliament to draw up the proposal for a uniform
         electoral procedure, but at the time of the facts in the present case, no such procedure had yet been adopted.
      
Under Article 7(2) of the Act:
‘Pending the entry into force of a uniform electoral procedure and subject to the other provisions of this Act, the electoral
         procedure shall be governed in each Member State by its national provisions.‘
      
Article of the Act provides as follows:
‘Pending the entry into force of the uniform electoral procedure referred to in Article 7(1), the [Parliament] shall verify
         the credentials of representatives. For this purpose it shall take note of the results declared officially by the Member States
         and shall rule on any disputes which may arise out of the provisions of this Act other than those arising out of the national
         provisions to which the Act refers.’
      
Article of the Act provides:
‘(1)      Pending the entry into force of the uniform electoral procedure referred to in Article 7(1) and subject to the other provisions
         of this Act, each Member State shall lay down appropriate procedures for filling any seat which falls vacant during the five-year
         term of office referred to in Article for the remainder of that period.
      
(2)      Where a seat falls vacant pursuant to national provisions in force in a Member State, the latter shall inform the [Parliament],
         which shall take note of that fact.
      
In all other cases, the [Parliament] shall establish that there is a vacancy and inform the Member State thereof.’
The Parliament’s Rules of Procedure
Rule of the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament, in the version in force at the material time (OJ L 202,
         p.1), entitled ‘Verification of credentials’, provided:
      
‘1. On the basis of a report by the committee responsible, Parliament shall verify the credentials without delay and rule
         on the validity of the mandate of each of its newly elected Members and also on any dispute referred to it pursuant to the
         provisions of the [Act], except those based on national electoral laws.
      
…
4. The committee shall ensure that any information which may affect the performance of the duties of a Member of the European
         Parliament or the ranking of the substitutes is forwarded without delay to Parliament by the authorities of the Member States
         or of the Union, with an indication of the date of effect where an appointment is concerned.
      
Should the competent authorities of the Member States initiate a procedure which might lead to the disqualification of a Member
         from holding office, the President shall ask them to keep him regularly informed of the stage reached in the procedure. He
         shall refer the matter to the committee responsible. On a proposal from that committee, Parliament may adopt a position on
         the matter.
      
5. Until such time as a Member’s credentials have been verified or a ruling has been given on any dispute, the Member shall
         take his seat in Parliament and on its bodies and shall enjoy all the rights attaching thereto.
      
…’ 
Rule of the Parliament’s Rules of Procedure, on the ‘Term of office of Members’, further stated:
‘1. A Member’s term of office shall begin and end as laid down in the [Act]. It shall also end on death or resignation.
…
6. The following shall be considered as the date of the end of the term of office and the effective date of a vacancy: 
–      in the event of resignation: the date on which the vacancy is established by Parliament, in accordance with the notification
         of resignation; 
      
–      in the event of appointment to an office incompatible with the office of a Member of the European Parliament, either in respect
         of national electoral law, or in respect of Article of the [Act]: the date notified by the competent authorities of
         the Member States or of the Union.
      
…
8. Any dispute concerning the validity of the appointment of a Member whose credentials have already been verified shall be
         referred to the committee responsible, which shall report to Parliament without delay and no later than the beginning of the
         next part-session.
      
9. Parliament shall reserve the right, where acceptance or termination of office appears to be based on material inaccuracy
         or vitiated consent, to declare the appointment under consideration to be invalid or refuse to establish the vacancy’.
      
 National law
Under Article of Law No 77-of July on the election of representatives to the Assembly of the European Communities
         (JORF of July 1977, p. 3579), in the version applicable to this case (‘the Law’):
      
‘Articles LO to LO 130-of the Electoral Code shall apply to the election of [Members of the European Parliament]. ...
Ineligibility arising during the term of office shall bring that term to an end. Ineligibility will be declared by decree.’
Article of the Law provides:
‘The election of [Members of the European Parliament] may, within days of the declaration of the results of the voting
         and in respect of any matter concerning the application of this law, be challenged by any elector before the Conseil d’État.
         The decision shall be given in plenary session.
      
The application will not have suspensory effect.’
 The facts giving rise to the dispute and the proceedings before the Court of First Instance
It is clear from the case-file before the Court that the dispute giving rise to the action before the Court of First Instance
         arises from the conviction of the appellant by the French courts and from the consequences which, in French law, such a conviction
         entails for the holding of elective office and, in particular, that of representative in the European Parliament.
      
Mr Le Pen, who was elected as a Member of the European Parliament on June 1999, had previously been found guilty of assault
         and public insults by the Tribunal correctionnel de Versailles (France) (Versailles Criminal Court) on April then,
         on appeal, of assault on a person in public office acting in the course of his duties and when the victim’s status was apparent
         or known to the perpetrator of the assault. For that offence contrary to Article 222-13, first paragraph, point 4, of the
         French Criminal Code, the Cour d’appel de Versailles (Court of Appeal, Versailles) on November imposed on the appellant
         a suspended sentence of three months’ imprisonment and a fine of FRF 000. By way of further sentence that court also withdrew
         for a period of one year his rights under Article 131-of the Criminal Code, but limited to eligibility.
      
The appellant’s appeal against that judgment was dismissed by judgment of November of the Cour de cassation (Court
         of Cassation) (France). Pursuant to the second paragraph of Article of the Law, the French Prime Minister accordingly
         declared, by decree dated March 2000, that ‘Mr Jean-Marie Le Pen’s ineligibility brought to an end his term of office as
         a representative in the European Parliament’. The Secretary‑General of the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs notified the
         appellant of that decree by letter dated April 2000, and the President of the European Parliament who, at the plenary session
         of May 2000, informed the Members of that decree and announced her intention to refer the file on Mr Le Pen’s disqualification
         from holding office to the Legal Affairs and Internal Market Committee (‘the Legal Affairs Committee’) pursuant to the second
         subparagraph of Rule 7(4) of the Parliament’s Rules of Procedure.
      
The Legal Affairs Committee verified the appellant’s credentials in closed sessions on 4, and May 2000. After the last
         of those sessions, the President of the Legal Affairs Committee sent the President of the Parliament a letter in the following
         terms:
      
‘Madam President,
The [Legal Affairs Committee] resumed the examination of the position of Mr Jean-Marie Le Pen at its meeting on May 2000.
         The Committee is aware that the French Prime Minister’s decree, notified to Mr Le Pen on April and published in the
         Journal Officiel de la République française  on April 2000, is now enforceable. However, the Committee notes that, as mentioned in the letter notifying the party concerned
         of the decree, the latter is entitled to bring proceedings before the Conseil d’État accompanied by a request for suspension
         of operation of the decree.
      
In the light of the decision yesterday not to recommend for the time being that the Parliament take formal note of the decree
         concerning Mr Le Pen, the Committee considered the possible ways forward. In support of this decision, the case of Mr Tapie
         was raised as a precedent to be followed, with the effect that the European Parliament should take formal note of the decree
         of disqualification from holding office only after expiry of the period prescribed for bringing proceedings before the Conseil
         d’État, or after the decision of that court, as the case may be.’ 
      
At the plenary session of the Parliament of May 2000, the President read out that letter and then stated that it was her
         intention to ‘follow the opinion of the Legal Affairs Committee’.
      
By letter dated June to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Védrine, and the Minister with responsibility for European
         Affairs, Mr Moscovici, the President of the Parliament stated that ‘…having regard to the irreversible nature of disqualification
         from holding office, … the European Parliament should take formal notice of the decree [of March 2000] only after expiry
         of the period prescribed for bringing proceedings before the Conseil d’État or after the decision of the latter, as the case
         may be.’ 
      
The Parliament’s position was strongly challenged by the French authorities which submitted, first, that, by adopting that
         position, the Parliament was in breach of Article 12(2) of the Act and, second, that the reason given did not justify
         such a breach, but that challenge was not sustained. 
      
By letter of June 2000, the President of the Parliament confirmed that the Parliament ‘would take note of Mr Le Pen’s disqualification
         from holding office [only when the decree of March was final]’, which was not yet the case since the appellant had
         commenced annulment proceedings before the Conseil d’État on June 2000. The President justified that position by reference
         to the precedent set in the case of Mr Tapie and the requirement of legal certainty.
      
Mr Le Pen’s action was dismissed by a decision of the Conseil d’État of October 2000. Consequently, Mr Védrine and Mr Moscovici
         sent a letter to the President of the Parliament on October in which, whilst stressing the fact that the French Government
         had always ‘strongly disputed’ the Parliament’s decision to await the outcome of the proceedings instituted by the appellant
         against the decree of March – a decision which the French Government regarded as contrary to ‘the letter and the spirit
         of the Act’ –, they requested the Parliament to ‘act in compliance with Community law’ and take note as soon as possible,
         through its President, of Mr Le Pen’s disqualification from holding office.
      
By letter of October 2000, the President of the Parliament informed the appellant of the receipt, the day before, of the
         official communication from the French authorities of the decision of the Conseil d’État and that, in accordance with the
         Parliament’s Rules of Procedure and the Act, ‘[she] would take note of the decree [of March 2000] in the next plenary
         session on October’ 2000.
      
By letter dated October 2000, Mr Le Pen informed the President of the Parliament, first, that he was challenging the validity
         of the decision of the Conseil d’État since, contrary to Article of the Law, it had not been adopted in a plenary
         session of that court and, second, that he had made a request for clemency to the President of the French Republic and an
         application to the European Court of Human Rights seeking suspension of operation of his disqualification from holding office.
         Consequently, Mr Le Pen requested that there be a further meeting of the Legal Affairs Committee and that he be given a hearing
         by that committee before the decree of March was ratified by the Parliament.
      
The President of the Parliament did not accede to that application. According to the minutes of the debates of the plenary
         session of October 2000, under the agenda item ‘Announcement of the President’, she stated as follows:
      
‘I must inform you that on Thursday October 2000, I received official notification from the relevant authorities of the
         French Republic of a ruling by the Conseil d’État on October rejecting the appeal lodged by Mr Jean-Marie Le Pen against
         the decree of the French Prime Minister of March terminating his mandate as Member of the European Parliament. 
      
I must also inform you that I have received a copy of a request for clemency for Mr Le Pen presented to Mr Jacques Chirac,
         President of the Republic, by Mr Charles de Gaulle, Mr Carl Lang, Mr Jean-Claude Martinez and Mr Bruno Gollnisch.’
      
After that announcement, the President handed over to the Chairman of the Legal Affairs Committee, who said: 
‘Madam President, the [Legal Affairs Committee], following its deliberations of and May last, recommended the suspension
         of the communication in plenary session of the Parliament’s declaration of the disqualification of Mr Le Pen from holding
         office. I stress that the Legal Affairs Committee recommended that this communication be suspended until the expiry of the
         period available to Mr Le Pen for bringing proceedings before the French Conseil d’État or the resolution of those proceedings.
         I quote here the letter of May that you yourself, Madam President, read out to the Parliament.
      
The Conseil d’État – as you have stated – has dismissed those proceedings and has duly informed us of this fact. Consequently,
         there are no further grounds for postponing this announcement to the Parliament, which is mandatory as a matter of primary
         law, specifically under Article 12(2) of the [Act]. 
      
The request for clemency that you have mentioned, Madam President, does not alter the situation, because it is not a legal
         proceeding. As its name suggests, it is the act of a public authority that does not concern the decree of the French Government
         which, in accordance with the recommendation of the Legal Affairs Committee, must be notified in plenary session.’ 
      
Then the President of the Parliament stated:
‘Pursuant to Article 12(2) of the [Act], the European Parliament takes note of the notification from the French Government
         confirming Mr Jean-Marie Le Pen’s removal from office.’ 
      
She therefore invited the appellant to leave the auditorium and suspended the session to enable him to do so. 
By letter of October 2000, the President of the Parliament informed the French Minister for Foreign Affairs that the Parliament
         had ‘taken note’ of the disqualification of Mr Le Pen from holding office and requested the Minister to inform her, in accordance
         with Article 12(1) of the Act, of the name of the person called upon to fill the seat thus left vacant.
      
By letter of November 2000, that Minister replied that ‘Ms Marie-France Stirbois [should] succeed Mr Le Pen on behalf of
         the list of the Front National for the European elections’.
      
It is in those circumstances that, by application lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on November 2000,
         Mr Le Pen brought an action for annulment of the contested act. By separate document, lodged on the same day at the Registry,
         Mr Le Pen made an application seeking suspension of the operation of that act. 
      
By order of January in Case T-353/R Le Pen v Parliament [2001] ECR II-125, the President of the Court of First Instance upheld that application and ordered the suspension of operation
         of ‘the decision in the form of a declaration of the President of the European Parliament of October 2000, in so far as
         it constitutes a decision of the European Parliament taking note of the appellant’s disqualification from holding office as
         a Member of the European Parliament’. As a result, Mr Le Pen was reinstated as a Member of the Parliament and he resumed his
         seat in the auditorium which he had vacated on October 2000. 
      
However, by the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance dismissed as inadmissible Mr Le Pen’s application and ordered
         him to bear his own costs and to pay those of the Parliament, both in the main proceedings and in the proceedings on the application
         for interim relief.
      
 The judgment under appeal
In arriving at that finding, supported both by the Parliament and by the French Republic, which was granted leave to intervene
         in support of the form of order sought by the Parliament, the Court of First Instance based its decision primarily on the
         fact that the contested act, by reason of its particular nature, cannot be the subject of an action for annulment under Article
         EC. In that regard, the Court of First Instance found more particularly as follows:
      
‘According to settled case-law, only measures which produce binding legal effects such as to affect the interests of an applicant,
         by bringing about a distinct change in his legal position may be the subject of an action for annulment under Article EC (Case 60/IBM v Commission [1981] ECR 2639, paragraph 9, and Case T-87/Assicurazioni Generali and Unicredito v Commission [1999] ECR II-203, paragraph 37). Thus, an action for annulment is available in the case of all measures adopted by the institutions,
         whatever their nature or form, which are intended to have legal effects (Case 22/Commission v Council [1971] ECR 263, paragraph 42). 
      
In the present case, the contested act is the declaration of the President of the Parliament in the plenary session of October by which, “in accordance with Article 12(2) of the [Act], the ... Parliament takes note of the notification
         of the French Government declaring the disqualification of [the applicant] from holding office”. 
      
It is, therefore, necessary to examine whether that declaration produced binding legal effects such as to affect the interests
         of the applicant by bringing about a distinct change in his legal position. 
      
It is necessary, in that respect, to note the legal context in which that declaration was made. 
It is not in dispute that, at the material time in the present case, no uniform electoral procedure for the election of Members
         of the European Parliament had been adopted. 
      
Accordingly, pursuant to Article 7(2) of the Act, the electoral procedure for that election continued to be governed
         by the national provisions in each Member State. 
      
Thus, in particular, it follows from the first subparagraph of Article 12(2) of the Act, that the “application of national
         provisions in force in a Member State” could bring about a vacancy for a seat of a Member of the European Parliament. 
      
In application of the Act, the French Republic adopted, in particular, the Law. Article of that law provides that
         the election of Members of the European Parliament is governed by “Title I of Book I of the Electoral Code and the provisions
         of the following chapters”. Article of the same law, placed in Chapter III on “Conditions of eligibility, ineligibility
         and incompatibility”, provides in particular that “Articles LO to LO 130-of the Electoral Code shall apply to the election
         of [Members of the European Parliament]”, that “ineligibility arising during the term of office shall bring that term to an
         end” and that “ineligibility will be declared by decree”. 
      
Article 12(2) of the Act draws a distinction between two situations in which seats of Members of the European Parliament
         become vacant. 
      
The first situation, referred to in the first subparagraph of that provision, covers cases where the vacancy arises from the
         “application of national provisions”. The second situation, referred to in the second subparagraph of the same provision,
         covers “all other cases”. 
      
Contrary to the applicant’s contention in that regard, the first situation is not at all confined to the cases of incompatibility
         referred to in Article of the Act, but also includes cases of ineligibility. Whilst it is true that Article 6(3) of
         the Act states that Members of the European Parliament to whom “paragraphs and 2” become applicable are to be replaced
         “in accordance with Article 12”, it cannot be inferred from that reference that that article concerns solely cases of incompatibility
         covered by Article 6(1) and (2). It is to be observed, furthermore, that nowhere does Article refer to the concept of “incompatibility”,
         but uses the much wider concept of “vacancy [of the seat]”. 
      
In the first situation covered by Article 12(2) of the Act the role of the Parliament is confined to “taking note” that
         the seat of the person concerned is vacant. In the second situation, which covers, for example, the resignation of one of
         its Members, the Parliament “shall establish that there is a vacancy and inform the Member State thereof”. 
      
In the present case, since the contested act was adopted pursuant to the first subparagraph of Article 12(2) of the Act,
         it is necessary to determine the scope of the process of “taking note” prescribed by that provision. 
      
It should be pointed out, in that regard, that the process of “taking note” refers not to the disqualification from office
         of the person concerned but to the simple fact that his seat has become vacant as a result of the application of national
         provisions. In other words, the role of the Parliament is not to “bring about” the disqualification from office, as the applicant
         claims, but merely to take note of the declaration, already made by the national authorities, that the seat is vacant, that
         is to say, of a pre-existing legal situation resulting exclusively from a decision of those authorities. 
      
The Parliament’s power of verification in that context is particularly limited. It is essentially confined to verifying whether
         the seat of the person concerned is in fact vacant. In particular, contrary to the applicant’s contention, it is not for the
         Parliament to verify that the procedure laid down by the applicable national law or the fundamental rights of the person concerned
         have been respected. That power belongs exclusively to the competent national courts or, as the case may be, to the European
         Court of Human Rights. It should be noted, moreover, in that regard that, in the present case, the applicant has specifically
         asserted his rights before both the French Conseil d’État and the European Court of Human Rights. It should also be noted
         that the Parliament itself never claimed, either in its written pleadings or at the hearing, to have a power of verification
         as wide as that alleged by the applicant. 
      
It should be added that such a wide concept of the Parliament’s power of verification under the first subparagraph of Article
         12(2) of the Act would imply that it would be open to that institution to challenge the very lawfulness of the disqualification
         declared by the national authorities and to refuse to take note that a seat was vacant if it considered that it was faced
         with an irregularity. Rule 8(9) of the Rules of Procedure alone contemplates the possibility for the Parliament to refuse
         the vacancy of a seat and then only where it is called upon to “establish” such a vacancy and where there is “material inaccuracy”
         or “vitiated consent”. It would be paradoxical if the Parliament were to have a greater discretion in cases where it is required
         simply to take note of the vacancy of a seat established by the national authorities than in cases where it itself establishes
         the vacancy of a seat. 
      
Those findings are in no way contradicted by the wording of the second subparagraph of [Rule] 7(4) of the [Parliament’s] Rules
         of Procedure. As the Parliament and the French Republic rightly point out, that provision applies “upstream of the disqualification”
         and therefore of the vacancy of the seat. It provides for the President of the Parliament to refer the matter to the competent
         committee “where the competent authorities of the Member States initiate a procedure which might lead to the disqualification
         of a [Member of the European Parliament] from holding office”. Once that procedure is completed and the vacancy of the seat
         of the person concerned has been established by the competent national authorities, it remains only for the Parliament to
         take note of that vacancy, pursuant to the first subparagraph of Article 12(2) of the Act. In any event, pursuant to
         the principle of the hierarchy of norms, a provision of the Rules of Procedure cannot allow derogation from the provisions
         of the Act and confer on the Parliament wider powers than it holds under that act. 
      
Nor are those findings undermined by the fact that, until October 2000, the applicant continued to sit in the Parliament
         and to receive the allowances from that institution and that, until October 2000, the French authorities paid him his salary.
         It is not in dispute between the parties that the decree of March was enforceable. The fact that the Parliament did
         not take note of that decree as soon as it was notified by the French authorities, but at a later date, and the fact that
         certain practical consequences for the applicant flowed from it cannot alter the legal consequences which attach to that notification
         pursuant to Article 12(2) of the Act. 
      
The applicant’s arguments, first, that Article of the Law compromises parliamentary independence and constitutes an
         intolerable interference in its functions and, second, that there is a general principle that “the disqualification must be
         declared by the parliamentary assembly concerned”, are unfounded. As has already been pointed out in paragraph above, it
         is plain from the express wording of the first subparagraph of Article 12(2) of the Act that a seat of a Member of the
         European Parliament may become vacant pursuant to the “national provisions in force in a Member State”. Since no uniform electoral
         procedure had been adopted at the material time, that provision, and therefore the Law, were fully applicable. Whatever
         the development of the Parliament’s powers, new powers cannot render inapplicable provisions of primary law, such as the Act, in the absence of express repeal by a text of equal rank. 
      
For the same reasons, the applicant’s argument founded on the primacy of Community law is wholly irrelevant. In the present
         case, there is neither contradiction nor conflict between national law and Community law. 
      
It follows from all the foregoing considerations that, in the present case, the decree of March is the measure which
         produced binding legal effects such as to prejudice the interests of the applicant. The contested act was not intended to
         produce legal effects of its own, distinct from those of that decree. 
      
It must, therefore, be found that the contested act is not capable of being the subject of an action for annulment under Article
         EC. Accordingly, the present application must be dismissed as inadmissible without there being any need to address the
         other pleas in law and arguments on admissibility.’
      
 The appeal
By his appeal, Mr Le Pen essentially asks the Court to set aside the judgment under appeal on the ground that that judgment
         dismissed the action as inadmissible, to declare the action admissible and well founded and to annul the contested act or,
         in the alternative, to refer the case back to the Court of First Instance for it to reach a decision on the merits, to award
         him the sum of EUR 622.as irrecoverable expenses and to order the Parliament to pay the costs of the appeal in full.
      
The Parliament contends primarily that the Court should dismiss the appeal as being in part inadmissible and in part unfounded
         and order the appellant to pay the costs of the appeal and at first instance, including those of the proceedings for interim
         measures and, in the alternative, to refer the case back to the Court of First Instance. 
      
Like the Parliament, the French Republic contends that the Court should dismiss the appeal and order the applicant to pay
         the costs.
      
 The admissibility of the appeal
Since the Parliament and the French Government submit in their respective pleadings that a large part of the appeal is inadmissible
         on the ground that the appellant merely reproduces his pleas in law to the Court of First Instance without indicating precisely
         the contested passages of the judgment under appeal or the legal arguments specifically advanced in support of the appeal,
         it should be noted that under Article EC, the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice and
         Article 112(1), first subparagraph, (c) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, an appeal must indicate precisely
         the contested elements of the judgment which the appellant seeks to have set aside and also the legal arguments specifically
         advanced in support of the appeal. That requirement is not satisfied by an appeal which, without even including an argument
         specifically identifying the error of law allegedly vitiating the judgment under appeal, merely repeats or reproduces verbatim
         the pleas in law and arguments previously submitted to the Court of First Instance (Case C‑352/P Bergaderm and Goupil v Commission [2000] ECR I-5291, paragraphs and 35, and Case C-76/P Eurocoton and Others v Council [2003] ECR I‑10091, paragraphs and 47). 
      
However, provided that the appellant challenges the interpretation or application of Community law by the Court of First Instance,
         the points of law examined at first instance may be discussed again in the course of an appeal. Indeed, if an appellant could
         not thus base his appeal on pleas in law and arguments already relied on before the Court of First Instance, an appeal would
         be deprived of part of its purpose (see, inter alia, Case C-41/P Interporc v Commission [2003] ECR I‑2125, paragraph 17, and the order of November in Case C-488/P Martinez v Parliament [2003] ECR I-13355, paragraph 39).
      
The present appeal, taken as a whole, seeks specifically to challenge the Court of First Instance’s findings in respect of
         various questions of law which were submitted to it and, in particular, on the precise scope of the Act and of the words
         ‘take note of that fact’ in the first subparagraph of Article 12(2) of that act.
      
In those circumstances the present appeal is admissible.
 The merits of the appeal
By his appeal the appellant essentially challenges the Court of First Instance’s interpretation of Article 12(2) of the Act and more particularly its finding, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the contested act was not intended
         to produce legal effects of its own, distinct from those of the decree of March 2000. According to the appellant, such
         a finding, in addition to contradicting the finding in paragraphs and of that judgment that the Parliament ‘nevertheless’
         has a limited power of verification in a situation in which it is required to take note of a declaration, already made by
         the national authorities, that a seat is vacant, also distorts the very scope of Article of the Act.
      
In this respect, recalling the Court’s case-law according to which it is necessary to have regard to the substance of an act
         more than to its form and to take account of the express intention of its author, the appellant submits in the present case
         that the act which brought about a change in his legal position by depriving him of his elective mandate is indeed the contested
         act and not the decree of March 2000. That interpretation is moreover confirmed both by the very wording of the first subparagraph
         of Article 12(2) of the Act – which refers to the duty of the Parliament to ‘take note’ where a seat falls vacant pursuant
         to national provisions – and the position of the Legal Affairs Committee and of the President of the Parliament, as well as
         by the fact that, until October 2000, the appellant continued to sit in the Parliament and to receive the allowances from
         that institution and the salary paid by the French authorities.
      
Before examining the scope of Article 12(2) of the Act it is necessary at the outset to reject the appellant’s argument
         alleging a contradiction in the grounds of the judgment under appeal and, more particularly, between paragraphs and 97.
         As the French Government pointed out in its written observations, in addition to the fact that the term ‘nevertheless’ does
         not appear anywhere in those paragraphs, paragraph 91, taken out of context and quoted only in part by the appellant, necessarily
         leads to the conclusion which appears in paragraph of that judgment. Thus, it is precisely because it found in paragraph
         that the Parliament’s power of verification is particularly limited and essentially confined to verifying whether the seat
         of the person concerned is in fact vacant – in particular, it is not for the Parliament to verify that the procedure laid
         down by the applicable national law or the fundamental rights of the person concerned have been respected – that the Court
         of First Instance could find, in paragraph of that judgment, that the contested act did not produce legal effects of its
         own, distinct from those of the decree of March 2000.
      
As regards the appellant’s main argument alleging a distortion of the scope of Article 12(2) of the Act and a mistaken
         assessment by the Court of First Instance of the true legal nature of the contested act which alone brings about a change
         in his legal position, the contention that, in order to determine whether an act may be the subject of a challenge in an action
         under Article EC, it is the substance of the act in question and the intention of its author which should be taken into
         account, is well founded. According to settled case-law, the form in which an act or decision is adopted is in principle irrelevant
         to the right to challenge such acts or decisions by way of an application for annulment (see, in particular, Commission v Council, cited above, paragraph 42, and IBM v Commission, paragraph 9).
      
Whilst, from that perspective, it cannot therefore be excluded that a written communication, or even a mere oral statement,
         are subject to review by the Court under Article EC, that possibility cannot extend to an infringement of the rules and
         procedures governing the election of members of Parliament.
      
As the Court of First Instance rightly pointed out in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, at the material time,
         no uniform electoral procedure for the election of Members of the Parliament had been adopted and that procedure consequently
         continued to be governed by the provisions in force in each Member State pursuant to Article 7(2) of the Act. 
      
In those circumstances, since under Article of the Law ineligibility, declared by decree, brings to an end the term
         of office as a Member of Parliament, that institution had no choice but to take note without delay of the declaration, already
         made by the national authorities, that the appellant’s seat was vacant, since, as the Court of First Instance rightly pointed
         out in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that declaration concerned a pre-existing legal situation resulting exclusively
         from a decision of those authorities. None of the appellant’s arguments in the present appeal undermine that finding.
      
Thus, as regards first of all the appellant’s argument based on the very wording of Article 12(2) of the Act which refers
         to an obligation for the Parliament to ‘take note’ that a seat has fallen vacant pursuant to national provisions in force
         in a Member State, that provision, far from supporting the appellant’s argument, clearly highlights the complete lack of discretion
         on the part of the Parliament in the matter. In that particular case, the role of the Parliament is not to declare that the
         seat is vacant but, as the Court of First Instance rightly held in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, merely to take
         note that the seat is vacant as already established by the national authorities, whereas in the other cases concerning, inter
         alia, the resignation or death of one of its members, that institution has a more active role to play since Parliament itself
         establishes that there is a vacancy and informs the Member State in question thereof.
      
That interpretation is, moreover, supported by the wording of other provisions of the Act, such as Article 11, and of
         Rule 7(1) of the Parliament’s Rules of Procedure. Those two provisions, which concern the verification of the credentials
         of Members of the Parliament, confer on that institution the power to rule on the validity of the mandate of each of its newly
         elected Members and also on any dispute referred to it pursuant to provisions of the Act, ‘other than those arising out
         of the national provisions to which the Act refers’ (Article of the Act), and ‘except those [disputes] based on national
         electoral laws’ (Rule 7(1) of the Rules of Procedure). Those specific points, which were taken up without amendment in the
         current Article of the Act as amended by Council Decision 2002/772/EC, Euratom of June and September (OJ L 283, p. 1), and in Rule 3(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament currently in force (OJ L 44, p. 1),
         therefore indeed confirm, as Community law now stands, the complete lack of competence on the part of the Parliament where
         a seat falls vacant pursuant to national provisions.
      
In challenging that interpretation, the appellant goes on to highlight the importance of the intention of the author of the
         contested act in adopting it and submits, more particularly, that the Legal Affairs Committee and the President of the Parliament
         have ‘consistently considered to be beyond doubt’ the principle that the fact of taking note of the appellant’s disqualification
         from holding office changed only his status. That argument cannot be upheld. In addition to the point that such an argument
         concerns findings of fact which in principle do not fall within the Court’s review on an appeal, it is in any event clear
         from a number of documents annexed to the appeal that the Legal Affairs Committee and the President of the Parliament considered
         that they were bound by the French authorities’ declaration of disqualification.
      
That is true, in particular, of the minutes of the extraordinary meeting of the Legal Affairs Committee of May 2000, from
         which it is clear that the President of that committee brought to the attention of its members the fact that the decision
         of the Parliament should be confined to the ‘formality of whether or not to take note’, and of the letter sent two days later
         to the President of the Parliament in which the President of that committee clearly highlighted the ‘enforceable’ nature of
         the decree of March 2000. Those two facts, to which should be added the letter of June sent by the President of
         the Parliament to the French authorities in which she notes the ‘irreversible’ nature of the disqualification from holding
         office pursuant to that decree, were all taken into consideration in paragraphs 23, and respectively of the judgment
         under appeal. However, none of the Court of First Instance’s findings in those three paragraphs has been challenged in the
         present appeal. 
      
Lastly, as regards the fact, referred to by the appellant, that until October he continued to sit in the Parliament
         and to receive both the allowances from that institution and the salary paid by the French authorities – which in his view
         proves that the contested act alone was able to bring about a change in his legal position and, therefore, to be the subject
         of an action under Article EC – it should be noted, as the Court of First Instance rightly held, that those were practical
         consequences of the delay with which the Parliament took note of the French authorities’ notification of the decree of March 2000. It is that decree alone which brought about a change in the appellant’s legal position by establishing his disqualification
         from holding office.
      
The appellant advances two further arguments in support of his contention that the contested act is reviewable. The first
         is based on the fact that, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance expressly referred to
         the fact that the appellant had asserted his rights before the Conseil d’État and the European Court of Human Rights, which
         demonstrates the existence of a reviewable act since the Parliament thus carried out an assessment of matters of fact and
         law. The second argument concerns the irrelevance of the concept of a confirmatory act, which underpins paragraph of that
         judgment, since the proceedings referred to in paragraph specifically constitute new matters of law arising between the
         date of adoption of the decree of March and the date on which the Parliament took note of the disqualification of
         the appellant from holding office.
      
It suffices to note in this connection that the argument that the Parliament carried out an assessment of elements of facts
         and law is founded on a manifestly erroneous reading of the judgment under appeal since, as has been noted in paragraph of the present judgment, the Court of First Instance specifically held in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that it
         was not for the Parliament – but for the competent national courts or the European Court of Human Rights as the case may be
         – to verify that the procedure laid down by the applicable national law or the fundamental rights of the person concerned
         have been respected. Far from confirming that the Parliament has any discretion, the reference to the proceedings instituted
         by the appellant before the Conseil d’État and the European Court of Human Rights is therefore further evidence of the lack
         of any such discretion on the part of the Parliament and the fact that, contrary to his assertion, the appellant was in fact
         able to assert his rights by legal proceedings.
      
As for the appellant’s argument that, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance implicitly
         applied the concept of a confirmatory act, the Court finds that to be unfounded. As Advocate General Jacobs noted in paragraph
         of his Opinion, in addition to the fact that there is nothing in paragraph to suggest that the Court of First Instance
         had in mind such a concept, the grounds of the judgment under appeal taken as a whole demonstrate on the contrary that the
         decree of March and the contested act are distinct both in terms of their nature and their purpose.
      
In the light of all the foregoing considerations, the Court finds that the Court of First Instance did not err in law in dismissing
         as inadmissible the action of Mr Le Pen.
      
Consequently, the present appeal must be dismissed without examining the other pleas in law put forward by the appellant alleging
         both the formal and substantive unlawfulness of the contested act.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, applicable to the procedure on appeal by virtue of Article 118, the unsuccessful
         party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Parliament
         applied for costs and the appellant has been unsuccessful, he must be ordered to pay the costs of these proceedings, including
         those of the proceedings for interim measures referred to in paragraph of the present judgment. Under the first subparagraph
         of Article 69(4) of the Rules of Procedure, the French Republic, as intervener, is to bear its own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Dismisses the appeal;
2.      Orders Mr Le Pen to pay the costs of these proceedings including those of the proceedings for interim measures;
3.      Orders the French Republic to bear its own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 