
Case C-379/Maurits Casteels
v
British Airways plc
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Arbeidshof te Brussel)
(Freedom of movement for workers – Articles TFEU and TFEU – Social security for migrant workers – Protection of supplementary pension rights – Inaction on the part of the Council – Worker employed successively by the same employer in several Member States)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Social security for migrant workers – Provisions of the Treaty – Article TFEU – No direct effect 
(Art. TFEU)
2.        Freedom of movement for persons – Workers – Equal treatment – Supplementary pension – Conditions of acquisition governed by
            a collective agreement
(Art. TFEU)
1.        Article TFEU does not have any direct effect that may be relied on by an individual against his private-sector employer
         in proceedings before national courts.
      
(see para. 16, operative part 1)
2.        In the context of the mandatory application of a collective labour agreement, it is contrary to Article TFEU:
      
–      in determining the period for the acquisition of definitive entitlements to supplementary pension benefits in a Member State,
         for the years of service completed by a worker for the same employer in establishments of that employer situated in different
         Member States and pursuant to the same coordinating contract of employment not to be included;
      
– for a worker who has been transferred from an establishment of his employer in one Member State to an establishment of the
         same employer in another Member State to be regarded as having left the employer of his own free will.
      
(see para. 36, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
March (*)
      
(Freedom of movement for workers – Articles TFEU and TFEU – Social security for migrant workers – Protection of supplementary pension rights – Inaction on the part of the Council – Worker employed successively by the same employer in several Member States)
In Case C‑379/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Arbeidshof te Brussel (Belgium), made by decision of September
         2009, received at the Court on September 2009, in the proceedings
      
Maurits Casteels
v
British Airways plc,
      
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, E. Juhász, G. Arestis (Rapporteur), J. Malenovský and T. von Danwitz, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on October 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Mr Casteels, by M. Van Asch, avocat,
–        British Airways plc, by C. Willems, S. Fiorelli and M. Caproni, advocaten,
–        the German Government, by J. Möller and C. Blaschke, acting as Agents,
–        the Hellenic Republic, by E.-M. Mamouna, M. Michelogiannaki and S. Spyropoulos, acting as Agents,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by H. Walker, acting as Agent,
–        the European Commission, by V. Kreuschitz and M. van Beek, acting as Agents, 
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on November 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
The present reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles TFEU and TFEU.
      
The reference has been made in the course of proceedings between Mr Casteels, a Belgian national, and the subsidiary, established
         in Brussels (Belgium), of British Airways plc (‘BA’), a company incorporated under the laws of the United Kingdom, concerning
         the entitlement of Mr Casteels to supplementary pension benefits.
      
 Legal context
Paragraph 1(1) of the German Law on the enhancement of occupational old-age pensions (the Gesetz zur Verbesserung der betrieblichen
         Altersversorgung) of December (BGBl. I, 1974, p. 3610; ‘the BetrAVG’) provides:
      
‘An employee who has been given an assurance of old-age, invalidity or survivor’s pension benefits on grounds of his employment
         relationship (occupational old-age pension) shall retain his pension right where his employment relationship terminates prior
         to the operative event if, at that time, the employee has reached the age of at least and
      
–        either the assurance as to benefits has existed in respect of him for at least years
–        or the beginning of his employment was at least years ago and the assurance as to benefits has existed in respect of him
         for at least three years. …’
      
Paragraph 17(3) of the BetrAVG reads as follows:
      
‘Derogations from the provisions of Paragraphs to 5, 16, and may be effected by collective agreement. The derogating
         provisions shall apply between employers and employees not bound by a collective agreement if they agree that the relevant
         provisions of the collective agreement are applicable between them. As to the remainder, the provisions of this Law cannot
         be derogated from to the employee’s disadvantage.’
      
Clause of the Collective Pension Agreement No (Versorgungs-Tarifvertrag Nr. 3; ‘the Collective Agreement’) in force from
         January and concluded between BA’s establishment in Düsseldorf (Germany) and the Gewerkschaft Öffentliche Dienste,
         Transport und Verkehr (trade union for the public-services and transport sector), provides:
      
‘(1)      Employees who entered service with BA after December shall be entitled to repayment of their own contributions, without
         interest, where they leave the company before the statutory qualification periods have been completed.
      
(2)      The following rules shall apply to employees who entered service with BA before January 1978:
(a)      Employees with non-forfeitable entitlements may, where they leave the company before reaching the relevant age, demand payment
         of the value of the pension entitlement guaranteed by their own contributions …
      
(b)      Employees who leave service with BA of their own free will before the completion of years of service shall be entitled only
         to benefits which are guaranteed by their own contributions.
      
Employees who, after the completion of years of service, but before the completion of the statutory qualifying periods,
         leave service with BA of their own free will or for any another reason, shall be entitled to the pension benefits which are
         guaranteed up to that time by BA’s contributions. …
      
...’
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Mr Casteels worked for BA without interruption from July 1974. In the course of his working life, Mr Casteels at all times
         worked for that company in the territory of various Member States, namely the Kingdom of Belgium, the Federal Republic of
         Germany and the French Republic. He remained continuously linked to BA by a coordinating contract of employment which was
         amended on numerous occasions depending on the establishment in which he was working.
      
Mr Casteels thus worked in Belgium until November 1988, and then from November to October at the BA establishment
         in Düsseldorf. From October to April 1996, he was employed by BA in France, and thereafter he worked again in Belgium.
      
Mr Casteels’ contract of employment, dated March 1988, provided that he would be affiliated to the BA supplementary pension
         scheme in existence at the place of his employment.
      
On the occasion of Mr Casteels’ transfer from Brussels to Düsseldorf, it was agreed between the parties concerned that Mr
         Casteels’ conditions of employment would be those applicable to German employees who had entered the service of BA on July
         1974. However, one exception was provided for with regard to Mr Casteels’ affiliation to BA’s pension scheme in Germany, which
         was arranged with the group insurance fund of Victoria Lebensversicherungen AG. That affiliation could not take effect until
         Mr Casteels had taken up his duties at the BA establishment in Düsseldorf.
      
In the context of the main proceedings, BA disputes Mr Casteels’ entitlement to supplementary pension benefits for the period
         of work completed in Germany on the ground that Mr Casteels voluntarily left the Düsseldorf establishment in after serving
         less than the minimum period required, under Clause of the Collective Agreement, for the acquisition of definitive supplementary
         pension rights under the scheme in force at that establishment.
      
According to the Arbeidshof te Brussel, under the German legislation in force during the period in question, Mr Casteels was
         entitled only to repayment of his own contributions, to the exclusion of those paid by his employer. Therefore, as regards
         entitlement to supplementary pension benefits, Mr Casteels was, by reason of the fact that he had worked in different Member
         States for the same employer, in a less favourable position than if he had always worked in Belgium for that employer.
      
Prior to taking the decision on Mr Casteels’ application, the Arbeidshof te Brussel decided to stay the proceedings and to
         refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Can Article EC, in the absence of action on the part of the Council [of the European Union], be invoked by a private individual
         against his private-sector employer in a dispute before national courts?
      
(2)      Do Article EC, prior to the adoption of [Council] Directive 98/49/EC [of June on safeguarding the supplementary
         pension rights of employed and self-employed persons moving within the Community (OJ L 209, p. 46)], and Article EC,
         individually or in conjunction with each other, preclude the following situation:
      
In the case where an employee who is in the service of the same legal entity/employer, otherwise than in the context of postings,
         is employed successively in a number of establishments of that employer in various Member States and in each case is subject
         to the supplementary pension plans applicable to those establishments,
      
–        for the determination of a period for the acquisition of definitive entitlements to supplementary pension benefits (based
         on the contributions of the employer and the employee) in a particular Member State, no account is taken of the years of service
         already completed with the same employer in another Member State or of the employee’s membership of a supplementary pension
         scheme there, and
      
–        the transfer of an employee, with his agreement, to an establishment of the same employer in another Member State is treated
         as equivalent to the situation, as envisaged in the pension rules, of an employee voluntarily leaving an establishment, in
         which case entitlements to a supplementary pension are limited to the employee’s own contributions,
      
and that situation has the unfavourable consequence that the employee loses his entitlements to supplementary pension benefits
         in relation to his employment in that Member State, which would not have been the case had he worked for his employer in only
         one Member State and remained a member of the supplementary pension scheme of that Member State?’
      
 The questions referred to the Court
 The first question
By its first question, the national court is essentially asking whether Article TFEU has direct effect, in the sense that
         an individual can rely on that article against his private-sector employer in a dispute before national courts.
      
In that regard, it must be noted that Article TFEU does not have the objective of laying down a legal rule which is operative
         as such. It constitutes a legal basis which allows the European Parliament and Council, acting in accordance with the ordinary
         legislative procedure, to adopt such measures in the field of social security as are necessary to provide freedom of movement
         for workers.
      
That provision thus requires action by the European Union legislature and is for that reason subject in its effects to the
         adoption of a measure by the institutions of the European Union. It cannot therefore, as such, confer rights on individuals
         which those individuals might be able to rely on before their national courts.
      
Consequently, the answer to the first question must be that Article TFEU does not have any direct effect capable of being
         relied on by an individual against his private-sector employer in a dispute before national courts.
      
 The second question
By its second question, the national court is essentially asking whether Article TFEU must be interpreted as precluding,
         for the determination of the period for the acquisition of definitive entitlements to supplementary pension benefits in a
         Member State, the non-inclusion of the years of service already completed by a worker with the same employer in establishments
         of the employer situated in different Member States and pursuant to the same coordinating contract of employment.
      
The national court is also in doubt as to whether the consensual transfer of an employee to another establishment of the same
         employer, situated in a different Member State, is to be regarded as a voluntary departure of that employee, within the meaning
         of the rules of the supplementary pension scheme at issue.
      
It should be noted at the outset that Article TFEU not only applies to the action of public authorities but also extends
         to rules of any other nature aimed at regulating gainful employment in a collective manner (see Case C‑325/Olympique Lyonnais [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
It follows that Article TFEU applies to a situation such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which is characterised
         by the existence of a collective labour agreement governing the supplementary pension rights of Mr Casteels in relation to
         BA.
      
It is also settled case-law that all of the provisions of the FEU Treaty relating to the freedom of movement for persons are
         intended to facilitate the pursuit by European Union nationals of occupational activities of all kinds throughout the European
         Union, and preclude measures which might place such nationals at a disadvantage when they wish to pursue an economic activity
         in the territory of another Member State (see Case C‑212/Gouvernement de la Communauté française and Gouvernement wallon [2008] ECR I‑1683, paragraph and the case-law cited, and Olympique Lyonnais, paragraph 33).
      
Consequently, Article TFEU militates against any measure which, even though applicable without discrimination on grounds
         of nationality, is capable of hindering or rendering less attractive the exercise by European Union nationals of the fundamental
         freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty (see Gouvernement de la Communauté française and Gouvernement wallon, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In the case in the main proceedings, even though, admittedly, the provisions of the Collective Agreement, in particular Clause
         thereof, apply without distinction to all employees working in BA’s establishments in Germany and do not differentiate on
         grounds of the nationality of the employees concerned, the fact nonetheless remains that that collective agreement has the
         effect of placing workers in Mr Casteels’ situation, by reason of the fact they have exercised their right to free movement
         within the European Union, at a disadvantage in comparison with workers employed by BA who have not exercised such a right.
      
As the Advocate General has noted in point of her Opinion, the Collective Agreement is restricted to the territory of the
         Federal Republic of Germany.
      
Consequently, first, as regards workers employed by BA who, like Mr Casteels, were transferred from a BA establishment in
         another Member State to the BA establishment in Düsseldorf, the period of service completed at the first of those establishments
         is not regarded as a period of service which is relevant for the purposes of determining whether the person concerned has
         completed the minimum period required for the acquisition of definitive supplementary pension rights under the scheme in force
         in Germany.
      
By contrast, workers employed in the Düsseldorf establishment who have a length of service with BA equal to that of Mr Casteels
         but who have not exercised their right to free movement are able to claim an uninterrupted length of service for purposes
         of verifying completion of the period required, pursuant to the provisions of the Collective Agreement, for acquisition of
         definitive entitlement to supplementary pension benefits under the scheme in force at that establishment. Those workers benefit
         from continuity in the acquisition of their rights to a supplementary pension, whereas the period during which Mr Casteels
         acquired rights under the scheme in force at that establishment was unable to reach the minimum threshold required by Clause
         of the Collective Agreement on the ground that the acquisition of length of service with BA had, with regard to Mr Casteels,
         been interrupted by virtue of the fact that it resulted from periods of service completed in establishments of that same employer
         in different Member States.
      
Second, workers employed by BA who are transferred, with their consent, from the BA establishment in Düsseldorf to an establishment
         of the same employer in another Member State are deemed to have left BA, for the purposes of the Collective Agreement, with
         the result that they only have a right, under Clause 7(2)(b) of that collective agreement, to benefits which are guaranteed
         by the contributions which they themselves paid in the case where they were transferred before the expiry of a period of service
         of years.
      
By contrast, as the Advocate General observes in point of her Opinion, a BA employee who accepts a transfer from the Düsseldorf
         establishment to another BA establishment in Germany is not deemed to have left BA, for the purposes of the Collective Agreement,
         and therefore does not come within the scope of application of the provision of the Collective Agreement mentioned in the
         previous paragraph.
      
By making no provision for account to be taken of years of service completed by a BA employee in a BA establishment in another
         Member State, and by treating the consensual transfer of a BA employee to a BA establishment in another Member State as a
         voluntary departure from BA, the Collective Agreement thus places workers who exercise their right to free movement at a disadvantage
         inasmuch as they suffer financial losses as well as an adverse effect on their supplementary pension rights. The prospect
         of such a disadvantage is liable to dissuade workers, such as Mr Casteels, from leaving their employer’s establishment in
         one Member State in order to take up a position with an establishment of that same employer in another Member State (see,
         to that effect, Gouvernement de la Communauté française and Gouvernement wallon, paragraph 48).
      
Since the scheme at issue in the main proceedings in the present case constitutes an obstacle to the freedom of movement for
         workers which is, in principle, prohibited by Article TFEU, that scheme can be allowed only on condition that it pursues
         a legitimate objective in the public interest, is appropriate to ensuring the attainment of that objective, and does not go
         beyond what is necessary to attain the objective pursued (see, inter alia, Gouvernement de la Communauté française and Gouvernement wallon, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
BA points out, in this respect, that that scheme is designed to prevent a worker from being affiliated simultaneously to several
         pension schemes in different Member States. However, as the Advocate General has observed in point of her Opinion, there
         is, in a situation such as that of Mr Casteels, reason to fear, not unjust enrichment of the migrant worker, but, on the contrary,
         unjustified disadvantages through the loss of supplementary pension rights for the period during which Mr Casteels was affiliated
         to the German supplementary pension scheme.
      
The objective of staff loyalty invoked by BA cannot reasonably be advanced as justification for the unfavourable treatment
         suffered by workers who, when exercising their right to free movement within the European Union, remain in the service of
         the same employer.
      
According to established case-law, it is for the national court, to the full extent of its discretion under national law,
         to interpret and apply domestic law in conformity with the requirements of European Union law (see Case 157/Murphy and Others [1988] ECR 673, paragraph 11; Case C‑262/Engelbrecht [2000] ECR I‑7321, paragraph 39; and Case C‑208/ITC [2007] ECR I‑181, paragraph 68).
      
In that regard, it is important to bear in mind that Mr Casteels, who worked continuously for BA from July 1974, must, on
         a construction of the second subparagraph of Clause 7(2)(b) of the Collective Agreement in accordance with Article TFEU,
         be able to be regarded as having been in the service of BA since that date and as not having left that employer at the time
         of his transfer to BA’s establishment in France in order to be entitled to benefits based on his own contributions as well
         as on those of BA for the period of his affiliation to the scheme in force in the BA establishment in Düsseldorf.
      
That provision of the Collective Agreement provides that employees who entered the service of BA before January and
         who, after the completion of five years of service, but before the completion of the statutory qualifying periods, leave the
         service of BA of their own free will or for any another reason, are also entitled to the pension benefits which are guaranteed
         up to that time by BA’s contributions. It must be pointed out in that regard that, at the hearing before the Court, BA acknowledged
         that Clause 7(2) of the Collective Agreement could be applied to Mr Casteels.
      
It follows from the foregoing that the answer to the second question is that Article TFEU must be interpreted as precluding,
         in the context of the mandatory application of a collective labour agreement:
      
–        for the determination of the period for the acquisition of definitive entitlements to supplementary pension benefits in a
         Member State, the non-inclusion of the years of service completed by a worker for the same employer in establishments of that
         employer situated in different Member States and pursuant to the same coordinating contract of employment; and
      
–        a worker who has been transferred from an establishment of his employer in one Member State to an establishment of the same
         employer in another Member State from being regarded as having left the employer of his own free will.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article TFEU does not have any direct effect capable of being relied on by an individual against his private-sector employer
            in a dispute before national courts.
2.      Article TFEU must be interpreted as precluding, in the context of the mandatory application of a collective labour agreement:
–        for the determination of the period for the acquisition of definitive entitlements to supplementary pension benefits in a
            Member State, the non-inclusion of the years of service completed by a worker for the same employer in establishments of that
            employer situated in different Member States and pursuant to the same coordinating contract of employment;
–        a worker who has been transferred from an establishment of his employer in one Member State to an establishment of the same
            employer in another Member State from being regarded as having left the employer of his own free will.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 