
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-520/José Vicente Olaso Valero
v
Fondo de Garantía Salarial (Fogasa)
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Tribunal Superior de Justicia de la Comunidad Valenciana)
(Social policy – Protection of workers in the event of the insolvency of their employer – Directive 80/987/EEC – Scope – Definition of ‘claims’ – Definition of ‘pay’ – Compensation payable in the event of unfair dismissal)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Social policy – Approximation of laws – Protection of workers in the event of the insolvency of their employer – Directive
            80/– Scope – Definition of pay – Application of national law – National legislation including compensation for unfair
            dismissal – Whether permissible
(Council Directive 80/987, Art. 2(2))
2.        Social policy – Approximation of laws – Protection of workers in the event of the insolvency of their employer – Directive
            80/– Scope – Definition of pay – National legislation including compensation for unfair dismissal awarded by judgment
            or administrative decision and excluding claims established in a conciliation procedure – Breach of the principle of equal
            treatment – Duties and powers of the national court
(Council Directive 80/987, Art. 2(2))
1.        According to Article 2(2) of Council Directive 80/on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the
         protection of employees in the event of the insolvency of their employer, it is for national law to specify the term ‘pay’
         and to define it.
      
In this regard, the fact that Directive 80/links the payment of remuneration to reference periods does not exclude its
         application to compensation for unfair dismissal. If, therefore, the word ‘pay’, as defined by national law, includes that
         compensation, the latter falls within the ambit of Directive 80/as it stood even before it was amended by Directive 2002/74.
         
      
(see paras 31-33, operative part 1)
2.        In connection with the application of Council Directive 80/on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating
         to the protection of employees in the event of the insolvency of their employer, where, according to the national legislation
         in question, claims corresponding to compensation for unfair dismissal, awarded by judgment or administrative decision, fall
         within the definition of ‘pay’, identical claims, established in a conciliation procedure such as that in question in the
         circumstances of this case, must also be regarded as employees’ claims arising from contracts of employment or employment
         relationships and as relating to pay for the purposes of that directive. Workers who have been unfairly dismissed are in a
         comparable situation in so far as they are entitled to compensation where they are not reinstated.
      
The national court must therefore set aside domestic legislation which, in breach of the principle of equality, excludes the
         latter claims from the definition of ‘pay’ under that legislation.
      
(see paras 35, 38, operative part 2)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)December 2004(1)
(Social policy  –  Protection of workers in the event of the insolvency of their employer  –  Directive 80/987/EEC  –  Scope  –  Definition of ‘claims’  –  Definition of ‘pay’ –  Compensation payable in the event of unfair dismissal)
 In Case C-520/03,REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, from the Tribunal Superior de Justicia de la Comunidad Valenciana
            (Spain), by decision of November 2003, received at the Court on December 2003, in the proceedings
            
José Vicente Olaso Valero
v 
Fondo de Garantía Salarial (Fogasa),
THE COURT (First Chamber),,
 composed of P. Jann, President of the Chamber, K. Lenaerts, N. Colneric (Rapporteur), K. Schiemann and E. Juhász, Judges,
            
 Advocate General: A. Tizzano,Registrar: R. Grass,
             having regard to the written procedure,after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
            
–
 José Olaso Valero, by T. Alcalá Mellado, abogada,
            
–
 the Spanish Government, by L. Fraguas Gadea, acting as Agent,
            
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by G. Rozet and L. Lozano Palacios, acting as Agents,
            
and having regard to the decision taken, after hearing the Advocate General, to determine the case without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Council Directive 80/987/EEC of October on
         the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the protection of employees in the event of the insolvency
         of their employer (OJ L 283, p. 23).
         
            
 The reference has been made in proceedings between Mr Olaso Valero and the Fondo de Garantía Salarial (Wages Guarantee Fund,
         ‘Fogasa’) concerning Fogasa’s refusal to pay him, by virtue of its secondary liability, compensation for his unfair dismissal,
         the payment of that compensation having been agreed between the worker and his employer in a conciliation settlement.
         
Legal background
The relevant provisions of Community law
            
 Article 1(1) of Directive 80/provides that ‘[t]his Directive shall apply to employees’ claims arising from contracts of
         employment or employment relationships and existing against employers who are in a state of insolvency within the meaning
         of Article 2(1)’.
         
            
 Article 2(2) thereof states that that directive is without prejudice to national law as regards the definition of the terms
         ‘employee’, ‘employer’, ‘pay’, ‘right conferring immediate entitlement’ and ‘right conferring prospective entitlement’.
         
            
 Article 3(1) of that directive provides:
         ‘Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that guarantee institutions guarantee, subject to Article 4, payment
         of employees’ outstanding claims resulting from contracts of employment or employment relationships and relating to pay for
         the period prior to a given date.’
         
            
 According to Article of Directive 80/987, Member States are to have the option to restrict the liability of guarantee institutions,
         referred to in Article of that directive, by limiting it to pay corresponding to a particular period or by setting a ceiling.
         
            
 Article thereof provides that the directive is ‘not [to] affect the option of Member States to apply or introduce laws,
         regulations or administrative provisions which are more favourable to employees’.
         
            
 Under Article 10(a) thereof, the directive ‘shall not affect the option of Member States … to take the measures necessary
         to avoid abuses’.
         
            
 Directive 2002/74/EC of the European Parliament and the Council of September amending Directive 80/987/EEC (OJ L 270, p. 10), which entered into force after the material time, replaced Article of Directive 80/with the following
         text:
         ‘Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that guarantee institutions guarantee, subject to Article 4, payment
         of employees’ outstanding claims resulting from contracts of employment or employment relationships, including, where provided
         for by national law, severance pay on termination of employment relationships. 
          The claims taken over by the guarantee institution shall be the outstanding pay claims relating to a period prior to and/or,
         as applicable, after a given date determined by the Member States.’
         
The relevant provisions of national law Legislative Royal Decree 1/Article 26(1) and (2) of Legislative Royal Decree 1/of March approving the amended text of the Estatuto de los
         Trabajadores (Workers’ Statute) (BOE No of March 1995, p. 9654; ‘the Workers’ Statute’), provides:
         ‘All economic benefits which workers receive, whether in cash or in kind, in consideration of the services which they provide
         in their professional capacity for others shall be deemed to be remuneration, provided that those benefits remunerate actual
         work, whatever form the remuneration takes, or rest periods treated as work. …
          2.       Sums received by a worker by way of reimbursement of expenses incurred in performing his work, social security benefits and
         allowances and compensation for relocation, suspension or dismissal shall not be included in the definition of remuneration.’
         
            
 Article of the Workers’ Statute, as amended by Law 33/of July (BOE No of July 2002, p. 24683), under
         the heading ‘Equal pay for men and women’, states:
         ‘Employers shall be required to pay equal remuneration for work of equal value, directly or indirectly, whatever the nature
         of the work, whether as wages or as other benefits, without any discrimination as regards any of the elements or conditions
         thereof on grounds of sex.’
         
            
 Article 33(1) and (2) of the Workers’ Statute, in the version under Law 60/of December (BOE No of December
         1997, p. 37453), provides:
         ‘1.     The Wages Guarantee Fund, an autonomous body answerable to the Ministry of Employment and Social Security, which has legal
         personality and the capacity to act in order to achieve its objectives, shall pay to workers the remuneration owed to them
         in the event of insolvency, suspension of payments, bankruptcy or judicial settlement on the part of their employers.
          For the purposes of the preceding paragraph, “remuneration” shall include the amount which the conciliation agreement or the
         judicial decision recognises as such by virtue of the definition in Article 26(1), and also supplementary compensation in
         respect of “salarios de tramitación”, awarded where appropriate by the competent court, although the Fund shall in no case
         pay, jointly or separately, an amount greater than the product of twice the daily interprofessional minimum wage and the number
         of days of unpaid remuneration, up to a maximum of days.
          2.       The Wages Guarantee Fund, in the cases referred to in the previous paragraph, shall pay the compensation fixed by a judgment
         or administrative decision in favour of workers on account of their dismissal or of the cancellation of their contracts in
         accordance with Articles 50, and 52(c) of this Law, up to a maximum of one year’s pay, it being understood that the daily
         wage, taken as the basis for that computation, may not exceed twice the minimum interprofessional wage.
          The amount of compensation, for the sole purpose of its payment by the Wages Guarantee Fund in cases of dismissal or the cancellation
         of a contract in accordance with Article of this Law, shall be computed on the basis of days per year of employment
         and may not exceed the ceiling fixed in the previous paragraph.’
         
            
 According to Article 33(4) of the Workers’ Statute, the Fund is to perform the obligations mentioned in the preceding paragraphs,
         after having examined the case to check that it is well founded.
         
            
 Article of the Workers’ Statute, which refers to the grounds for termination of the contract at the worker’s request, provides:
         ‘1.     The following shall be valid grounds on which the worker may request the termination of the contract:
         
...
(c)
Any other serious breach by the employer of his obligations, save in case of force majeure ...
            
 2.       In those cases, the worker shall be entitled to the allowances provided for in the case of unfair dismissal.’
         
            
 Article 56(1) of the Workers’ Statute is worded as follows:
         ‘I.     Where the dismissal is held to be unfair, the employer, within five days of notice of the judgment being served, may choose
         between reinstatement of the worker together with payment of the “salarios de tramitación”, as prescribed in (b) below, and
         payment of the following sums, which must be determined by the judgment:
         (a)     compensation equivalent to days of remuneration per year of service, periods shorter than a year being calculated pro rata
         on a monthly basis up to monthly payments; 
         (b)     an amount equivalent to the remuneration payable with effect from the date of dismissal up to the date on which is served
         notice of the judgment holding the dismissal to be unfair or up to the date on which the worker finds another job, if he is
         recruited before judgment is delivered and if the employer provides evidence of the sums paid in order for them to be deducted
         from the “salarios de tramitación”. 
          The employer shall continue to register the worker with the social security authorities during the period corresponding to
         the remuneration referred to in (b) above.’
          Royal Decree 505/concerning Fogasa
         
            
 Article of Royal Decree 505/of March on the organisation and operation of the Wages Guarantee Fund (BOE No
         of April 1985, ‘Royal Decree 505/85’), provides:
         ‘For the purposes of this Royal Decree, all economic benefits to which workers are entitled shall be considered to be protected
         claims for wages provided that they remunerate:
         
(a)
work actually performed;
(b)
rest periods treated as work;
(c)
economic benefits paid under Article 56(1)(b) of the Workers’ Statute and the last paragraph of Article of the law on
               employment procedure.
            
...
 2.       The sum awarded to workers in the judgment, the employment authority’s decision or the judicial decision supplementing those
         shall be deemed to be a claim for compensation, on account of the dismissal or cancellation of the employment contract, in
         accordance with Articles and of the Workers’ Statute.’
         
            
 In accordance with Article 28(3) of that royal decree, ‘the finding of an abuse of process or a contravention of the law and
         where payment is not warranted because it has been established that the workers and employers have a common interest in creating
         the appearance of a legal state of insolvency for the purpose of obtaining payments from the Wages Guarantee Fund’ constitutes
         grounds for refusing claims for wage guarantee payments.
         
 The law on employment procedure
         
            
 Article of Legislative Royal Decree 2/of April approving the amended text of the Ley de Procedimiento laboral
         (Law on Employment Procedure) (BOE No of April 1995, p. 10695, ‘the LPL’) requires a conciliation procedure conducted
         by an administrative service before any judicial proceedings take place.
         
            
 Article of the LPL provides that, if the conciliation before that service should fail, it is mandatory for new conciliation
         proceedings to take place before the competent court.
         
The dispute in the main proceedings
            
 In a conciliation agreement drawn up on December before the Juzgado de lo Social (Labour Court) No of Valencia
         (Spain), in proceedings challenging his dismissal brought before that court by Mr Olaso Valero, it was recognised that his
         dismissal by the firm Valls y Lorente SL (‘Valls’) was unfair.  In the circumstances, Valls undertook to pay Mr Olaso Valero
         the ‘salarios de tramitación’ and compensation for unfair dismissal.  That undertaking was accepted by the employee.
         
            
 Valls having failed to pay the sums due pursuant to that undertaking on the day agreed, the Juzgado de lo Social No of Valencia
         made an order on February for enforcement of that undertaking.  By order of the same court of September Valls
         was declared insolvent.  That order was served on the parties and on Fogasa.
         
            
 Mr Olaso Valero then applied to Fogasa for payment of the guarantee benefits, which was refused by that body’s decision of
         October 2001.  With regard to the compensation for unfair dismissal, Fogasa stated that the sums claimed in that respect
         had been agreed in a conciliation settlement and were not, therefore, recognised by a judgment, a decision of the employment
         authority or a judicial decision supplementing such, in accordance with Article 14(2) of Royal Decree No 505/85.
         
            
 Mr Olaso Valero brought proceedings challenging Fogasa’s decision before the Juzgado de lo Social No of Valencia, which
         dismissed the action by judgment of March 2003.
         
The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 In its order for reference the Tribunal Superior de Justicia de la Comunidad Valenciana (High Court of Justice of the Community
         of Valencia), before which Mr Olaso Valero has brought an appeal against the order dismissing his action, finds that the issue
         of ‘salarios de tramitación’ has already been disposed of by the Court of Justice in Case C-442/Rodríguez Caballero [2002] ECR I-11915).
         
            
 With regard to compensation for unfair dismissal, the Tribunal observes that, in the light of Article of the Workers’ Statute,
         it would seem that the concept of ‘pay’ in Spanish law is not necessarily confined to wages alone, inasmuch as it may mean
         ‘wages’ or ‘other benefits’.
         
            
 The national court is conscious of some initial doubt as to the general application of Directive 80/to the compensation
         paid to a worker who has been unfairly dismissed, having particular regard to paragraphs and of Rodríguez Caballero.  It points out, inter alia, that it was Directive 2002/that introduced into Article of Directive 80/the reference
         to ‘severance pay on termination of employment relationships’ ‘where provided for by national law’.  Furthermore, Article
         4(2) of Directive 80/links the payment of remuneration to periods that do not accord well with the notion of compensation.
          Unless a quite unprecedented interpretation of the legal concept of pay is to be given, under Article of the Workers’
         Statute, to the effect that it covers compensation for unfair dismissal, it is apparent from Spanish law that Directive 80/is not applicable to that compensation, the national provisions in that respect being more favourable to workers than the
         Community rules.
         
            
 The court making the reference also harbours doubts as to observance of the general principles of equality and non-discrimination
         referred to in paragraphs 30, 31, and of Rodríguez Caballero.  In its view, if the provisions of Article of the Workers’ Statute and of Royal Decree 505/are to be regarded as falling
         within the ambit of Community law, it may be concluded, as in the case of ‘salarios de tramitación’, that if all unfairly
         dismissed workers – both those the unfair nature of whose dismissal has been recognised by a judgment and those who have entered
         into a conciliation agreement based on previous recognition of the unfairness of the dismissal – are entitled to compensation
         if they are not reinstated, the restriction imposed by Article 33(2) of the Workers’ Statute in respect of the compensation
         awarded by a judicial or administrative decision cannot be justified objectively.
         
            
 The Tribunal Superior de Justicia de la Comunidad Valenciana maintains that, in accordance with Article 28(3) of Royal Decree
         505/85, Fogasa had available to it enough guarantees to avoid any kind of fraud.  Conciliation under Article of the LPL
         is strictly supervised by the judicial authority which has to approve it.  That is all the more true in circumstances such
         as those of this dispute, in which the guarantee institution itself has admitted, at the hearing before the court, that the
         sum claimed is correct and in accordance with the ceilings and limits fixed by Spanish law. 
         
            
 It is on the basis of those decisions that the Tribunal Superior de Justicia de la Comunidad Valenciana has decided to stay
         proceedings and refer to the Court of Justice the two following questions for a preliminary ruling:
         
‘(1)
Does the compensation claimed for unfair dismissal fall within the ambit of Directive 80/… in its version prior to that
               as amended by Directive 2002/74?
            
(2)
From the point of view of observance of the principles of equality and non-discrimination, can the rules set out in Article
               33(2) [of the Workers’ Statute], in so far as they require a judgment or an administrative decision in order for Fogasa to
               pay the corresponding compensation, be regarded as objectively unreasonable and, therefore, inapplicable?’
            
On the questions referredOn the first question
            
 The ambit of Directive 80/is defined in Article thereof.  A reading of Article 1(1) in conjunction with Article 3(1)
         of that directive makes it clear that the directive covers only those claims made by workers that arise from contracts of
         employment or employment relationships where those claims relate to pay within the meaning of Article 3(1) (see Rodríguez Caballero, paragraph 26).
         
            
 According to Article 2(2) of Directive 80/987, it is for national law to specify the term ‘pay’ and to define it (Rodríguez Caballero, paragraph 27).  In the circumstances, that directive therefore refers back to Spanish law.
         
            
 The fact that Directive 80/links the payment of remuneration to reference periods does not exclude its application to
         compensation for unfair dismissal.  This finding is borne out by Article of that directive, in the version amended by Directive
         2002/74, which, while preserving the link to such periods, makes express reference to compensation for termination of the
         employment relationship.
         
            
 The answer to be given to the first question must therefore be that it falls to the national court to determine whether the
         word ‘pay’, as defined by national law, includes compensation for unfair dismissal.  If it does, such compensation falls within
         the ambit of Directive 80/as it stood before it was amended by Directive 2002/74.
         
On the second question
            
 The right reserved to national law to specify the benefits payable by the guarantee institution is conditional upon observance
         of fundamental rights, which include inter alia the general principle of equality and non-discrimination.  That principle
         requires that comparable situations should not be treated differently unless such difference in treatment is objectively justified
         (Rodríguez Caballero, paragraphs to 32).
         
            
 Workers who have been unfairly dismissed are in a comparable situation in so far as they are entitled to compensation where
         they are not reinstated.
         
            
 The different treatment afforded to those workers under the Spanish legislation, in so far as claims relating to compensation
         for unfair dismissal are payable by Fogasa only if they have been determined by a judgment or administrative decision, can
         thus be accepted only if it is objectively justified (see, to that effect, Rodríguez Caballero, paragraph 34).
         
            
 In this connection it has to be observed that the documents before the Court do not supply any information additional to that
         which the Court has already had an opportunity of examining in Rodríguez Caballero, paragraphs to 38.  It follows that no persuasive argument has been made to justify the difference in treatment between
         claims corresponding to compensation for unfair dismissal awarded by a judgment or administrative decision and claims for
         compensation for unfair dismissal established in conciliation proceedings.
         
            
 In light of the foregoing considerations the answer to be given to the second question must be that, where, according to the
         national legislation in question, claims corresponding to compensation for unfair dismissal, awarded by judgment or administrative
         decision, fall within the definition of ‘pay’, identical claims, established in a conciliation procedure such as that in question
         in the circumstances of this case, must be regarded as employees’ claims arising from contracts of employment or employment
         relationships and as relating to pay for the purposes of Directive 80/987.  The national court must set aside domestic legislation
         which, in breach of the principle of equality, excludes the latter claims from the definition of ‘pay’ under that legislation.
         
Costs
            
 Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court.  Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the
         costs of those parties, are not recoverable.
         
 On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) rules as follows:
         
 
1.
It falls to the national court to determine whether the word ‘pay’, as defined by national law, includes compensation for
                     unfair dismissal.  If it does, such compensation falls within the ambit of Council Directive 80/987/EEC of October on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the protection of employees in the event of the insolvency
                     of their employer, as it stood before it was amended by Directive 2002/74/EC of the European Parliament and the Council of
                     September amending Directive 80/987.
                  
 
2.
Where, according to the national legislation in question, claims corresponding to compensation for unfair dismissal, awarded
                     by judgment or administrative decision, fall within the definition of ‘pay’, identical claims, established in a conciliation
                     procedure such as that in question in the circumstances of this case, must be regarded as employees’ claims arising from contracts
                     of employment or employment relationships and as relating to pay for the purposes of Directive 80/987.  The national court
                     must set aside domestic legislation which, in breach of the principle of equality, excludes the latter claims from the definition
                     of ‘pay’ under that legislation.
                  
 Signatures.
      
 –
            
Language of the case: Spanish.
Top  
 