
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-329/The Queen, on the application of British Sugar plcvIntervention Board for Agricultural Produce(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the High Court of Justice of England and Wales, Queen's Bench Division (Administrative
            Court))
         
«(Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar – Regulation (EEC) No 2670/– Proof of export – Regulation (EEC) No 3719/– Correction of an export licence – Obvious inaccuracy – Principle of proportionality)»
Opinion of Advocate General Stix-Hackl delivered on September Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), February Summary of the Judgment
1..
Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar – Production in excess of the quota (C sugar) – Export licence stating a quantity of sugar lower than that actually exported or having expired – Proof of export – None – Licence extract endorsed by customs authorities – No effect  (Commission Regulation No 2670/81, Art. 2(2)(a)) 
2..
Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Import and export licences – Correction by the competent authorities of statement made in the licence or an extract therefrom – No inaccuracy in those documents – Not permissible   (Commission Regulation No 3719/88, Art. 24(2)) 
3. Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets –   Import and export licences – Correction by the competent authorities – Breach of the principle of proportionality – None – Interference with protected interests – None  (Commission Regulation No 3719/88, Art. 24(2)) 
4. Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar – Production in excess of the quota (C sugar) – Alteration of the charge to be paid – Discretion of the national court or the competent authorities – No evidence of wrongful conduct – None  (Commission Regulation No 2670/81, Art. 3) 
5. Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar – Production in excess of the quota (C sugar) – Export carried out after the expiry of the export licence – Obligation to pay the charge due in respect of sugar disposed of on the internal market  (Commission Regulation No 2670/81, Art. 3) 
1.
 The proof provided for in Article 2(2)(a) of Regulation No 2670/laying down detailed implementing rules in respect of sugar
         production in excess of the quota, as amended by Regulation No 158/96, has not been supplied in respect of a quantity of C
         sugar actually exported where that quantity exceeds the total quantity stated on the export licence or where the export takes
         place after the period of that licence's validity has expired. The fact that the C sugar concerned did actually leave the
         Community's customs territory is not conclusive in that respect. The same is true where the customs authorities have endorsed
         the licence extract for a quantity applied for, but which does not reflect the manufacturer's real intentions having regard
         to a customs declaration in a corrected form corresponding to the amount actually exported. see paras 49-50, 52, operative part 2.
 On a proper construction of Article of Regulation No 3719/laying down common detailed rules for the application of the
         system of import and export licences and advance-fixing certificates for agricultural products, as amended by Regulation No
         1199/95, the competent authority is not permitted to carry out a correction of the tonnage stated on the export licence or
         extract therefrom where there is no inaccuracy in the entries made in those documents themselves. see para. 56, operative part 3.
 Examination of Article of Regulation No 3719/88, laying down common detailed rules for the application of the system of
         import and export licences and advance fixing certificates for agricultural products, as amended by Regulation No 1199/95,
         has disclosed nothing which might affect its validity. In order to establish whether a provision of Community law complies
         with the principle of proportionality, it must be ascertained whether the means which it employs are suitable for the purpose
         of achieving the desired objective and whether they do not go beyond what is necessary to achieve it. It cannot be maintained
         that rules which do not themselves interfere with protected interests are capable of infringing the principle of proportionality.
         The sole purpose of Article 24(2), as is made clear by the 17th recital in the preamble to that regulation, is to allow errors
         attributable to the issuing agency or to obvious inaccuracies to be corrected. Such a provision does not give rise to any
         interference with the manufacturers' interests and it cannot, therefore, constitute a breach of the principle of proportionality.
         see paras 58-60, 63, operative part 4.
 Where there is no evidence of wrongful conduct on the part of the national authorities, their refusal to correct licence extracts
         where there is no inaccuracy in the entries made in those documents cannot permit either the national court or the competent
         authority to enjoy any discretion to vary downwards the charge to be paid pursuant to Article of Regulation No 2670/laying
         down detailed implementing rules in respect of sugar production in excess of the quota, as amended by Regulation No 158/96.
         see paras 66-67, operative part 5.
 Article of Regulation No 2670/81, laying down detailed implementing rules in respect of sugar production in excess of the
         quota, as amended by Regulation No 158/96, is to be interpreted as applying to an export of C sugar effected after the corresponding
         export licence has expired, if the export was made after the expiry of the corresponding export licence. see para. 73, operative part JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)February (1)
((Agriculture – Common organisation of the markets – Sugar – Regulation (EEC) No 2670/– Proof of export – Regulation (EEC) No 3719/– Correction of an export licence – Obvious inaccuracy – Principle of proportionality))
 In Case C-329/01, 
             REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending before the High Court of
            Justice (England and Wales), Queen's Bench Division (Administrative Court) between 
            
The Queen, on the application of
            British Sugar plc,  
and
Intervention Board for Agricultural Produce,
 on the interpretation of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2670/of September laying down detailed implementing rules
            in respect of sugar production in excess of the quota (OJ L 262, p. 14), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No
            158/of January (OJ L 24, p. 3), and on the interpretation and validity of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 3719/of November laying down common detailed rules for the application of the system of import and export licences and
            advance-fixing certificates for agricultural products (OJ L 331, p. 1), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1199/of May (OJ L 119, p. 4),
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
 composed of: V. Skouris, acting for the President of the Sixth Chamber, C. Gulmann, J.-P. Puissochet, F. Macken and N. Colneric (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: C. Stix-Hackl, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
 British Sugar plc, by T. Sharpe QC and D. Jowell, Barrister, instructed by A. Lidbetter and D. Green, Solicitors, 
               
─
 the United Kingdom Government, by J.E. Collins, acting as Agent, and K. Parker QC and R. Haynes, Barrister, 
               
─
 the Commission of the European Communities, by M. Condou-Durande and K. Fitch, acting as Agents, 
               
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2003, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By order of July 2001, received at the Court on September 2001, the High Court of Justice (England and Wales), Queen's
         Bench Division (Administrative Court), referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC seven questions
         on the interpretation of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2670/of September laying down detailed implementing rules
         in respect of sugar production in excess of the quota (OJ L 262, p. 14), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No
         158/of January (OJ L 24, p. 3), and on the interpretation and validity of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 3719/of November laying down common detailed rules for the application of the system of import and export licences and
         advance-fixing certificates for agricultural products (OJ L 331, p. 1), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1199/of May (OJ L 119, p. 4,  
         the contested regulation). 
         
            
 Those questions were raised in proceedings between British Sugar plc (
         British Sugar) and the Intervention Board for Agricultural Produce (
         IBAP) concerning the latter's decision to demand payment from the former of a charge pursuant to Article 3(1) of Regulation No
         2670/on the ground that British Sugar had failed to supply the requisite proof that certain quantities of sugar had been
         exported. 
         
The relevant provisions
            
 In connection with the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector, Council Regulation (EEC) No 1785/of June
         on the common organisation of the markets in the sugar sector (OJ L 177, p. 4), as amended by Council Regulation
         (EC) No 3290/of December (OJ L 349, p. 105,  
         the basic regulation), seeks to maintain the necessary guarantees in respect of employment and standards of living for producers of basic products
         such as European Community sugar-beet producers and to ensure the continuous supply of sugar to all consumers at reasonable
         prices, by stabilising the sugar market. 
         
            
 To those ends it regulates the production, import and export of sugar.  The essential features of this scheme are summarised
         in paragraphs to below. 
         
            
 The basic regulation defines and fixes certain quantities of A and B production.  Each Member State has to divide those A
         and B basic quantities between the sugar producers established in their territory.  An A quota and a B quota are allocated
         to the producing undertakings, on certain conditions, in respect of every marketing year (that is to say, from July in any
         one year to June the following year).  Sugar produced by an undertaking under its A and B quotas is known as  
         A sugar and  
         B sugar, respectively.  Any quantity of sugar produced in excess of the A and B quotas is known as  
         C sugar. 
         
            
 Article of the basic regulation provides for a system of compulsory import and export licences, the issue of which is conditional
         upon the lodging of a deposit to guarantee that the transaction for which the licence is sought will be effected.  An export
         licence for C sugar is valid from the date of issue until the end of the third month after that date.  The deposit is forfeit
         in whole or in part if the transaction is not effected or is only partly effected during the period of that licence's validity.
         
         
            
 C sugar is eligible for neither the system of price supports nor the system of export refunds.  Nor is it subject to set prices
         for beet or to production levies.  In addition, except in the circumstances described below, C sugar must be disposed of outside
         the Community to be sold on the world market.  
         
            
 Article of the basic regulation provides: 
         
(1)
 Without prejudice to paragraph 2, C sugar not carried forward pursuant to Article 27, C isoglucose and C inulin syrup may
         not be disposed of on the Community's internal market and must be exported in the natural state before January following
         the end of the marketing year in question.
          Articles 8, 9, and shall not apply to this sugar, and Articles 9, and shall not apply to this isoglucose or this
         inulin syrup.
         
(2)
 Exceptionally, and to the extent necessary to guarantee the Community's sugar supplies, it may be decided that Article shall apply to C sugar.  In that event it shall be decided at the same time that the entire quantity of the C sugar in question
         may finally be disposed of on the internal market without the amount laid down in paragraph being levied.
         
(3)
 Detailed rules for the application of this Article shall be adopted in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article
         41.
          These rules shall provide in particular for the levying of a charge on the C sugar, C isoglucose and C inulin syrup referred
         to in paragraph in respect of which proof of its export in the natural state within the prescribed period was not furnished
         at a date to be determined.
         
            
 Regulation No 2670/lays down the detailed implementing rules in respect of sugar production in excess of quota.  Article
         provides: 
         
(1)
 The products referred to in Article 26(1) of Regulation (EEC) No 1785/shall be considered to have been exported if:
         
(a)
 without prejudice to the other provisions of this Regulation, the proof referred to in Article is in the possession of the
         competent agency of the Member State of production, whichever the Member State of export of the C sugar, C isoglucose or C
         inulin syrup may have been;  
         
(b)
 the export declaration in question is accepted by the Member State of export before January following the end of the marketing
         year during which the C sugar, C isoglucose or C inulin syrup was produced;  
         
(c)
 the C sugar, C isoglucose or C inulin syrup or a corresponding quantity within the meaning of Article 2(3) has left the customs
         territory of the Community not later than days after the January referred to in point (b);  
         
(d)
 the product has been exported without either refund or levy as white sugar or raw sugar that has not been denatured or as
         syrups obtained prior to sugar in solid form and falling within CN codes and 99, such as isoglucose in
         its natural state or inulin syrup in its natural state. 
          Except in cases of  
         force majeure, if any of the conditions provided for in the first subparagraph are not fulfilled, the quantity of C sugar, C isoglucose
         or C inulin syrup concerned shall be considered to have been disposed of on the internal market....
         
            
 Article 2(2) of Regulation No 2670/provides that the proof referred to in Article shall be furnished by the production of:  
         
(a)
 an export licence issued pursuant to Article of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2630/of September laying down
         special detailed rules for application of the system of import and export licences in the sugar sector (OJ L 258, p.
         16) to the manufacturer by the competent agency of the Member State referred to ...; 
         
(b)
 the documents referred to in Articles and of Regulation (EEC) No 3183/required for the release of the security; 
         
         
(c)
 a statement by the manufacturer to the effect that the C sugar, C isoglucose or C inulin syrup was produced by him
         . 
         
            
 Article 3(1) of Regulation No 2670/is worded as follows: The Member State concerned shall levy on quantities which, within the meaning of Article 1(1), have been disposed of on the
         internal market, a charge for C sugar per kilograms of white or raw sugar as appropriate ... equal to the sum of:
         
─
 the highest import charges applicable to the product concerned during the period comprising the marketing year during which
            the C sugar ... concerned was produced and the six months following that marketing year and 
          the highest import charges applicable to the product concerned during the period comprising the marketing year during which
         the C sugar ... concerned was produced and the six months following that marketing year and 
         
─
 ECU 1.21.
          ECU 1.21.
         
            
 Article 3(2) of Regulation No 2670/provides that the Member State concerned must notify to those manufacturers who are
         required to pay the charge referred to in paragraph the total amount to be paid by May following January following the
         end of the marketing year during which the C sugar was produced.  
         
            
 Special detailed rules for the application of the system of import and export licences in the sugar sector were laid down
         in Commission Regulation (EC) No 1464/of June on special detailed rules for the application of the system of import
         and export licences in the sugar sector (OJ L 144, p. 14), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 2136/of September
         (OJ L 214, p. 19), which replaced Regulation No 2630/81. 
         
            
 Article of Regulation No 1464/provides: 
         
(1)
 For C sugar, C isoglucose and C inulin syrup produced for export in accordance with Article 26(1) of Regulation (EEC) No 1785/81,
         Section of the licence application and of the licence shall contain at least one of the following indications:
         ...
         
─
 for export under Article 26(1) of Regulation (EEC) No 1785/for export under Article 26(1) of Regulation (EEC) No 1785/...
         
(2)
 Section of the licence shall contain at least one of the following indications:
         ...
         
─
 for export without refund or levy . . . (quantity for which the licence is issued) kg  
          for export without refund or levy . . . (quantity for which the licence is issued) kg  
         ...
         
(3)
 Paragraph shall not apply to C sugar when, in accordance with Article 26(2) of Regulation (EEC) No 1785/81, it is subject
         to the export levy referred to in Article of that Regulation.
         
(4)
 Article 8(4) of Regulation (EEC) No 3719/shall not apply to the export licences for C sugar, C isoglucose and C inulin
         syrup.
         
            
 In accordance with Article of Regulation No 1464/95: An export licence for C sugar, C isoglucose and C inulin syrup may be issued only after the manufacturer in question has provided
         the competent body with proof that the quantity for which the licence is requested, or an equivalent quantity, has actually
         been produced in excess of the A and B quotas of the undertaking concerned ....
         
            
 Import and export licences for sugar are also regulated by Commission Regulation (EEC) No 3719/88, which replaced Commission
         Regulation (EEC) No 3183/of December laying down common detailed rules for the application of the system of import
         and export licences and advance fixing certificates for agricultural products (OJ L 338, p. 1), referred to in Article
         2(2)(b) of Regulation No 2670/81.  The first paragraph of Article 8(1) of Regulation No 3719/provides: The import or export licence shall constitute authorisation and give rise to an obligation respectively to import or to export
         under the licence, and, except in case of  
         force majeure, during its period of validity, the specified quantity of the relevant product ....
         
            
 According to the second paragraph of Article 8(1) of Regulation No 3719/88, the obligations referred to in that paragraph
         are primary requirements within the meaning of Article of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2220/of July laying
         down common detailed rules for the application of the system of securities for agricultural products (OJ L 205, p. 5),
         as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 3403/of December (OJ L 310, p. 4). 
         
            
 Article of Regulation No 3719/provides: Extracts from licences or certificates shall have the same legal effects as the licences or certificates from which they are
         extracted, within the limits of the quantity in respect of which such extracts are issued.
         
            
 Under Article of that regulation: 
         
(1)
 On application by the titular holder of the licence or certificate or by the transferee, and on submission of copy No of
         the document, one or more extracts therefrom may be issued by the competent agencies of Member States. 
         ...The agency issuing the extract shall, on copy No of the licence or certificate, attribute the quantity for which the extract
         has been issued, increased by the relevant tolerance. The word  
         extract shall be entered beside the attributed quantity shown on copy No of the licence or certificate. 
         
(2)
 No further extract may be made from an extract of a licence or certificate.
         ...
         
            
 Article 21(1) of Regulation No 3719/provides: For the purpose of determining their period of validity, licences or certificates shall be considered to have been issued
         on the day on which the application for them was lodged, that day being included in the calculation of such period of validity.
         
            
 Article 22(1) of that regulation is worded as follows: Copy No of the licence or certificate shall be submitted to the office where: ...(b) in the case of an export licence or of a certificate of advance fixing of the refund, the declaration relating to: - export
         from the Community [is accepted]...
         
            
 Article of that regulation provides: 
         
(1)
 Entries made on licences, certificates or extracts may not be altered after their issue.
         
(2)
 Where the accuracy of entries on the licence, certificate or extract is in doubt, such licence, certificate or extract shall,
         on the initiative of the party concerned or of the competent authorities of the Member State concerned, be returned to the
         issuing agency.
          If the issuing agency considers a correction to be required, it shall withdraw the extract or the licence or certificate as
         well as any extracts previously issued and shall issue without delay either a corrected extract or a corrected licence or
         certificate and the corrected extracts corresponding thereto. On such further documents, which shall include the entry  
         licence (or certificate) corrected on ... or  
         extracts corrected on ..., the former attributions shall be reproduced, as appropriate, on each copy.Where the issuing agency does not consider it necessary to correct the licence or certificate or the extract, it shall enter
         thereon the endorsement  
         verified on ... in accordance with Article of Regulation (EEC) No 3719/and apply its stamp.
         
            
 The 17th recital in the preamble to Regulation No 3719/states: Whereas, in the interest of sound administration, licences or certificates and extracts therefrom may not be amended after
         issue; whereas, however, in cases of doubt relating to an error attributable to the issuing agency or to obvious inaccuracies
         and concerning the items appearing on the licence or certificate or extract, a procedure should be introduced whereby inaccurate
         licences or certificates or extracts may be withdrawn and corrected documents issued.
         
            
 Articles and of Regulation No 3719/provide: Article (1)
 Fulfilment of a primary requirement shall be shown by production of proof:
         ...
         
(b)
 for exports, of acceptance of the declaration referred to in Article 22(1)(b) relating to the product concerned; furthermore:
          
         
(i)
 in the case of either export from the customs territory of the Community, or supplies treated as exports within the meaning
         of Article of Regulation (EEC) No 3665/87, proof shall be required that the product has, within days from the day of
         acceptance of the export declaration, unless prevented by  
         force majeure, as the case may be, either, in the case of supplies treated as exports, reached its destination or, in other cases, left
         the customs territory of the Community ... 
         
...Article (1)
 The proof required under Article shall be furnished as follows:
         ...
         
(b)
 in cases as referred to in Article 30(1)(b) and (2) and subject to the provisions of paragraph 2, by production of copy No
         of the licence or certificate and, where appropriate, of copy No of the extract or extracts of the licence or certificate,
         endorsed as provided for in Article or Article 23.  
         
(2)
 Furthermore, in the case of export from the Community or of supplies to a destination specified in Article of Regulation
         (EEC) No 3665/or the placing of products under the arrangements provided for in Article of that Regulation, additional
         proof shall be required.
          Such additional proof:
         
(a)
 shall be left to the choice of the Member State concerned where the following operations take place within that Member State:
          
         
(i)
 the licence or certificate is issued; and  
         
(ii)
 the declaration referred to in Article 22(1)(b) is accepted; and  
         
(iii)
 the product ...: - leaves the customs territory of the Community ... ...
         
The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 On August British Sugar applied to IBAP for an export licence for million kilograms (specified in words and figures)
         of C sugar. On August IBAP issued export licence number 3SGfor tonnes of C sugar (
         the head licence), valid up to November inclusive, with security against failure to export this quantity marked at GBP 249.74.
          On the same day IBAP, at British Sugar's request, issued the first extract from that licence directly to the Applicant's
         shipping agent, Oughtred & Harrison (
         O & H). 
          The first shipment at issue
         
            
 On August (the date on which the head licence and the first extract were issued), British Sugar made four further separate
         applications for extracts (extracts to 5) from that licence.  The  
         pro forma application for the third extract, as for the first extract and in accordance with British Sugar's current practice, requested
         that the relevant extract should be forwarded directly to O & H. 
         
            
 The application for the third extract stated, under  
         Tonnage required,  
         in figures and beneath,  
         Two thousand nine hundred kilogrammes in words. British Sugar argues that the application for the third extract contained an error in that the true intention of
         the Applicant was to apply for tonnes of sugar and not kg.  Nevertheless, British Sugar entered in its own records
         an export of 2.tonnes and proceeded to request licence extracts on that basis. 
         
            
 An extract in the amount of 2.tonnes was issued by IBAP on August and an attribution in the sum of 2.tonnes was
         made by IBAP against the head licence which it retained.  As requested, the licence extract was forwarded directly to O &
         H.  British Sugar claims that it did not see the extract.  Nor was the head licence retained by IBAP ever seen by British
         Sugar at any time. 
         
            
 IBAP is not in a position to confirm when the relevant export declaration (Customs Form C88) was drawn up, but states that
         Customs Form Cwas typed by O & H from a  
         pro forma Cprovided by British Sugar. In accordance with the  
         pro forma, the Cform declared for export kg in box 38; that was corrected by O & H and replaced with kg.  Further,
         O & H described the packages as x kg (i.e. tonnes) with a value of GBP 493.  In box 47, which provides
         for basic details concerning quantity, in the column headed  
         net mass a figure of was declared and the column headed  
         unit was left blank. However, the column headed  
         export licence referred to licence number 3SG00070/03, which was issued for a quantity of kg. 
         
            
 On August O & H presented Form Cand the licence extract to H.M. Customs & Excise, under cover of a letter seeking
         permission to load tonnes of sugar.  O & H asked the customs authorities to stamp the letter as proof that permission
         to load had been granted.  The letter was stamped by the Customs & Excise and dated August 1997.  The Form Cdeclared
         the date of the goods' export from the United Kingdom as August 1997, although the declaration was accepted by the customs
         authorities on August following the late submission on that date of a notification of completion of loading.  It is
         not disputed that the customs authorities endorsed the Con the date of acceptance, stamping it against an attribution for
          
         Two million nine hundred thousand kilos.  IBAP is not in a position to confirm when the manuscript addition to box of the Cwas made, but notes that British
         Sugar states that that correction was made by O & H, which was aware that the company intended to export kg of C
         sugar. 
         
            
 On August tonnes of sugar were shipped to a destination outside the European Union. 
         
            
 On August the customs authorities attributed the licence extract with  
         T and  
         Two million nine hundred thousand kilos (i.e. tonnes) by stamping and signing the document.  While the ship had indeed sailed on August 1997, proof of departure
         was not furnished until August 1997, which explains the delay in attribution, notwithstanding the earlier punctual receipt
         of the Customs declaration and licence extract. 
         
            
 The Form Cwas endorsed by Customs by their stamp in the top right-hand corner and in box 38, marked  
         Net mass (kg), containing the figures 000.  Customs endorsed the reverse of the Form Cwith their stamp halfway down the right-hand
         side and in the bottom right-hand corner, and ticked box A1, marked  
         Satisfied that the goods specified have left the UK ... for export to a non-member country. 
         
            
 IBAP received the relevant licence on September 1997. 
         
            
 As a result of post-clearance inspection of the relevant export documents, which began on that date, it appeared to IBAP both
         that the Form Cand, possibly, the licence had been lodged after shipment of the goods, and that the net mass declared in
         box in that form did not conform to the quantity stated in boxes and of the extract from that licence.  In various
         letters sent to British Sugar between and October IBAP drew the latter's attention to those facts. 
         
            
 On October there remained tonnes of unused capacity on the head licence. On October that quantity was
         exported under that licence. 
         
            
 By letter of April British Sugar formally requested IBAP to use its powers of amendment under Article of Regulation
         No 3719/in order to  
         regularise the position and remove the inaccuracies.  IBAP took the view it had no option but to refuse to make any amendment of the head licence or of any extract from it.
         
          The second shipment at issue
         
            
 According to paragraphs to of the annex to the order for reference addressed to the Court: Following the third extract, there were a further extracts taken from the head licence which extinguished the quantity
         thereon. On September 1997, [British Sugar] was issued with an extract for 298.tonnes (the 46th extract and the amount
         for which [it] applied). Though one consignment of tonnes was shipped under this extract on October (i.e before
         the last day of validity of the head licence and extract), a second consignment of 158.tonnes was not exported until December
         (i.e days after the last day of validity of the head licence and extract).Customs, acting as the Respondent's agent, attributed the licence extract with  
         158.2T and  
         One hundred and fifty-eight thousand, two hundred kilograms (i.e. 158.tonnes) by placing its stamp and signature on it.A Form Cin respect of this consignment of 298.tonnes was endorsed by Customs by its stamp in the top right-hand corner
         and, on the reverse, on the right-hand side half way down and in the bottom right-hand corner. Customs also ticked box Aon the reverse, marked  
         Satisfied that the goods specified have left the UK ... for export to a non-member country.
         
            
 On receipt of a Cexport declaration form on December 1997, IBAP reviewed the declaration on and December and
         discovered that 158.tonnes of sugar had been exported on December under the 46th extract, after the head licence
         and relevant extract had expired.  British Sugar was informed by letter of that irregularity soon after that review. 
          Levying of the charge payable pursuant to Article 3(1) of Regulation No 2670/IBAP considered that it must demand that British Sugar should pay a charge under Article of Regulation No 2670/for failure
         to supply the required proof that the goods had been exported, namely, a valid licence for the full volume exported in respect
         of exports made under the third and 46th extracts. 
         
            
 On April IBAP issued an invoice for a charge calculated according to the terms of Article 3(1) of that regulation.
          That charge concerns a quantity of 055.tonnes, that is to say, the principal element of the application in the main proceedings
         (897.tonnes, or less 2.9) to which is added the second element (158.tonnes).  The charge comes to GBP 520.49.
          The basis for levying that charge is the finding that British Sugar had not satisfied the conditions laid down in Article
         2(2) of Regulation No 2670/81. 
         
            
 The order to pay that charge was sent to British Sugar on April and it was IBAP's decision of December to
         seek recovery of that charge which is the subject-matter of the case in the main proceedings. 
         
            
 Those were the circumstances in which the High Court of Justice (England and Wales), Queen's Bench Division (Administrative
         Court), decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
         
(1)
 In circumstances where:
         
(a)
 a trader has exported a quantity of C sugar which exceeds the amount for which export was authorised by the licence concerned;
         and/or 
         
(b)
 a trader has exported C sugar after the expiry of the validity of the licence authorising the said export; and 
         
(c)
 even if, as a matter of fact, the relevant C sugar left the Customs territory of the Community; has the proof required by the first indent of Article 2(2) of Regulation No 2670/been furnished in relation to that export,
         or that element of the relevant export, which was not covered by a valid licence? 
         
(2)
 In the circumstances described in paragraph 1(a) above, is the answer to the above question different in circumstances where:
         
         
(a)
 the trader presented to the customs authority a customs declaration form (C88) amended in manuscript to reflect the amount
         actually exported; and 
         
(b)
 the customs authority has endorsed the relevant licence extract against the trader's entry in the actual amount exported?
         
         
(3)
 Is the answer to question above different on the assumption that the circumstances were as follows: 
         
(a)
 the trader intended to apply for an extract for tonnes;. 
         
(b)
 owing to an error on the part of the trader, a licence extract was issued for 2.tonnes and this [
         sic] 2.tonnes was [
         sic] recorded in the records of both the Intervention Board and the trader; 
         
(c)
 the licence extract was attributed, with the authority of the trader, by the trader's agent, accurately to record the trader's
         intention of exporting tonnes; 
         
(d)
 that licence extract was subsequently endorsed by H.M. Customs & Excise to certify the export of tonnes of sugar; 
         
(e)
 the sugar was subject to a Form Cexport licence for tonnes, which was subsequently attributed and endorsed by H.M.
         Customs & Excise; 
         
(f)
 tonnes of sugar were in fact exported; 
         
(g)
 licence extracts were subsequently applied for, and granted, on the basis that only 2.tonnes had earlier been authorised
         for export; 
         
(h)
 each subsequent licence extract was duly attributed and endorsed and all sugar tonnages so noted were in fact exported; 
         
(i)
 in the result, 897.tonnes of sugar were exported in excess of the volume authorised in the original licence? 
         
(4)
 Does Article of Regulation No 3719/enable the competent authority to withdraw the extract or the licence or certificate
         as well as any extracts previously issued and require the competent authority to issue without delay a corrected licence or
         extract or any attribution thereto in circumstances where: 
         
(a)
 there is no obvious or manifest error on the face of the licence or extract itself and where there has been no error on the
         part of the issuing agency; and/or 
         
(b)
 the amendment is sought to be made after the expiry of the validity of the relevant extract or head licence? 
         
(c)
 does it make a difference if the trader intended to apply for a licence extract (from a licence already issued) in respect
         of a quantity greater than that for which he called off [
         sic]? 
         
(5)
 If the answers to the above questions are negative, do the provisions of Article of Commission Regulation 3719/infringe
         the Community law principles of proportionality and/or equality in that the absence of any power to amend the head licence,
         licence extract or attributes thereto may, in the circumstances referred to above, lead to the imposition of a fine under
         Article of Commission Regulation No 2670/81? 
         
(6)
(a)
 Does the national court and/or the national authority have a discretion to vary (downwards) the amount of the penalty to be
         imposed under Article of Commission Regulation No 2670/81? 
         
(b)
 If so, are there any factors in this case which the Court regards as relevant to the exercise of that discretion? 
         
(7)
 In the circumstances referred to in paragraphs to above [reproduced in paragraph above], is a penalty under Article
         of Regulation No 2670/properly levied?
         
Consideration of the first three questions
            
 The first three questions, which may appropriately be examined together, concern the interpretation of Article 2(2)(a) of
         Regulation No 2670/81.  
         
            
 In accordance with that provision, the proof referred to in Article of that regulation requires the production of an export
         licence issued pursuant to Article of Regulation No 2630/─ replaced by Article of Regulation No 1464/─ to the manufacturer
         by the competent agency of the Member State. 
         
            
 In paragraph of its judgment in Case C-161/Südzucker [1998] ECR I-281, the Court held that, despite the fact that the quantity of sugar at issue had left the customs territory
         of the Community, the Commission could legitimately consider that production of the export licence bearing the required attributions
         and endorsements was necessary in order to ensure compliance with the requirements relating to the export of C sugar.  In
         paragraph of that judgment, it noted that the obligation to prove that the requirements relating to the export of C sugar
         had been complied with by means of such a licence was essential to the proper functioning of the quota system. 
         
            
 As is apparent from the ninth recital in the preamble to the basic regulation, it must be made possible for the competent
         authorities to keep a constant watch on movements in trade with non-member countries in order to enable them to assess trends
         in such movements and, where appropriate, to apply the measures provided for in that regulation.  To this end, provision was
         made for a system of export licences. 
         
            
 Licences for the export of C sugar do not thus have the sole purpose of proving the quantity exported and the date of export,
         but also the objective of quantitative and temporal regulation of the related exports in order to avoid undesired effects
         on the common organisation of the sugar market. 
         
            
 It follows from the above that the proof provided for in Article 2(2)(a) of Regulation No 2670/has not been supplied in
         respect of a quantity of C sugar actually exported where that quantity exceeds the total quantity stated on the export licence
         or where the export takes place after the period of that licence's validity has expired.  The fact that the C sugar at issue
         in the case in the main proceedings did actually leave the Community's customs territory is not conclusive in that respect.
         
         
            
 As regards the fact, referred to in the second question, that the customs authorities endorsed the licence extract at issue
         against the manufacturer's customs declaration in a corrected form corresponding to the amount actually exported, it is sufficient
         to state that those authorities do not act as the person vested with the legal representation of IBAP.  In any case, the fact
         that the amount actually exported was attributed and endorsed on the licence extract does not alter the manufacturer's obligation
         to produce a licence extract valid for the quantity actually exported. 
         
            
 Nor is the reply to be given to the first question altered by the hypotheses suggested in the third question, which relate
         in some detail to the situation under consideration in the second question, on the one hand, and to the fact that, as regards
         the applications for licence extracts, the trader's mistake was not corrected, and to the consequences of that fact, on the
         other. 
         
            
 The answer to be given to the first three questions must therefore be that the proof provided for in Article 2(2)(a) of Regulation
         No 2670/has not been supplied in respect of a quantity of C sugar actually exported where that quantity exceeds the total
         quantity stated on the export licence or where the export takes place after the period of that licence's validity has expired.
          The fact that the C sugar at issue in the case in the main proceedings did actually leave the Community's customs territory
         is not conclusive in that respect.  The same is true where the customs authorities have endorsed the licence extract for a
         quantity applied for, but which does not reflect the manufacturer's real intentions having regard to a customs declaration
         in a corrected form corresponding to the amount actually exported. 
         Consideration of the fourth question
            
 A correction made pursuant to Article 24(2) of Regulation No 3719/presupposes that an entry in the export licence or licence
         extract is inaccurate. 
         
            
 There is no inaccuracy within the meaning of that provision where the tonnage entered in the application for an extract is
         accurately transcribed on that extract. 
         
            
 That finding holds good regardless of whether or not the entries made in the application reflect the applicant's real intentions.
          It is not the objective of Article 24(2) to correct applications for export licences or extracts therefrom.  Moreover, if
         the applicant has not made any such request, the agency issuing those licences is not even entitled to issue an extract from
         a licence in excess of the amount of tonnage expressly requested. 
         
            
 Consequently, the answer to be given to the fourth question must be that, on a proper construction of Article of Regulation
         No 3719/88, the competent authority is not permitted to carry out a correction of the tonnage stated on the export licence
         or extract therefrom where there is no inaccuracy in the entries made in those documents themselves. 
         
            
 Given that, in circumstances such as those of the case in the main proceedings, there is no inaccuracy within the meaning
         of Article of Regulation No 3719/88, there is no need to reply to the question concerning the validity of corrections made
         after the period of the export licence's validity has expired. 
         Consideration of the fifth question
            
 According to the Court's case-law, in order to establish whether a provision of Community law complies with the principle
         of proportionality, it must be ascertained whether the means which it employs are suitable for the purpose of achieving the
         desired objective and whether they do not go beyond what is necessary to achieve it (see, inter alia, Case C-426/Germany v  
         Council [1995] ECR I-3723, paragraph 42, and Case C-491/British American Tobacco (Investments) and Imperial Tobacco [2002] ECR I-11453, paragraph 122). 
         
            
 It cannot be maintained that rules which do not themselves interfere with protected interests are capable of infringing the
         principle of proportionality. 
         
            
 The sole purpose of Article 24(2) of Regulation No 3719/88, as is made clear by the 17th recital in the preamble to that regulation,
         is to allow errors attributable to the issuing agency or to obvious inaccuracies to be corrected.  Such a provision does not
         give rise to any interference with the manufacturers' interests and it cannot, therefore, constitute a breach of the principle
         of proportionality. 
         
            
 As regards the principle of equality, it must be stated that British Sugar has not put forward any arguments capable of establishing
         that Article 24(2) of Regulation No 3719/itself is invalid by reason of breach of that principle. 
         
            
 It must be added that when, as a result of an error contained in an extract from an export licence and falling within the
         applicant's sphere of responsibility, an extract has been issued in respect of a quantity which is too low in relation to
         the applicant's intentions, the regulation does not prevent the manufacturer from avoiding the payment of a charge under Article
         3(1) of Regulation No 2670/81, by requesting the issue of another extract to cover the missing amount, before exporting the
         quantity of goods actually intended. 
         
            
 In light of the foregoing, the answer to be given to the fifth question must be that examination of Article of Regulation
         No 3719/has disclosed nothing which might affect its validity. 
         Consideration of the sixth question
            
 Nothing in the wording of Article of Regulation No 2670/indicates that the competent authorities have any power to alter
         the charge in question. 
         
            
 British Sugar observes, however, that if a clearly wrongful act or omission can be attributed to IBAP, Community law not only
         authorises the latter to vary a penalty but even requires it. 
         
            
 It is not necessary to decide whether that interpretation must be upheld.  In the case in the main proceedings no argument
         has been put forward which would  make it possible to conclude that there was any wrongful conduct on IBAP's part.  The one
         and only argument alleging fault supposedly committed by IBAP is the argument concerning its refusal to correct the licence
         extracts in question, conduct which, as paragraphs to above make clear, does not lay it open to any complaint. 
         
            
 In consequence, the answer to be given to the first part of the sixth question must be that, in circumstances such as those
         in the case in the main proceedings, neither the national court nor the competent authorities enjoy any discretion to vary
         downwards the charge to be paid pursuant to Article of Regulation No 2670/81. 
         
            
 Having regard to that answer, there is no longer any need to reply to the second part of that question. 
         Concerning the seventh question
            
 By its seventh question the court making the reference seeks in essence to ascertain whether, in the circumstances described
         in paragraphs to of the order for reference (reproduced in paragraph above), the charge was rightfully imposed pursuant
         to Article of Regulation No 2670/81. 
         
            
 It ought here to be borne in mind that the procedure under Article EC is based on a clear separation of functions between
         the national courts and the Court of Justice. 
         
            
 The Court has no jurisdiction to give a ruling on the facts in an individual case or to apply the rules of Community law which
         it has interpreted to national measures or situations, since those questions are matters for the exclusive jurisdiction of
         the national court (Joined Cases C-175/and C-177/Lirussi and Bizzaro [1999] ECR I-6881, paragraphs and 38). 
         
            
 None the less, in order to supply the national court with a helpful reply, it must be stated that nothing in Regulation No
         2670/authorises a manufacturer to export C sugar after the corresponding export licence has expired.  Attribution of the
         quantities exported on the extract from that licence and endorsements made by the customs authorities to a Form Ccorresponding
         to the export at issue cannot call that conclusion in question, because those measures do not involve an extension of the
         export licence's validity. 
         
            
 The answer to be given to the seventh question must therefore be that Article of Regulation No 2670/is to be interpreted
         as applying to an export of C sugar effected after the corresponding export licence has expired. 
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the United Kingdom Government and the Commission, which have submitted observations to the Court, are
         not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before
         the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
 in answer to the questions referred to it by the High Court of Justice, England and Wales, Queen's Bench Division (Administrative
         Court), by order of July 2001, hereby rules: 
         
1.
 The proof provided for in Article 2(2)(a) of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2670/of September laying down detailed
            implementing rules in respect of sugar production in excess of the quota, as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 158/of January 1996, has not been supplied in respect of a quantity of C sugar actually exported where that quantity exceeds
            the total quantity stated on the export licence or where the export takes place after the period of that licence's validity
            has expired.  The fact that the C sugar concerned did actually leave the Community's customs territory is not conclusive in
            that respect.  The same is true where the customs authorities have endorsed the licence extract for a quantity applied for,
            but which does not reflect the manufacturer's real intentions having regard to a customs declaration in a corrected form corresponding
            to the amount actually exported. 
            
2.
 On a proper construction of Article of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 3719/of November laying down common detailed
            rules for the application of the system of import and export licences and advance-fixing certificates for agricultural products,
            as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1199/of May 1995, the competent authority is not permitted to carry out
            a correction of the tonnage stated on the export licence or extract therefrom where there is no inaccuracy in the entries
            made in those documents themselves. 
            
3.
 Examination of Article of Regulation No 3719/88, as amended by Regulation No 1199/95, has disclosed nothing which might
            affect its validity. 
            
4.
 In circumstances such as those in the case in the main proceedings neither the national court nor the competent authorities
            enjoy any discretion to vary downwards the charge to be paid pursuant to Article of Regulation No 2670/81, as amended by
            Regulation No 158/96. 
            
5.
 Article of Regulation No 2670/as amended is to be interpreted as applying to an export of C sugar effected after the
            corresponding export licence has expired, if the export was made after the expiry of the corresponding export licence. 
            
Skouris
Gulmann 
Puissochet 
Macken
Colneric 
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on February 2004. 
         
 R. Grass 
V. Skouris  
Registrar
President 
 –
            
 Language of the case: English.
Top  
 