
Case C-282/Commission of the European Communities
v
Ireland
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Water pollution – Directive 76/464/EEC)
Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), June Summary of the Judgment
1.     Environment — Water pollution — Directive 76/— No period set for transposition — Consequence — Obligation on Member States
            to comply with a reasonable period for implementation
(Council Directive 76/464)
2.     Environment — Water pollution — Directive 76/— Obligation to establish specific programmes with a view to reducing pollution
            caused by certain dangerous substances — Scope — Concept of a programme
(Council Directive 76/464, Art. 7, and Annex, List II)
3.     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations — Examination by the Court as to the soundness of the action — Situation to be taken
            into consideration — Situation at the expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion
(Art. EC)
4.     Member States — Obligations — Implementation of directives — Failure — Justification based on the fixing of objectives more
            ambitious than those pursued by the directive — Not permissible
(Art. EC)
1.     While Directive 76/on pollution caused by certain dangerous substances discharged into the aquatic environment of the
         Community does not, in contrast to normal practice, set out any period for its transposition, that does not mean that the
         Member States are free to adopt measures for its implementation within periods which they alone consider to be adequate. 
         A directive, the transposition of which could remain suspended indefinitely, would be rendered meaningless and entirely ineffective.
         Furthermore, the purpose of Directive 76/464, namely to eliminate or reduce water pollution, requires that it be transposed
         within a reasonable period of time.
      
(see paras 31, 33)
2.     The programmes which Member States are required to establish under Article of Directive 76/on pollution caused by certain
         dangerous substances discharged into the aquatic environment of the Community must be specific, that is to say, they must
         embody a comprehensive and coherent approach, providing practical and coordinated arrangements covering the entire national
         territory for the reduction of pollution caused by any of the substances in List II of the annex to that directive which is
         relevant in the particular context of each Member State, in accordance with the quality objectives fixed by those programmes
         for the waters affected.  The concept of a ‘programme’ thus implies a series of coordinated, integrated and comprehensive
         measures.
      
A national measure which, for a particular substance, does not encompass all surface waters in the country, inasmuch as canals
         are not affected by the quality objectives established by that measure, cannot therefore be regarded as being a programme
         within the terms of Article of the directive.
      
(see paras 38,  41)
3.     Within the framework of an action under Article EC, the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations
         must be determined by reference to the situation in that Member State as it stood at the end of the period laid down in the
         reasoned opinion, and the Court cannot take account of any subsequent changes.
      
(see para. 40)
4.     The fact that a Member State claims that it has set itself more ambitious objectives than those pursued by a given directive
         does not relieve that Member State of its obligation to comply, at the very least, with the requirements laid down in that
         directive.
      
(see para. 53)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
June (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Water pollution – Directive 76/464/EEC)
In Case C-282/02,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on July 2002,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by M. Shotter, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg, 
      
applicant,
v
Ireland, represented by D.J. O’Hagan, acting as Agent, and A.M. Collins, BL, with an address for service in Luxembourg, 
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, R. Silva de Lapuerta (Rapporteur), C. Gulmann, J. Makarczyk and P. Kūris,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities seeks a declaration by the Court that, in failing to take all
         of the measures necessary to ensure a correct transposition and application of Council Directive 76/464/EEC of May on pollution caused by certain dangerous substances discharged into the aquatic environment of the Community (OJ L 129,
         p. 23) (‘the Directive’), Ireland has failed to comply with its obligations under that directive, in particular Articles and thereof, and with its obligations under the EC Treaty.
      
 The legal framework
The Directive seeks to protect the aquatic environment of the Community against pollution.  To that end, it draws a distinction
         between two categories of dangerous substances coming respectively under List I and List II in the annex thereto.  List I
         sets out substances that are particularly dangerous for the aquatic environment and have been selected mainly on the basis
         of their toxicity, their persistence and their bioaccumulation.  List II contains substances which have a deleterious effect
         on the aquatic environment but which can, however, be confined to a given area and depend on the characteristics and location
         of the water into which they are discharged.  That annex states that the substances contained in List I for which the limit
         values referred to in Article of the Directive have not been determined are to be treated as List II substances.
      
Article 1(1) of the Directive provides that the latter is to apply to inland surface water, territorial waters, internal coastal
         waters and ground water.
      
Article 1(2) of the Directive sets out a number of definitions, including definitions of the terms ‘discharge’ and ‘pollution’.
         ‘Discharge’ is defined in Article 1(2)(d) as follows: ‘the introduction into the waters referred to in paragraph of any
         substances in List I or List II of the Annex, with the exception of: 
      
–       discharges of dredgings, 
–       operational discharges from ships in territorial waters, 
–       dumping from ships in territorial waters’.
‘Pollution’ is defined in Article 1(2)(e) of the Directive as meaning ‘the discharge by man, directly or indirectly, of substances
         or energy into the aquatic environment, the results of which are such as to cause hazards to human health, harm to living
         resources and to aquatic ecosystems, damage to amenities or interference with other legitimate uses of water’.
      
Article of the Directive imposes an obligation on Member States to take the appropriate steps to eliminate pollution of
         water by the substances mentioned in List I of the annex to the Directive and to reduce pollution by the substances mentioned
         in List II of that annex.
      
Article of the Directive provides as follows:
‘1.      In order to reduce pollution of the waters referred to in Article by the substances within List II, Member States shall
         establish programmes in the implementation of which they shall apply in particular the methods referred to in paragraphs and 3. 
      
2.      All discharges into the waters referred to in Article which are liable to contain any of the substances within List II shall
         require prior authorisation by the competent authority in the Member State concerned, in which emission standards shall be
         laid down.  Such standards shall be based on the quality objectives, which shall be fixed as provided for in paragraph 3.
         
      
3.      The programmes referred to in paragraph shall include quality objectives for water; these shall be laid down in accordance
         with Council Directives, where they exist. 
      
4.      The programmes may also include specific provisions governing the composition and use of substances or groups of substances
         and products and shall take into account the latest economically feasible technical developments. 
      
5.      The programmes shall set deadlines for their implementation. 
6.      Summaries of the programmes and the results of their implementation shall be communicated to the Commission. 
7.      The Commission, together with the Member States, shall arrange for regular comparisons of the programmes in order to ensure
         sufficient coordination in their implementation.  If it sees fit, it shall submit relevant proposals to the Council to this
         end.’ 
      
The second sentence of Article of the Directive requires Member States to prohibit all acts which intentionally or unintentionally
         circumvent the provisions of the Directive.
      
Article of the Directive provides that application of the measures taken pursuant to the Directive may on no account lead,
         either directly or indirectly, to increased pollution of the waters referred to therein.
      
Article of the Directive provides that, where appropriate, one or more Member States may individually or jointly take more
         stringent measures than those provided for under the Directive. 
      
The Directive did not lay down any express time-limit for its implementation.  Article 12(2) thereof provides that ‘[the]
         Commission shall, where possible within months following notification of this Directive, forward the first proposals made
         pursuant to Article 7(7).  The Council, acting unanimously, shall take a decision within nine months.’
      
In a letter of November 1976, the Commission proposed the following dates to the Member States for implementation of the
         Directive: September for the authorisation system; September for adoption of the programmes to reduce pollution
         by List II substances; and September for implementation of those programmes.
      
Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of October establishing a framework for Community
         action in the field of water policy (OJ L 327, p. 1) contains several provisions which relate to the Directive.
      
In particular, Article 22(2) of Directive 2000/is worded as follows:
‘The following shall be repealed with effect from years after the date of entry into force of this Directive:
…
–       Directive 76/464/EEC …’
 The pre-litigation procedure
Following a complaint, the Commission sent a formal letter of notice to Ireland on February in which it stated that
         that Member State had failed to forward summaries of the pollution reduction programmes for certain substances covered by
         List II of the annex to the Directive.
      
The Commission sent a new letter of formal notice to Ireland on December in which it contended, inter alia, that the
         Irish legislation did not correctly transpose Article of the Directive.  According to the Commission, that legislation failed
         to make pollution reduction programmes mandatory and failed adequately to provide for the laying down of quality objectives
         and an authorisation system for sewers.  The Commission added that there had been failures to implement Article of the Directive
         in a number of specific areas.  Ireland replied by letter of July 1993.
      
On February 1996, after investigating a number of complaints relating to Irish marine fish farms, the Commission sent a
         letter of formal notice to Ireland in which it drew that Member State’s attention to the fact that it was not applying Article
         of the Directive to such farms.
      
Ireland replied to the Commission by letters of and June 1996, providing details as to its position in respect of Article
         7.
      
In addition to that of December 1992, the Commission sent a further letter of formal notice to Ireland on October 1996.
On June the Commission sent to Ireland a reasoned opinion in which it brought together those different procedures
         and addressed the various failures by that Member State which constituted breaches of Articles and of the Directive, in
         particular the failure to finalise pollution-reduction programmes and/or to communicate programme summaries and implementation
         results, failures in relation to mandatory implementation methods (that is to say, quality objectives, authorisations and
         emission standards) and the failure to prevent the emergence and worsening of widespread phosphorous pollution of fresh water.
      
On June 1997, that is to say, the day before that reasoned opinion was dispatched, Ireland sent to the Commission a letter
         setting out a catchment-based strategy to counter eutrophication of Ireland’s rivers and lakes.  That strategy sought to combat
         the problem of phosphorous pollution referred to in the reasoned opinion.
      
Following an extensive exchange of correspondence between Ireland and the Commission, the latter sent to Ireland a supplementary
         reasoned opinion on July in which it declared that, by failing to take all of the measures necessary to ensure correct
         transposition and application of the Directive, Ireland had failed to fulfil its obligations under the Directive, in particular
         Articles and thereof, and under the EC Treaty, and requested Ireland to take the necessary measures to comply with that
         opinion within two months of its notification.
      
On February Ireland, in response to the reasoned opinion, notified to the Commission new legislation, namely the Water
         Quality (Dangerous Substances) Regulations of January (S.I. No of 2001) (‘the Regulations’).  These new
         regulations lay down quality objectives for atrazine, dichloromethane, simazine, toluene, tryibutylin, xylenes, arsenic, chromium,
         copper, cyanide, fluoride, lead, nickel and zinc.  Ireland stated that these new provisions were being notified in accordance
         with Directive 2000/60.
      
On April Ireland forwarded to the Commission a copy of a report drawn up by the Irish Environmental Protection Agency
         on the presence of dangerous substances in Irish surface waters.
      
Ireland notified a number of other measures to the Commission on July 2001, including local bye-laws designed, inter alia,
         to give effect to the Directive as well as to Directive 2000/60.
      
On February 2002, Ireland sent to the Commission a copy of a published report on the progress achieved by Irish local authorities
         in implementing phosphorous pollution reduction measures.
      
As it was not satisfied by the explanations provided by Ireland, the Commission decided to bring the present action.
 The action
 The period within which the Directive had to be transposed
It should be noted at the outset that the Directive does not expressly lay down a period within which Member States are required
         to transpose it.  Before the Court rules on whether or not the Commission’s heads of complaint are well founded, it is necessary
         to determine whether the Member States were none the less required to comply with their obligations under that directive within
         a given period of time.
      
Article 12(2) of the Directive requires the Commission to forward to the Council, where possible within months following
         notification of that directive, the first proposals for comparisons of the programmes established by the Member States pursuant
         to Article 7(7) of the Directive.
      
Article 12(2) does not, admittedly, lay down a mandatory time-limit.  The expression ‘where possible’ featuring in its wording
         makes it clear that this is not a period that is binding in nature.  None the less, by providing for a relatively short period
         for the evaluation of the first results of the implementation of the Directive, Article is intended to prevent late application
         of the Directive’s provisions.
      
Furthermore, a directive, the transposition of which could remain suspended indefinitely, would be rendered meaningless and
         entirely ineffective.  The purpose of the Directive, namely to eliminate or reduce water pollution, requires that it be transposed
         within a reasonable period of time in order to guarantee that it will be effective.  If there is no transposition over a prolonged
         period, there will be no control over situations favouring the proliferation of pollution, something which would render the
         Directive entirely ineffective.
      
So far as concerns the concept of a ‘reasonable period’, it should be borne in mind that the Commission proposed to the Member
         States, by letter of November 1976, that they select September for the authorisation system, September for
         adoption of the programmes, and September for implementation of those programmes.  Ireland did not at that time call
         those dates into question.  Furthermore, as protection of the environment is of fundamental importance within the context
         of the definition and implementation of the Community’s policies and actions, a prompt reply on the part of the national authorities
         could have been required for the purpose of remedying the problems of water pollution.
      
In the light of those considerations, the view must be taken that, while it is true that, in contrast to normal practice,
         the Directive does not set out any period for its transposition, that does not mean that the Member States are free to adopt
         measures for its implementation within periods which they alone consider to be adequate.  In view of the need to guarantee
         the effectiveness of the Directive and of the fact that the dates proposed by the Commission for the progressive implementation
         of the Directive were not contested at the time by Ireland, that Member State was under an obligation to transpose the Directive
         within a reasonable period of time.
      
It must be held that, when the pre-litigation procedure was instituted, a reasonable period of time for transposition of the
         Directive had already elapsed.
      
 The first head of complaint: failure to comply with the provisions of Article 7(1) of the Directive
 Arguments of the parties
In its first head of complaint, the Commission criticises Ireland for its failure to establish pollution reduction programmes
         for all of the substances covered by List II, contrary to the requirements of Article 7(1) of the Directive.
      
Ireland argues that the obligation imposed on it by Article 7(1) of the Directive extends to those substances only when they
         are detected or liable to be detected in the waters coming under its jurisdiction.  It accordingly takes the view that its
         obligation to establish programmes for all of the substances contained in List II of the Directive has to be construed as
         being conditioned by the particular context of that Member State.
      
Ireland also states that it has implemented programmes for each of the substances set out in List II in respect of which it
         was required to do so.  In the absence of significant pollution, whether actual or potential, or of discharges containing
         those substances, it submits that it is not required to establish the programmes contemplated in Article of the Directive
         in regard to those substances.
      
 Findings of the Court
It must be noted at the outset that, according to the Court’s case-law, the programmes to be established under Article of
         the Directive must be specific.  The specific nature of the programmes in question lies in the fact that they must embody
         a comprehensive and coherent approach, providing practical and coordinated arrangements covering the entire national territory
         for the reduction of pollution caused by any of the substances in List II which is relevant in the particular context of each
         Member State, in accordance with the quality objectives fixed by those programmes for the waters affected (Case C-207/Commission v Belgium [1999] ECR I-275, paragraphs and 40).  The concept of ‘programmes’ thus implies a series of coordinated, integrated and
         comprehensive measures.
      
From that perspective, it is appropriate to examine whether the national measures adopted by Ireland satisfy those criteria.
         Those measures are as follows:
      
–       the Local Government (Water Pollution) Act (Water Quality Standards for Phosphorous) Regulations of July (S.I.
         No of 1998) (‘the Regulations’), which lay down mandatory objectives for phosphorous;
      
–       the Regulations fixing quality objectives for other substances;
–       a number of municipal regulations designed to give effect to both the Directive and the Regulations.
Those measures include the establishment, as the basis for a programme, of quality objectives for phosphorous and other
         substances.
      
First, with regard to the substances covered by the Regulations, the latter came into force after the period set in
         the supplementary reasoned opinion had elapsed, a fact acknowledged by the Irish authorities in their statement of defence.
         The question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations must be determined by reference to the situation
         in that Member State as it stood at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion, and the Court cannot take account
         of any subsequent changes (Case C-289/Commission v Italy [1996] ECR I‑4405, paragraph 20).  It must for that reason be stated that, when the period granted it expired, Ireland had
         not established pollution reduction programmes for all of the substances in respect of which it was required to do so.
      
Second, with regard to the description of the Regulations as a measure to establish a pollution reduction programme for
         phosphorous, it must be noted that that programme does not encompass all surface waters in the country inasmuch as canals
         are not affected by the quality objectives established by those regulations.  Ireland acknowledges in its statement of defence
         that it did not establish quality objectives for canals in respect of phosphorous and that it thus failed in its obligation
         to comply with the requirement that it establish such objectives for all surface waters in the country.
      
So far as concerns the municipal regulations designed to give effect to the Directive, suffice it to note that it appears
         from the case-file that the notification of July sent by Ireland indicated that it related solely to regulations drawn
         up by four local authorities and relating to agricultural activities.  Ireland also stated in that notification that other
         regulations were in the process of being drafted by several local authorities.
      
Regard being had to the foregoing, it must be held that, by not establishing pollution reduction programmes for all of the
         substances in respect of which it was required to do so under the Directive, Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under Article 7(1) thereof.
      
 The second head of complaint: failure to comply with the provisions of Article 7(3) of the Directive
 Arguments of the parties
By its second head of complaint, the Commission submits that Ireland has failed to establish quality objectives, contrary
         to the requirements of Article 7(3) of the Directive.  This head of complaint is in turn divided into two limbs.
      
By the first limb, the Commission submits that that Member State has failed to establish quality objectives for substances
         other than phosphorous and the substances covered by the Regulations.
      
By the second limb, the Commission contends that the Regulations, which seek to establish quality objectives for phosphorous,
         do not comply with the requirements of the Directive.  The Commission invokes several factors, namely the failure to provide
         a quality rating for all water masses in the country, the fact that the Irish authorities confined themselves to making observations,
         which is not equivalent to allocating a quality rating, the delay – years after the Directive was adopted – in making such
         observations, non-compliance with the Directive’s definition of the term ‘pollution’, and the unreliability of the methods
         of analysis which Ireland adopted in respect of lakes.
      
The Irish authorities dispute the Commission’s allegations, pleading, first, the scope of the surveillance methods adopted,
         second, the consideration taken of the Regulations as an interim measure designed to attain the objective of improving
         the waters specifically covered by those regulations, and, third, the freedom to choose the method of analysis for the water
         quality of lakes, in view of the fact that the Directive does not require that one or other method of analysis be adopted.
      
 Findings of the Court
It is necessary to declare at the outset that, even though Ireland states that it has in fact complied with the requirements
         of Article of the Directive, that State acknowledges in its statement of defence that, when the period set in the supplementary
         reasoned opinion expired, it had not adopted all of the measures required by Article 7(3) of the Directive.
      
In particular, with regard to the first limb of this second head of complaint, Ireland takes the view that the obligation
         to establish quality objectives for the substances on List II of the annex to the Directive is conditioned by the particular
         context of each State.  It does, however, acknowledge in its statement of defence that it adopted quality objectives only
         for phosphorous and other substances, in the case of the latter four months after the period set in the reasoned opinion
         had expired.  By contrast, no objective was established for a number of substances derived from the industrial sector, as
         the Commission notes in its application.
      
In those circumstances, it is clear that the first limb of this second head of complaint is well founded.
With regard to the second limb of the second head of complaint, in relation first to Ireland’s argument concerning the extent
         of the measures for the surveillance of the quality of water masses in the country, it has already been stated in paragraph
         of this judgment that the Regulations do not encompass all surface waters of the country inasmuch as canals are not
         included within their scope.  Moreover, the comments relating to lakes cover only 65% of the total surface of lakes in the
         country, as Ireland acknowledges in its rejoinder.  Further, Ireland limited itself to making mere observations on the quality
         of water.  While it may constitute an important element for the definition of the quality objectives, the making of mere observations
         is not equivalent to the establishment of such quality objectives.  Viewed from that angle, the argument put forward by Ireland
         cannot be accepted.
      
With regard, next, to the failure to comply with the definition of the term ‘pollution’ given by the Directive, Ireland points
         out that the Regulations constitute an interim measure designed to bring about improvements in the quality of the waters
         specifically covered by those Regulations and must for that reason be regarded as a pragmatic effort to deal with the problem
         of phosphorous pollution in fresh water in Ireland, while at the same time setting standards that are more stringent than
         those employed in the legislation of other Member States.
      
As the Court has already ruled, the fact that a Member State claims that it has set itself more ambitious objectives than
         those pursued by a given directive does not relieve that Member State of its obligation to comply, at the very least, with
         the requirements laid down in that directive (see Case C-292/Commission v France [2002] ECR I-4097, paragraph 48).
      
The fact of describing the Regulations as an interim measure, the results of which relate to 2007, does not make it possible
         to treat those regulations as being adequate for the purpose of giving effect to the obligations deriving from Article 7(3)
         of the Directive, even though the Irish authorities are contemplating the adoption of more stringent quality objectives. 
         The argument put forward by Ireland cannot, in those circumstances, be accepted.
      
Finally, as far as the reliability of the system for the analysis of the quality of lake water is concerned, two studies prepared
         by the Central Fisheries Board and the Environmental Protection Agency and annexed by the Commission to its application place
         in question the reliability of the system whereby samples are taken from the centre of lakes.  As Ireland has not produced
         any evidence to gainsay the arguments put forward in the light of those documents, its argument on this point must also be
         treated as being unfounded.
      
In the light of the foregoing, it must be held that, by not establishing quality objectives in accordance with the requirements
         of Article 7(3) of the Directive, Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under that provision.
      
 The third head of complaint: breach of Article 7(2) of the Directive
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission criticises Ireland on the ground that it has failed to establish an authorisation system in accordance with
         Article 7(2) of the Directive, invoking, by way of example, certain polluting discharges that are not subject to such authorisation.
      
The Commission submits that Ireland has made no provision for a system of prior authorisation in respect of certain local
         authority discharges.
      
Likewise, according to the Commission, the discharges of List II substances from Irish marine structures are not subject to
         prior authorisation.
      
The Commission also submits that Irish legislation does not guarantee that phosphorous discharges from agricultural installations
         will be subject to authorisation or, in the absence of such authorisation, prohibited, even though these are among the most
         significant sources of pollution.
      
Finally, the Commission criticises the fact that the phosphorous discharges resulting from aerial spraying in relation to
         afforestation are not subject to prior authorisation.
      
Ireland disputes those allegations.  In particular, with regard to discharges from drainage under local authority responsibility,
         Ireland avers that these are governed by the Urban Waste Water Treatment Regulations of June 2001, which correctly implement
         Council Directive 91/271/EEC of May concerning urban waste-water treatment (OJ L 135, p. 40).
      
With regard to storm water overflows under the responsibility of local health authorities, Ireland acknowledges that it has
         not established an authorisation system.  It does, none the less, take the view that it is not obliged to establish such a
         system for overflows by reason of the discretion conferred on Member States by Directive 91/271, which, in addition to the
         system of prior authorisation specific to that directive, also allows the implementation of general regulations.  The Regulations
         of June 2001, cited above, it is argued, fulfil that role of prior general regulations in Ireland.  Furthermore, legislation
         is at present being drafted in order to require prior authorisation for discharges produced by local authorities in cases
         where these are not yet subject to statutory standards and/or a system of prior authorisation.
      
With regard to marine installations, Ireland invokes the Fisheries (Amendment) Act 1997, although it acknowledges that the
         provisions of that statute relate only to the regulation of discharges from aquaculture installations.  However, according
         to Ireland, those provisions should be read in conjunction with those of the Foreshore Acts 1933-1998, which require authorisation
         to be obtained from the Minister for any development of the foreshore.
      
With regard to pollution from agricultural installations, Ireland takes the view that some leaks of contaminated fluids from
         agricultural installations are unintentional and, in many instances, accidental.  While it acknowledges that prior authorisation
         might be required under the provisions of the Directive for those places in which discharges are foreseeable, the appropriate
         response, in the case of unintentional or accidental discharges, is, it argues, to request those responsible to rectify the
         situation as far as possible and, if need be, to impose fines.
      
With regard to aerial spraying of fertilisers on forest sites, Ireland submits that this activity has always been subject
         to prior authorisation by the national regulatory authority and that, since January 2002, a special authorisation procedure
         is prescribed for such spraying.
      
Finally, Ireland takes issue with an argument put forward by the Commission in its application to the effect that the prohibitory
         regime established by section 3(1) of the Local Government (Water Pollution) Act (‘the Act’) does not constitute
         a stricter system than that of authorisation.  Section 3(1) of that act provides that ‘a person shall not cause or permit
         any polluting matter to enter waters’ and is for that reason, according to Ireland, a more stringent measure within the terms
         of Article of the Directive.
      
 Findings of the Court
As a preliminary point, it should be noted that, as the Court has already ruled on numerous occasions, it follows inter alia
         from Article 7(2) of the Directive that authorisations must contain emission standards which are applicable to authorised
         individual discharges and which have been calculated in accordance with the quality objectives previously laid down in a programme
         established pursuant to Article 7(1) to protect the expanses of water and watercourses in question (Joined Cases C-232/and C-233/Commission v Greece [1998] ECR I-3343, paragraph 28).  Because of the absence of a coherent and general system of quality objectives, the other
         elements of a programme (authorisations and emission standards based on the objectives) cannot be defined in such a way as
         to comply with the requirements of the Directive.
      
It must be borne in mind that, as has been established in paragraphs and of this judgment, Ireland had not, at the expiry
         of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion, complied with the requirements imposed by the Directive in regard to the
         establishment of the quality objectives.
      
Further, in regard to the failure to make certain local authority discharges, such as drainage discharges and storm water
         overflows, subject to authorisation, it should be noted that the Urban Waste Water Treatment Regulations were adopted
         on June 2001, that is to say, almost one year after the date of the supplementary reasoned opinion sent by the Commission.
         The question whether there has been a failure to fulfil obligations must be determined by reference to the situation in the
         Member State as it stood at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion, and the Court cannot take account of
         any subsequent changes (see Commission v Italy, cited above, paragraph 20).  It must be declared that Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations in this regard.
      
So far as concerns the absence of an authorisation system for discharges from marine installations, the head of complaint
         is well founded.  Ireland has acknowledged, in its statement of defence, that the relevant national legislation does not require
         authorisations for marine installations other than aquaculture installations.  It has also failed to demonstrate that the
         Foreshore Acts to contain provisions that expressly require emission standards to be set on the basis of quality
         objectives.  Those two failures amount to a breach of the obligations deriving from Article 7(2) of the Directive.
      
So far as concerns the absence of an authorisation system for discharges from agricultural installations, the Commission’s
         head of complaint must also be upheld.  Ireland and the Commission are in agreement in this regard in acknowledging that a
         significant portion of the pollutants discharged into Irish waters comes from farms (namely, at least 30% of all nutrients
         and, in particular, as much as 73% with regard to phosphorous in inland waters).
      
Moreover, in response to the Commission’s argument that the requisite connection of causality and predictability between the
         acts attributable to one person and water pollution can be established in the case of such phosphorous pollution when it comes
         from fixed agricultural installations, Ireland acknowledges that prior authorisation could be required under the provisions
         of the Directive for places in which those discharges are foreseeable.
      
As both the Commission and Ireland have acknowledged, even if authorisation cannot be required for discharges from agricultural
         installations, it cannot be disputed that authorisation is necessary, at least in the case where polluting overflows are foreseeable.
         To the extent to which no discharge from an agricultural installation is subject to authorisation, it follows that fixed installations
         in respect of which discharges are foreseeable are not subject to such an authorisation system.
      
In those circumstances, it must be concluded that, by not making pollutant discharges from fixed agricultural installations
         subject to authorisation in those cases where such discharges are foreseeable, Ireland has failed in its obligations.
      
Finally, with regard to the absence of authorisation for aerial spraying activities, Ireland acknowledges that it was only
         from January 2002, and consequently after the expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion, that a special authorisation
         procedure has been required for aerial spraying of fertilisers over forest sites.  Ireland states that, before January 2002,
         this type of spraying was subject to prior authorisation by the national regulatory authority.  Ireland has, however, failed
         to demonstrate that such authorisation was in accordance with the requirements of the Directive in regard to compliance with
         the quality objectives and emission standards.  It follows that, on this point also, the Commission’s head of complaint is
         well founded.
      
Finally, it is appropriate, in the context of this third head of complaint, to examine the argument put forward by Ireland
         that the prohibitory regime established by the Act is a ‘more stringent measure’ within the terms of Article of the
         Directive.
      
Although, in principle, a prohibitory regime constitutes an alternative to an authorisation system, in accordance with the
         requirements of the Directive, Ireland has failed to demonstrate that the prohibitory regime established by the Act can
         effectively replace the authorisation system as envisaged by the Directive.
      
The prohibitory regime set out in section 3(1) of the Act is accompanied, in section 3(3), by a clause releasing from
         liability any person concerned who proves that he took all reasonable care to prevent pollutants from entering water.  Effective
         application of this regime is guaranteed by the powers vested in the judicial authorities (section 11) and local authorities
         (section 12).  The latter section allows local authorities to issue notices to persons responsible for a source of pollution
         enjoining them to take specific measures to counter pollution.  By contrast, that statute makes no mention of quality objectives
         or programmes for the reduction of water pollution.
      
In the first place, the Act does not contain precise provisions allowing individuals to refer to a clear, precise and
         unequivocal legal framework, as required by the Court (see, to this effect, Case C-119/Commission v Italy [1994] ECR I-393, paragraph 17).  By way of example, it should be pointed out that the Act does not contain an enumeration
         of the pollutants within the terms of List II of the annex to the Directive, which prevents those concerned from knowing the
         true scope of that prohibition.
      
Next, the effectiveness of the system rests in large measure on the notices issued by local authorities on foot of section
         12.  Those notices are, however, issued in a discretionary manner by each local authority in each specific situation, with
         no relation to any parameter as to water quality, which is lacking in that statute.  This absence of uniform statutory criteria
         does not guarantee a homogenous, comprehensive and consistent application of the Directive.  Ireland itself indicates in this
         regard, at point 8.of its rejoinder, that it is not contending that the system of notices under section is equivalent
         to an authorisation system.
      
Finally, with regard to the exemption clause in section 3(3) of the Act, that section does not specify the scope and
         nature of the measures to be adopted for such an exemption, leaving as it does to each local authority, each time that a case
         arises, the assessment of whether the measures adopted are reasonable.  Considered thus, such a system is not equivalent to
         a system under which all pollution reduction aspects are defined in advance in a manner which is clear, precise and unequivocal.
      
It follows from all of the foregoing that Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligation to establish an authorisation system,
         as required by Article 7(2) of the Directive.
      
 The fourth head of complaint: breach of Article of the Directive
 Arguments of the parties
By this head of complaint, the Commission submits that, contrary to the provisions of Article of the Directive, there has
         been an increase in the pollution of Irish territorial waters since the Directive was adopted.
      
This breach of Article 9, it argues, results from Ireland’s delay in transposing the Directive, a delay which had two consequences
         at variance with the objectives pursued by that provision.  First, the late implementation allowed a statutory tolerance for
         degradation of water quality that was not provided for by the Directive.  Second, the attribution, as a reference base, of
         the indicia obtained from studies carried out in could lead to a distortion of the true level of pollution existing in
         when the Directive was adopted.
      
Ireland submits, in contrast, that compliance with Article of the Directive is called for only in the case where a Member
         State has adopted measures pursuant to the Directive and the application of those measures results in a deterioration in water
         quality.  In the case where there has been no implementation of measures in application of the Directive, Article thereof
         is not applicable.  Ireland accordingly takes the view that the question before the Court is that of determining whether application
         of the Regulations has, directly or indirectly, led to an increase in water pollution, something which Ireland denies.
      
Ireland also submits that the Court’s case-law relied on by the Commission, to the effect that a directive must not be interpreted
         in such a way as to confer an advantage on Member States which fail to comply with its provisions, is not applicable in the
         case where the provisions in question do not indicate the date by which they have to be transposed.
      
 Findings of the Court
It should be borne in mind at the outset that, under Article of the Directive, application of the measures taken pursuant
         to the Directive may on no account lead, either directly or indirectly, to increased pollution of the waters referred to in
         Article 1.  It follows clearly from the actual wording of Article – which refers expressly to the ‘measures taken pursuant
         to [the] Directive’ – that the obligation which it sets out relates to the situation in which Member States have in fact adopted
         measures to transpose the Directive.
      
Contrary to the arguments put forward by Ireland, it does not, however, follow from such a finding that, in the absence of
         any transposition measures or even in the case of partial transposition of the Directive, a Member State is free to adopt
         measures liable to lead, directly or indirectly, to an increase in pollution.  Although not coming directly within the scope
         of Article of the Directive, such conduct might indeed be incompatible with the Directive, in particular with Article thereof, which in any event obligates Member States to adopt appropriate measures to eliminate or reduce pollution of water
         by the substances set out in the two lists in the annex to the Directive.
      
In the present case, the Commission has failed to demonstrate adequately that the adoption of the measures for transposing
         the Directive resulted in increased pollution of Irish waters.  The failure has therefore not been established in regard to
         a breach of Article 9.
      
Regard being had to all of the foregoing, it must be held that, in failing to take all of the measures necessary to ensure
         a correct transposition and application of the Directive, Ireland has failed to comply with its obligations under Article
         thereof.  The remainder of the action is dismissed.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings.  As the Commission has applied for costs to be awarded against Ireland, and
         as the latter has been unsuccessful in the essential aspects of its submissions, Ireland must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, in failing to take all of the measures necessary to ensure a correct transposition and application of Council
            Directive 76/464/EEC of May on pollution caused by certain dangerous substances discharged into the aquatic environment
            of the Community, Ireland has failed to comply with its obligations under Article of that directive;
2.      Dismisses the remainder of the action;
3.      Orders Ireland to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 