
Case C-357/PPU
Said Shamilovich Kadzoev (Huchbarov)
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Administrativen sad Sofia-grad)
(Visas, asylum, immigration and other policies related to free movement of persons – Directive 2008/115/EC – Return of illegally staying third-country nationals – Article 15(4) to (6) – Period of detention – Taking into account the period during which the execution of a removal decision was suspended – Concept of ‘reasonable prospect of removal’)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Visas, asylum, immigration – Immigration policy – Return of illegally staying third-country nationals – Detention for the
            purpose of removal – Maximum duration – Calculation – Inclusion of the period of detention completed in connection with a
            removal procedure commenced before the entry into force of the rules in Directive 2008/(European Parliament and Council Directive No 2008/115, Art. 15(5) and (6))
2.        Visas, asylum, immigration – Immigration policy – Return of illegally staying third-country nationals – Detention for the
            purpose of removal – Maximum duration – Calculation – Exclusion of the period completed in a detention centre under the national
            and Community provisions on asylum seekers
(European Parliament and Council Directive No 2008/115, Art. 15)
3.        Visas, asylum, immigration – Immigration policy – Return of illegally staying third-country nationals – Detention for the
            purpose of removal – Maximum duration – Calculation – Decree of deportation against which a judicial review procedure is brought
            – Inclusion of the period of detention completed during the review procedure
(European Parliament and Council Directive No 2008/115, Art. 15(5) and (6))
4.        Visas, asylum, immigration – Immigration policy – Return of illegally staying third-country nationals – Detention for the
            purpose of removal – Judicial review – Maximum period of detention having expired – Taking into consideration by the court
            of reasonable prospects of removal – Excluded
(European Parliament and Council Directive No 2008/115, Art. 15(4) and (6))
5.        Visas, asylum, immigration – Immigration policy – Return of illegally staying third-country nationals – Detention for the
            purpose of removal – Reasonable prospect of removal  – Definition
(European Parliament and Council Directive No 2008/115, Art. 15(4), (5) and (6))
6.        Visas, asylum, immigration – Immigration policy – Return of illegally staying third-country nationals – Detention for the
            purpose of removal – Maximum period of detention having expired – Possibility of not releasing the detained person  immediately
            – None
(European Parliament and Council Directive No 2008/115, Art. 15(4) and (6))
1.        Article 15(5) and (6) of Directive 2008/on common standards and procedures in Member States for returning illegally staying
         third-country nationals must be interpreted as meaning that the maximum duration of detention laid down in those provisions
         must include a period of detention completed in connection with a removal procedure commenced before the rules in that directive
         become applicable.
      
(see para. 39, operative part 1)
2.        A period during which a person has been held in a detention centre on the basis of a decision taken pursuant to the provisions
         of national and Community law concerning asylum seekers may not be regarded as detention for the purpose of removal within
         the meaning of Article of Directive 2008/on common standards and procedures in Member States for returning illegally
         staying third-country nationals.
      
Detention for the purpose of removal governed by Directive 2008/and detention of an asylum seeker, in particular under
         Directive 2003/laying down minimum standards for the reception of asylum seekers, Directive 2005/on minimum standards
         on procedures in Member States for granting and withdrawing refugee status, and the applicable national provisions, fall under
         different legal rules.
      
However, if an asylum seeker remains in detention for the purpose of removal while asylum procedures opened following his
         applications for asylum are under way, the period of detention corresponding to the period during which those asylum procedures
         were under way must be taken into account in calculating the period of detention for the purpose of removal mentioned in Article
         15(5) and (6) of Directive 2008/115.
      
(see paras 45, 47-48, operative part 2)
3.        Article 15(5) and (6) of Directive 2008/on common standards and procedures in Member States for returning illegally staying
         third-country nationals must be interpreted as meaning that the period during which execution of the decree of deportation
         was suspended because of a judicial review procedure brought against that decree by the person concerned is to be taken into
         account in calculating the period of detention for the purpose of removal, where the person concerned continued to be held
         in a detention facility during that procedure.
      
If it were otherwise, the duration of detention for the purpose of removal could vary, sometimes considerably, from case to
         case within a Member State or from one Member State to another because of the particular features and circumstances peculiar
         to national judicial procedures, which would run counter to the objective pursued by Article 15(5) and (6) of Directive 2008/115,
         namely to ensure a maximum duration of detention common to the Member States.
      
(see paras 54, 57, operative part 3)
4.        Article 15(4) of Directive 2008/on common standards and procedures in Member States for returning illegally staying third-country
         nationals must be interpreted as not being applicable where the possibilities of extending the periods of detention provided
         for in Article 15(6) of Directive 2008/have been exhausted at the time when a judicial review of the detention of the
         person concerned is conducted.
      
(see para. 62, operative part 4)
5.        Article 15(4) of Directive 2008/on common standards and procedures in Member States for returning illegally staying third-country
         nationals must be interpreted as meaning that only a real prospect that removal can be carried out successfully, having regard
         to the periods laid down in Article 15(5) and (6), corresponds to a reasonable prospect of removal, and that that reasonable
         prospect does not exist where it appears unlikely that the person concerned will be admitted to a third country, having regard
         to those periods.
      
(see para. 67, operative part 5)
6.        Article 15(4) and (6) of Directive 2008/on common standards and procedures in Member States for returning illegally staying
         third-country nationals must be interpreted as not allowing, where the maximum period of detention laid down by that directive
         has expired, the person concerned not to be released immediately on the grounds that he is not in possession of valid documents,
         his conduct is aggressive, and he has no means of supporting himself and no accommodation or means supplied by the Member
         State for that purpose.
      
(see para. 71, operative part 6)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Visas, asylum, immigration and other policies related to free movement of persons – Directive 2008/115/EC – Return of illegally staying third-country nationals – Article 15(4) to (6) – Period of detention – Taking into account the period during which the execution of a removal decision was suspended – Concept of ‘reasonable prospect of removal’)
In Case C‑357/PPU,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Articles EC and EC from the Administrativen sad Sofia-grad (Bulgaria), made
         by decision of August 2009, received at the Court on September 2009, in the proceedings concerning
      
Said Shamilovich Kadzoev (Huchbarov),
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, A. Tizzano, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, K. Lenaerts, J.‑C. Bonichot, C. Toader, Presidents of
         Chambers, C.W.A. Timmermans, P. Kūris, E. Juhász, G. Arestis, L. Bay Larsen (Rapporteur), T. von Danwitz and A. Arabadjiev,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: N. Nanchev, Administrator,
having regard to the request of the referring court of August 2009, received at the Court on September and supplemented
         on September 2009, that the reference for a preliminary ruling be dealt with under an urgent procedure pursuant to Article
         104b of the Rules of Procedure,
      
having regard to the decision of the Second Chamber of September granting that request,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on October 2009,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Mr Kadzoev, by D. Daskalova and V. Ilareva, advokati,
–        the Bulgarian Government, by T. Ivanov and E. Petranova, acting as Agents,
–        the Lithuanian Government, by R. Mackevičienė, acting as Agent,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by S. Petrova and M. Condou-Durande, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Advocate General,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 15(4) to (6) of Directive 2008/115/EC of the
         European Parliament and of the Council of December on common standards and procedures in Member States for returning
         illegally staying third-country nationals (OJ L 348, p. 98).
      
The reference was made in the course of administrative proceedings brought on the initiative of the director of the Direktsia
         ‘Migratsia’ pri Ministerstvo na vatreshnite raboti (Directorate for Migration at the Ministry of the Interior) requesting
         the Administrativen sad Sofia-grad (Sofia City Administrative Court) to rule of its own motion on the continued detention
         of Mr Kadzoev (Huchbarov) at that directorate’s special detention facility for foreign nationals (‘the detention centre’)
         in Busmantsi in the district of Sofia.
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
Directive 2008/was adopted on the basis in particular of Article 63(3)(b) EC. According to recital in the preamble to
         the directive:
      
‘In accordance with Council Directive 2005/85/EC of December on minimum standards on procedures in Member States for
         granting and withdrawing refugee status [OJ L 326, p. 13], a third-country national who has applied for asylum in a Member
         State should not be regarded as staying illegally on the territory of that Member State until a negative decision on the application,
         or a decision ending his or her right of stay as asylum seeker has entered into force.’
      
Article of Directive 2008/115, which forms part of the chapter on detention for the purpose of removal, reads as follows:
      
‘1.      Unless other sufficient but less coercive measures can be applied effectively in a specific case, Member States may only keep
         in detention a third-country national who is the subject of return procedures in order to prepare the return and/or carry
         out the removal process, in particular when:
      
(a)      there is a risk of absconding or
(b)      the third-country national concerned avoids or hampers the preparation of return or the removal process.
Any detention shall be for as short a period as possible and only maintained as long as removal arrangements are in progress
         and executed with due diligence.
      
2.      Detention shall be ordered by administrative or judicial authorities.
Detention shall be ordered in writing with reasons being given in fact and in law.
When detention has been ordered by administrative authorities, Member States shall:
(a)      either provide for a speedy judicial review of the lawfulness of detention to be decided on as speedily as possible from the
         beginning of detention;
      
(b)      or grant the third-country national concerned the right to take proceedings by means of which the lawfulness of detention
         shall be subject to a speedy judicial review to be decided on as speedily as possible after the launch of the relevant proceedings.
         In such a case Member States shall immediately inform the third-country national concerned about the possibility of taking
         such proceedings.
      
The third-country national concerned shall be released immediately if the detention is not lawful.
3.      In every case, detention shall be reviewed at reasonable intervals of time either on application by the third-country national
         concerned or ex officio. In the case of prolonged detention periods, reviews shall be subject to the supervision of a judicial
         authority.
      
4.      When it appears that a reasonable prospect of removal no longer exists for legal or other considerations or the conditions
         laid down in paragraph no longer exist, detention ceases to be justified and the person concerned shall be released immediately.
      
5.      Detention shall be maintained for as long a period as the conditions laid down in paragraph are fulfilled and it is necessary
         to ensure successful removal. Each Member State shall set a limited period of detention, which may not exceed six months.
      
6.      Member States may not extend the period referred to in paragraph except for a limited period not exceeding a further months in accordance with national law in cases where regardless of all their reasonable efforts the removal operation is
         likely to last longer owing to:
      
(a)      a lack of cooperation by the third-country national concerned, or
(b)      delays in obtaining the necessary documentation from third countries.’
Under Article of Directive 2008/115, Member States are required to bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions necessary to comply with the directive, with the exception of Article 13(4), by December 2010.
      
In accordance with Article of the directive, it entered into force on January 2009.
      
 National legislation
Directive 2008/was transposed into Bulgarian law by the Law on foreign nationals in the Republic of Bulgaria (DV No of 1998), as amended on May (DV No of 2009) (‘the Law on foreign nationals’).
      
According to the referring court, Article 15(4) of the directive has, however, not yet been transposed into Bulgarian law.
      
Under Article 44(6) of the Law on foreign nationals, where a coercive administrative measure cannot be applied to a foreign
         national because his identity has not been established or because he is likely to go into hiding, the body which adopted the
         measure may order the foreign national to be placed in a detention centre for foreign nationals in order to enable his deportation
         from the Republic of Bulgaria or expulsion to be arranged.
      
Before the transposition of Directive 2008/115, detention in such a centre was not subject to any time-limit.
      
Now, under Article 44(8) of the Law on foreign nationals, ‘[t]he detention shall last as long as the circumstances set out
         in paragraph above pertain but may not exceed six months. Exceptionally, where the person refuses to cooperate with the
         competent authorities, where there is a delay in obtaining the documents essential for deportation or expulsion, or where
         the person constitutes a threat to national security or public order, the period of detention may be extended to months’.
      
Article 46a(3) to (5) of the Law on foreign nationals provide:
      
‘(3)      Every six months the head of the detention centre for foreign nationals shall present a list of the foreign nationals who
         have been detained for more than six months owing to impediments to their removal from Bulgarian territory. The list is to
         be sent to the administrative court of the place where the detention centre is situated.
      
(4)      At the end of each period of six months’ detention in a detention centre, the court deliberating in private shall of its own
         motion determine whether the period of detention is to be extended, replaced, or terminated. No appeal shall lie against the
         court’s decision.
      
(5)      Where the court annuls the contested detention order or orders the foreign national to be released, the latter shall be immediately
         released from the detention centre.’
      
 The main proceedings and the reference for a preliminary ruling
On October a person was arrested by Bulgarian law enforcement officials near the border with Turkey. He had no identity
         documents and said that his name was Said Shamilovich Huchbarov, born on February in Grozny (Chechnya). He stated
         that he did not wish the Russian consulate to be informed of his arrest.
      
By decree of October of the competent police department, a coercive administrative measure of deportation was imposed
         on him.
      
He was placed in the detention centre on November 2006, to be detained until it was possible to execute the decree, that
         is, until documents were obtained enabling him to travel abroad and sufficient funds guaranteed to purchase a ticket to Chechnya.
         The decree became enforceable on April 2008, following judicial review proceedings.
      
On December he declared to the authorities of the detention centre that his real name was not Huchbarov but Kadzoev.
      
In the course of two administrative proceedings before the Administrativen sad Sofia-grad, a birth certificate was produced
         showing that Mr Kadzoev was born on February in Moscow (former Soviet Union) of a Chechen father, Shamil Kadzoev,
         and a Georgian mother, Loli Elihvari. However, a temporary identity card for a national of the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria,
         valid until February 2001, issued in the name of Said Shamilovich Kadzoev, born on February in Grozny, was also
         produced. The person concerned nevertheless continued to present himself to the authorities under the names of either Kadzoev
         or Huchbarov.
      
In the period from January to April 2008, there was an exchange of correspondence between the Bulgarian and Russian authorities.
         Contrary to the view of the Bulgarian authorities, the Russian authorities claimed that the temporary identity card in the
         name of Said Shamilovich Kadzoev came from persons and an authority unknown to the Russian Federation, and could not therefore
         be regarded as a document proving the person’s Russian nationality.
      
On May 2007, while he was detained in the detention centre, Mr Kadzoev applied for refugee status. The action he brought
         against the refusal of the Bulgarian administrative authorities to grant that application was dismissed by judgment of the
         Administrativen sad Sofia-grad of October 2007. On March he made a second application for asylum, but withdrew it
         on April 2008. On March he made a third application for asylum. By decision of July 2009, the Administrativen
         sad Sofia-grad dismissed his action and refused him asylum. No appeal lies against that decision.
      
On June Mr Kadzoev’s lawyer applied for the detention to be replaced by a less severe measure, namely the obligation
         for Mr Kadzoev to sign periodically a register kept by the police authorities at his place of residence. As the competent
         authorities considered that he had no actual address in Bulgaria, they rejected the application on the ground that the necessary
         conditions were not satisfied.
      
On October a similar application was made, which was likewise rejected.
      
Following an administrative procedure brought at the request of Mr Kadzoev before the Commission for Protection against Discrimination,
         which gave rise to proceedings in the Varhoven administrativen sad (Supreme Administrative Court), that court, in agreement
         with the commission, accepted in its judgment of March that it was not possible to establish with certainty the identity
         and nationality of Mr Kadzoev, so that it considered him to be a stateless person.
      
According to the order for reference, the help centre for survivors of torture, the office of the United Nations High Commissioner
         for Refugees and Amnesty International find it credible that Mr Kadzoev was the victim of torture and inhuman and degrading
         treatment in his country of origin.
      
Despite the efforts of the Bulgarian authorities, several non-governmental organisations and Mr Kadzoev himself to find a
         safe third country which could receive him, no agreement was reached, and he has not as yet obtained any travel documents.
         Thus the Republic of Austria and Georgia, to which the Bulgarian authorities applied, refused to accept Mr Kadzoev. The Republic
         of Turkey, to which the Bulgarian authorities also applied, did not reply.
      
The Administrativen sad Sofia-grad states that Mr Kadzoev is still detained in the detention centre.
      
The main proceedings were commenced by an administrative document filed by the director of the Directorate for Migration at
         the Ministry of the Interior, asking the Administrativen sad Sofia-grad to rule of its own motion, pursuant to Article 46a(3)
         of the Law on foreign nationals, on the continued detention of Mr Kadzoev.
      
That court states that, before the Law on foreign nationals in the Republic of Bulgaria was amended for the purpose of transposing
         Directive 2008/115, the duration of detention in the detention centre was not limited to any period. It points out that there
         are no transitional provisions governing situations in which decisions were taken before that amendment. The applicability
         of the new rules deriving from the directive to periods and the grounds for extending them is therefore a matter on which
         interpretation should be sought, especially as, in the case at issue in the main proceedings, the maximum duration of detention
         laid down by the directive had already been exceeded before the directive was adopted.
      
Moreover, there is no express provision stating whether in a case such as the present one the periods referred to in Article
         15(5) and (6) of Directive 2008/are to be understood as including the period during which the foreign national was detained
         when there was a legal prohibition on executing an administrative measure of ‘deportation’ on the ground that a procedure
         for recognition of humanitarian and refugee status had been initiated by Mr Kadzoev.
      
Finally, the referring court indicates that, if there is no ‘reasonable prospect of removal’ within the meaning of Article
         15(4) of Directive 2008/115, the question arises whether the immediate release of Mr Kadzoev should be ordered in accordance
         with that provision.
      
In those circumstances, the Administrativen sad Sofia-grad decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following questions
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Must Article 15(5) and (6) of Directive 2008/… be interpreted as meaning that:
(a)      where the national law of the Member State did not provide for a maximum period of detention or grounds for extending such
         detention before the transposition of the requirements of that directive and, on transposition of the directive, no provision
         was made for conferring retroactive effect on the new provisions, the requirements of the directive only apply and cause the
         period to start to run from their transposition into the national law of the Member State?
      
(b)      within the periods laid down for detention in a specialised facility with a view to removal within the meaning of the directive,
         no account is to be taken of the period during which the execution of a decision of removal from the Member State under an
         express provision was suspended owing to a pending request for asylum by a third-country national, where during that procedure
         he continued to remain in that specialised detention facility, if the national law of the Member State so permits?
      
2.      Must Article 15(5) and (6) of Directive 2008/… be interpreted as meaning that within the periods laid down for detention
         in a specialised facility with a view to removal within the meaning of that directive no account is to be taken of the period
         during which execution of a decision of removal from the Member State was suspended under an express provision on the ground
         that an appeal against that decision is pending, even though during the period of that procedure the third-country national
         has continued to stay in that specialised detention facility, where he did not have valid identity documents and there is
         therefore some doubt as to his identity or where he does not have any means of supporting himself or where he has demonstrated
         aggressive conduct?
      
3.      Must Article 15(4) of Directive 2008/… be interpreted as meaning that removal is not reasonably possible where:
(a)      at the time when a judicial review of the detention is conducted, the State of which the person is a national has refused
         to issue him with a travel document for his return and until then there was no agreement with a third country in order to
         secure the person’s entry there even though the administrative bodies of the Member State are continuing to make endeavours
         to that end?
      
(b)      at the time when a judicial review of the detention is conducted there was an agreement for readmission between the European
         Union and the State of which the person is a national, but, owing to the existence of new evidence, namely the person’s birth
         certificate, the Member State did not refer to the provisions of that agreement, if the person concerned does not wish to
         return? 
      
(c)      the possibilities of extending the detention periods provided for in Article 15(6) of the directive have been exhausted in
         the situation where no agreement for readmission has been reached with the third country at the time when a judicial review
         of his detention is conducted, regard being had to Article 15(6)(b) of the directive?
      
4.      Must Article 15(4) and (6) of Directive 2008/… be interpreted as meaning that if at the time when the detention with a
         view to removal of the third-country national is reviewed there is found to be no reasonable ground for removing him and the
         grounds for extending his detention have been exhausted, in such a case:
      
(a)      it is none the less not appropriate to order his immediate release if the following conditions are all met: the person concerned
         does not have valid identity documents, whatever the duration of their validity, with the result that there is a doubt as
         to his identity, he is aggressive in his conduct, he has no means of supporting himself and there is no third person who has
         undertaken to provide for his subsistence?
      
(b)      with a view to the decision on release it must be assessed whether, under the provisions of the national law of the Member
         State, the third-country national has the resources necessary to stay in the Member State as well as an address at which he
         may reside?’
      
 The urgent procedure
The Administrativen sad Sofia-grad asked for the reference for a preliminary ruling to be dealt with under an urgent procedure
         pursuant to Article 104b of the Rules of Procedure.
      
The referring court justified its request by stating that the case raises the question whether Mr Kadzoev should be kept in
         detention in the detention centre or released. In view of his situation, the court stated that the proceedings should not
         be suspended for a prolonged period.
      
The Second Chamber of the Court, after hearing the Advocate General, decided to grant the referring court’s request for the
         reference for a preliminary ruling to be dealt with under an urgent procedure, and to remit the case to the Court for it to
         be assigned to the Grand Chamber.
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 Question 1(a)
By Question 1(a) the referring court essentially asks whether Article 15(5) and (6) of Directive 2008/must be interpreted
         as meaning that the maximum duration of detention laid down in those provisions must include also the period of detention
         completed before the rules in the directive become applicable.
      
It must be observed that Article 15(5) and (6) of Directive 2008/fix the maximum period of detention for the purpose of
         removal.
      
If the period of detention for the purpose of removal completed before the rules in Directive 2008/become applicable were
         not taken into account for calculating the maximum period of detention, persons in a situation such as that of Mr Kadzoev
         could be detained for longer than the maximum periods mentioned in Article 15(5) and (6) of that directive.
      
Such a situation would not be consistent with the objective of those provisions of Directive 2008/115, namely to guarantee
         in any event that detention for the purpose of removal does not exceed months.
      
Moreover, Article 15(5) and (6) of Directive 2008/apply immediately to the future consequences of a situation that arose
         when the previous rules were in force.
      
The answer to Question 1(a) is therefore that Article 15(5) and (6) of Directive 2008/must be interpreted as meaning that
         the maximum duration of detention laid down in those provisions must include a period of detention completed in connection
         with a removal procedure commenced before the rules in that directive become applicable.
      
 Question 1(b)
By Question 1(b) the referring court seeks to know whether, when calculating the period of detention for the purpose of removal
         under Article 15(5) and (6) of Directive 2008/115, the period must be included during which the execution of the removal decision
         was suspended because of the examination of an application for asylum by a third-country national, where, during the procedure
         relating to that application, he has remained in the detention centre.
      
It should be recalled that recital in the preamble to Directive 2008/states that ‘[i]n accordance with … Directive 2005/… a third-country national who has applied for asylum in a Member State should not be regarded as staying illegally on the
         territory of that Member State until a negative decision on the application, or a decision ending his or her right of stay
         as asylum seeker has entered into force’.
      
In accordance with Article 7(1) and (3) of Council Directive 2003/9/EC of January laying down minimum standards for
         the reception of asylum seekers (OJ L 31, p. 18), asylum seekers may move freely within the territory of the host Member
         State or within an area assigned to them by that Member State, but when it proves necessary, for example for legal reasons
         or reasons of public order, Member States may confine an applicant to a particular place in accordance with their national
         law.
      
Article of Directive 2003/provides that Member States are to ensure that negative decisions relating to the granting
         of benefits under that directive or decisions taken under Article which individually affect asylum seekers may be the subject
         of an appeal within the procedures laid down in the national law. At least in the last instance, the possibility of an appeal
         or a review before a judicial body must be granted.
      
Under Article 18(1) of Directive 2005/85, Member States must not hold a person in detention for the sole reason that he or
         she is an applicant for asylum and, under Article 18(2), where an applicant for asylum is held in detention, Member States
         shall ensure that there is a possibility of speedy judicial review.
      
Detention for the purpose of removal governed by Directive 2008/and detention of an asylum seeker in particular under
         Directives 2003/and 2005/and the applicable national provisions thus fall under different legal rules.
      
It is for the national court to determine whether Mr Kadzoev’s stay in the detention centre during the period in which he
         was an asylum seeker complied with the conditions laid down by the provisions of Community and national law concerning asylum
         seekers.
      
Should it prove to be the case that no decision was taken on Mr Kadzoev’s placement in the detention centre in the context
         of the procedures opened following his applications for asylum, referred to in paragraph above, so that his detention remained
         based on the previous national rules on detention for the purpose of removal or on the provisions of Directive 2008/115, Mr
         Kadzoev’s period of detention corresponding to the period during which those asylum procedures were under way would have to
         be taken into account in calculating the period of detention for the purpose of removal mentioned in Article 15(5) and (6)
         of Directive 2008/115.
      
Consequently, the answer to Question 1(b) is that a period during which a person has been held in a detention centre on the
         basis of a decision taken pursuant to the provisions of national and Community law concerning asylum seekers may not be regarded
         as detention for the purpose of removal within the meaning of Article of Directive 2008/115.
      
 Question By this question the referring court asks essentially whether Article 15(5) and (6) of Directive 2008/must be interpreted
         as meaning that the period during which execution of the decree of deportation was suspended because of a judicial review
         procedure brought against that decree by the person concerned is to be taken into account in calculating the period of detention
         for the purpose of removal, where the person concerned continued to be held in a detention facility during that procedure.
      
It must be observed that Article 13(1) and (2) of Directive 2008/provide in particular that the third-country national
         concerned is to be afforded an effective remedy to appeal against or seek review of decisions related to return before a competent
         judicial or administrative authority or a competent body composed of members who are impartial and who enjoy safeguards of
         independence. That authority or body must have the power to review decisions related to return, including the possibility
         of temporarily suspending their enforcement, unless a temporary suspension is already applicable under national legislation.
      
Neither Article 15(5) and (6) of Directive 2008/nor any other provision of that directive permits the view that periods
         of detention for the purpose of removal should not be included in the maximum duration of detention defined in Article 15(5)
         and (6) because of the suspension of execution of the removal decision.
      
In particular, the suspension of execution of the removal decision because of a procedure for judicial review of that decision
         is not one of the grounds for extending the period of detention laid down in Article 15(6) of Directive 2008/115.
      
The period of detention completed by the person concerned during the procedure in which the lawfulness of the removal decision
         is the subject of judicial review must therefore be taken into account for calculating the maximum duration of detention laid
         down in Article 15(5) and (6) of Directive 2008/115.
      
If it were otherwise, the duration of detention for the purpose of removal could vary, sometimes considerably, from case to
         case within a Member State or from one Member State to another because of the particular features and circumstances peculiar
         to national judicial procedures, which would run counter to the objective pursued by Article 15(5) and (6) of Directive 2008/115,
         namely to ensure a maximum duration of detention common to the Member States.
      
This conclusion is not called into question by the judgment in Case C‑19/Petrosian [2009] ECR I‑relied on by the Bulgarian Government. In that case, which concerned the interpretation of Council Regulation
         (EC) No 343/of February establishing the criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible
         for examining an asylum application lodged in one of the Member States by a third-country national (OJ L 50, p. 1), the
         Court held that where, in the context of the procedure for transfer of an asylum seeker, the legislation of the requesting
         Member State provides for suspensive effect of an appeal, the period for implementation of the transfer laid down in Article
         20(1)(d) of that regulation begins to run, not as from the time of the provisional judicial decision suspending the implementation
         of the transfer procedure, but only as from the time of the judicial decision which rules on the merits of the procedure and
         which is no longer such as to prevent its implementation.
      
That interpretation of Article 20(1)(d) of Regulation No 343/cannot be transposed to the context of the interpretation
         of Article 15(5) and (6) of Directive 2008/115. While the period at issue in the Petrosian case determines the time available to the requesting Member State for implementing the transfer of an asylum seeker to the
         Member State which is obliged to readmit him, the maximum periods laid down in Article 15(5) and (6) of Directive 2008/serve the purpose of limiting the deprivation of a person’s liberty. Moreover, the latter periods set a limit to the duration
         of detention for the purpose of removal, not to the implementation of the removal procedure as such.
      
Consequently, the answer to Question is that Article 15(5) and (6) of Directive 2008/must be interpreted as meaning
         that the period during which execution of the decree of deportation was suspended because of a judicial review procedure brought
         against that decree by the person concerned is to be taken into account in calculating the period of detention for the purpose
         of removal, where the person concerned continued to be held in a detention facility during that procedure.
      
 Question By this question the referring court seeks clarification, in the light of the facts of the case in the main proceedings, of
         the meaning of Article 15(4) of Directive 2008/115, in particular of the concept of a ‘reasonable prospect of removal’.
      
 Question 3(c)
By Question 3(c) the referring court asks whether Article 15(4) of Directive 2008/is to be interpreted as meaning that
         there is no reasonable prospect of removal where the possibilities of extending the periods of detention provided for in Article
         15(6) have been exhausted, in the situation where no agreement for readmission has been reached with the third country at
         the time when a judicial review of the detention of the person concerned is conducted.
      
It is clear that, where the maximum duration of detention provided for in Article 15(6) of Directive 2008/has been reached,
         the question whether there is no longer a ‘reasonable prospect of removal’ within the meaning of Article 15(4) does not arise.
         In such a case the person concerned must in any event be released immediately.
      
Article 15(4) of Directive 2008/can thus only apply if the maximum periods of detention laid down in Article 15(5) and
         (6) of the directive have not expired.
      
Consequently, the answer to Question 3(c) is that Article 15(4) of Directive 2008/must be interpreted as not being applicable
         where the possibilities of extending the periods of detention provided for in Article 15(6) of Directive 2008/have been
         exhausted at the time when a judicial review of the detention of the person concerned is conducted.
      
 Questions 3(a) and (b)
As regards Questions 3(a) and (b), it should be pointed out that, under Article 15(4) of Directive 2008/115, detention ceases
         to be justified and the person concerned must be released immediately when it appears that, for legal or other considerations,
         a reasonable prospect of removal no longer exists.
      
As is apparent from Article 15(1) and (5) of Directive 2008/115, the detention of a person for the purpose of removal may
         only be maintained as long as the removal arrangements are in progress and must be executed with due diligence, provided that
         it is necessary to ensure successful removal.
      
It must therefore be apparent, at the time of the national court’s review of the lawfulness of detention, that a real prospect
         exists that the removal can be carried out successfully, having regard to the periods laid down in Article 15(5) and (6) of
         Directive 2008/115, for it to be possible to consider that there is a ‘reasonable prospect of removal’ within the meaning
         of Article 15(4) of that directive.
      
Thus a reasonable prospect of removal does not exist where it appears unlikely that the person concerned will be admitted
         to a third country, having regard to those periods.
      
Consequently, the answer to Questions 3(a) and (b) is that Article 15(4) of Directive 2008/must be interpreted as meaning
         that only a real prospect that removal can be carried out successfully, having regard to the periods laid down in Article
         15(5) and (6), corresponds to a reasonable prospect of removal, and that that reasonable prospect does not exist where it
         appears unlikely that the person concerned will be admitted to a third country, having regard to those periods.
      
 Question By this question the referring court asks essentially whether Article 15(4) and (6) of Directive 2008/allow the person
         concerned not to be released immediately, even though the maximum period of detention provided for by that directive has expired,
         on the grounds that he is not in possession of valid documents, his conduct is aggressive, and he has no means of supporting
         himself and no accommodation or means supplied by the Member State for that purpose.
      
It must be pointed out that, as is apparent in particular from paragraphs 37, and above, Article 15(6) of Directive
         2008/in no case authorises the maximum period defined in that provision to be exceeded.
      
The possibility of detaining a person on grounds of public order and public safety cannot be based on Directive 2008/115.
         None of the circumstances mentioned by the referring court can therefore constitute in itself a ground for detention under
         the provisions of that directive.
      
Consequently, the answer to Question is that Article 15(4) and (6) of Directive 2008/must be interpreted as not allowing,
         where the maximum period of detention laid down by that directive has expired, the person concerned not to be released immediately
         on the grounds that he is not in possession of valid documents, his conduct is aggressive, and he has no means of supporting
         himself and no accommodation or means supplied by the Member State for that purpose.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article 15(5) and (6) of Directive 2008/115/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of December on common
            standards and procedures in Member States for returning illegally staying third-country nationals must be interpreted as meaning
            that the maximum duration of detention laid down in those provisions must include a period of detention completed in connection
            with a removal procedure commenced before the rules in that directive become applicable.
2.      A period during which a person has been held in a detention centre on the basis of a decision taken pursuant to the provisions
            of national and Community law concerning asylum seekers may not be regarded as detention for the purpose of removal within
            the meaning of Article of Directive 2008/115.
3.      Article 15(5) and (6) of Directive 2008/must be interpreted as meaning that the period during which execution of the decree
            of deportation was suspended because of a judicial review procedure brought against that decree by the person concerned is
            to be taken into account in calculating the period of detention for the purpose of removal, where the person concerned continued
            to be held in a detention facility during that procedure.
4.      Article 15(4) of Directive 2008/must be interpreted as not being applicable where the possibilities of extending the periods
            of detention provided for in Article 15(6) of Directive 2008/have been exhausted at the time when a judicial review of
            the detention of the person concerned is conducted.
5.      Article 15(4) of Directive 2008/must be interpreted as meaning that only a real prospect that removal can be carried out
            successfully, having regard to the periods laid down in Article 15(5) and (6), corresponds to a reasonable prospect of removal,
            and that that reasonable prospect does not exist where it appears unlikely that the person concerned will be admitted to a
            third country, having regard to those periods.
6.      Article 15(4) and (6) of Directive 2008/must be interpreted as not allowing, where the maximum period of detention laid
            down by that directive has expired, the person concerned not to be released immediately on the grounds that he is not in possession
            of valid documents, his conduct is aggressive, and he has no means of supporting himself and no accommodation or means supplied
            by the Member State for that purpose.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Bulgarian.
      
Top  
 