
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-76/P Petrotub SA and Republica SAvCouncil of the European Union
«(Appeal – Protection against dumping – Determination of the dumping margin – Choice of the asymmetrical calculation method – Article 2.4.of the Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the GATT – Statement of reasons – Determination of normal value – Taking into account of sales made using compensation – Statement of reasons)»
Opinion of Advocate General Jacobs delivered on April I - Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber), January I - Summary of the Judgment
1..
Appeals – Pleas in law – Admissibility – Conditions – Submission of arguments also raised before the Court of First Instance – No effect  (Art. EC; EC Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 51, first para.; Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, Art. 112(1)(c))
                  
2..
Common commercial policy – Protection against dumping – Dumping margin – Comparison between the normal value and the export price – Use of the asymmetrical method – Conditions  (Council Regulation No 384/96, Art. 2(11)) 
3..
International agreements – Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation – GATT – Direct effect – None – Not possible to rely on the WTO agreements to contest the lawfulness of a Community act – Exceptions – Community measure intended to implement a GATT or WTO rule or expressly and specifically referring thereto  (Art. EC; General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994) 
4..
Common commercial policy – Protection against dumping – Dumping margin – Rules relating to the calculation of the dumping margin, contained in the GATT Anti-dumping Code – Transposition into Community law by the basic anti-dumping regulation –   Effect – Obligation to state reasons for the choice of recourse to the asymmetrical method  (EC Treaty, Art. (now Art. EC); Council Regulation No 384/96, Art. 2(11); Agreement on Implementation of Article VI
                  of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade,  
                  Anti-dumping Code, Art. 2.4.2) 
5..
Community law – Interpretation – Methods – Interpretation in the light of international agreements concluded by the Community  
6..
Acts of the institutions – Statement of reasons – Obligation – Scope  (EC Treaty, Art. (now Art. EC)) 
7..
Common commercial policy – Protection against dumping – Dumping margin – Determination of the normal value – Taking into account, by way of exception, of the prices charged between parties which have a compensatory arrangement with
                     each other – Need to justify recourse to the exception  
                  (EC Treaty, Art. (now Art. EC); Council Regulation No 384/96, Art. 2(1), first and third subparas) 
1.
 Since, in the context of an appeal, the appellant clearly identified, in accordance with Article EC, the first paragraph
         of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice and Article 112(1)(c) of the Rules of Procedure, the aspects of the contested
         judgment which are criticised and the legal arguments which specifically support its appeal, the fact that the arguments in
         support of a plea raised were also set forth at first instance cannot entail their inadmissibility. see paras 28, 2.
 It is clear from the actual wording of Article 2(11) of the basic anti-dumping regulation (Regulation No 384/96) that the
         existence of a dumping margin is normally to be established using one of the two symmetrical methods and that recourse to
         the asymmetrical method, by way of an exception to that rule, may be had only on the twofold condition that, on the one hand,
         the pattern of export prices differs significantly among different purchasers, regions or time periods and, on the other hand,
         the symmetrical methods do not reflect the full degree of dumping being practised. The Council cannot therefore claim that the effect of that provision is that, having made a choice, in the exercise of its
         discretion, as between the two symmetrical methods, it is sufficient for it to satisfy itself that the symmetrical method
         thus chosen does not reflect the full degree of dumping being practised in order for it then to be entitled to use the asymmetrical
         method. see paras 49-3.
 Having regard to their nature and structure, the WTO Agreement and the agreements and understandings annexed to it are not
         in principle among the rules in the light of which the Court is to review the legality of measures adopted by the Community
         institutions, pursuant to the first paragraph of Article EC. However, where the Community intended to implement a particular obligation assumed in the context of the WTO, or where the
         Community measure refers expressly to precise provisions of the agreements and understandings contained in the annexes to
         the WTO Agreement, it is for the Court to review the legality of the Community measure in question in the light of the WTO
         rules. see paras 53-4.
 Since the preamble to the basic anti-dumping regulation (Regulation No 384/96), and more specifically the fifth recital therein,
         shows that the purpose of that regulation is,  
          inter alia , to transpose into Community law as far as possible the new and detailed rules contained in the Anti-dumping Code, which
         include, in particular, those relating to the calculation of the dumping margin, so as to ensure a proper and transparent
         application of those rules, it must be held that the Community adopted the basic regulation in order to satisfy its obligations
         arising from the Anti-dumping Code and therefore intended, by means of Article 2(11) of that regulation, to implement
         the particular obligations laid down by Article 2.4.of that code. Although it is true that it was not expressly specified in Article 2(11) of the basic regulation that the explanation required
         by Article 2.4.of the Anti-dumping Code had to be given by the Community institution where recourse is had to the asymmetrical
         method in order to determine the dumping margin, that omission does not mean that the Community intended to exempt itself
         from that obligation since it may be explained by the existence of Article of the Treaty (now Article EC). Once Article
         2.4.is transposed by the Community, the specific requirement to state reasons laid down by that provision can be considered
         to be subsumed under the general requirement imposed by Article of the Treaty for acts adopted by the institutions to
         state the reasons on which they are based.  see paras 55-56, 5.
 Community legislation must, so far as possible, be interpreted in a manner that is consistent with international law, in particular
         where its provisions are intended specifically to give effect to an international agreement concluded by the Community. see para. 6.
 The statement of reasons required by Article of the Treaty (now Article EC) must be appropriate to the act at issue
         and must disclose in a clear and unequivocal fashion the reasoning followed by the institution which adopted the measure in
         question in such a way as to enable the persons concerned to ascertain the reasons for the measure and to enable the competent
         Community court to exercise its power of review. The requirements to be satisfied by the statement of reasons depend on the
         circumstances of each case, in particular the content of the measure in question, the nature of the reasons given and the
         interest which the addressees of the measure, or other parties to whom it is of direct and individual concern, may have in
         obtaining explanations. It is not necessary for the reasoning to go into all the relevant facts and points of law, since the
         question whether the statement of reasons meets the requirements of Article must be assessed with regard not only to its
         wording but also to its context and to all the legal rules governing the matter in question. see para. 7.
 As far as concerns dumping, the determination of normal value constitutes one of the essential steps required to prove the
         existence of any dumping. In that regard, it follows from the first and third subparagraphs of Article 2(1) of the basic anti-dumping regulation (Regulation
         No 384/96) that, in principle, prices between parties which have a compensatory arrangement with each other may not be taken
         into account in determining normal value, and that there is no exception to this, unless it is determined that those prices
         are unaffected by the relationship. The requirements of the obligation to state reasons are therefore not satisfied by the Council regulation imposing definitive
         anti-dumping duties on imports, which merely states that it had been  
         found that sales made using compensation were indeed made in the ordinary course of trade. Such a peremptory statement, which amounts to no more than a reference to the provisions of Community law, does not contain
         any explanatory element of such a kind as to enlighten the parties concerned and the Community judicature as to the reasons
         which led the Council to consider that the prices charged in connection with those sales made using compensation had not been
         affected by the relationship, and therefore that statement does not enable the parties concerned to know whether those prices
         were, by way of exception, correctly taken into consideration for the purpose of calculating normal value, or whether this
         latter circumstance may constitute a flaw affecting the legality of the contested regulation. see paras 82, 85-JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)January (1)
((Appeal – Protection against dumping – Determination of the dumping margin – Choice of the asymmetrical calculation method – Article 2.4.of the Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the GATT – Statement of reasons – Determination of normal value – Taking into account of sales made using compensation – Statement of reasons))
In Case C-76/P, 
            
 Petrotub SA,  established in Roman (Romania),and Republica SA,  established in Bucharest (Romania),represented by A. Merckx, avocat, and P. Bentley QC, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
appellants, 
TWO APPEALS against the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities (Second Chamber, Extended Composition)
            of December in Joined Cases T-33/and T-34/Petrotub and Republica  v  
             Council  [1999] ECR II-3837, seeking to have that judgment set aside,
            
the other parties to the proceedings being: 
             Council of the European Union , represented by S. Marquardt, acting as Agent, assisted by G. Berrisch, Rechtsanwalt, with an address for service in Luxembourg,defendant at first instance, and Commission of the European Communities,  represented by V. Kreuschitz and S. Meany, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
intervener at first instance, 
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),,
composed of: M. Wathelet, President of the Chamber, C.W.A. Timmermans, D.A.O. Edward, A. La Pergola (Rapporteur) and P. Jann, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs, Registrar: H. von Holstein, Deputy Registrar, 
            
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,after hearing oral argument from the parties at the hearing on January 2002, at which Petrotub SA and Republica SA were
            represented by P. Bentley, the Council by G. Berrisch and the Commission by V. Kreuschitz and S. Meany,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 2002,
gives the following
Judgment
            
By joint application lodged at the Registry of the Court of Justice on March 2000, Petrotub SA (
         Petrotub) and Republica SA (
         Republica) brought, in so far as each is concerned respectively, an appeal pursuant to Article of the EC Statute of the Court of
         Justice against the judgment of the Court of First Instance of December in Joined Cases T-33/and T-34/Petrotub and Republica  v  
          Council  [1999] ECR II-(
         the contested judgment), in which the Court of First Instance dismissed their respective actions for the annulment of Council Regulation (EC) No
         2320/of November imposing definitive anti-dumping duties on imports of certain seamless pipes and tubes of iron
         or non-alloy steel originating in Hungary, Poland, Russia, the Czech Republic, Romania and the Slovak Republic, repealing
         Regulation (EEC) No 1189/and terminating the proceeding in respect of such imports originating in the Republic of Croatia
         (OJ L 322, p. 1,  
         the contested regulation). 
         
Legislative background
            
Under the heading  
         A. Normal value, the third subparagraph of Article 2(1) of Council Regulation (EC) No 384/of December on protection against dumped
         imports from countries not members of the European Community (OJ L 56, p. 1), as amended by Council Regulation (EC) No
         2331/of December (OJ L 317, p. 1,  
         the basic regulation), provides: Prices between parties which appear to be associated or to have a compensatory arrangement with each other may not be considered
         to be in the ordinary course of trade and may not be used to establish normal value unless it is determined that they are
         unaffected by the relationship.
         
            
Under the heading  
         D. Dumping margin, Article 2(11) of the basic regulation provides: Subject to the relevant provisions governing fair comparison, the existence of margins of dumping during the investigation
         period shall normally be established on the basis of a comparison of a weighted average normal value with a weighted average
         of prices of all export transactions to the Community [
         the first symmetrical method], or by a comparison of individual normal values and individual export prices to the Community on a transaction-to-transaction
         basis [
         the second symmetrical method]. However, a normal value established on a weighted average basis may be compared to prices of all individual export transactions
         to the Community [
         the asymmetrical method], if there is a pattern of export prices which differs significantly among different purchasers, regions or time periods,
         and if the methods specified in the first sentence of this paragraph would not reflect the full degree of dumping being practised.
         ...
         
            
The Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (OJ L 336, p. 103, 
         
         the Anti-dumping Code) is contained in Annex 1A to the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation (
         the WTO Agreement), approved by Council Decision 94/800/EC of December 1994) concerning the conclusion on behalf of the European Community,
         as regards matters within its competence, of the agreements reached in the Uruguay Round multilateral negotiations (1986-1994)
         (OJ L 336, p. 1). Article 2.4.of the Anti-dumping Code states: ... the existence of margins of dumping during the investigation phase shall normally be established on the basis of a comparison
         of a weighted average normal value with a weighted average of prices of all comparable export transactions [first symmetrical
         method] or by a comparison of normal value and export prices on a transaction-to-transaction basis [second symmetrical method].
         A normal value established on a weighted average basis may be compared to prices of individual export transactions [asymmetrical
         method] if the authorities find a pattern of export prices which differ significantly among different purchasers, regions
         or time periods, and if an explanation is provided as to why such differences cannot be taken into account appropriately by
         the use of a weighted average-to-weighted average or transaction-to-transaction comparison.
         Facts and the contested judgment
            
The contested judgment shows that the Commission published, on August 1996, a notice of the initiation of an anti-dumping
         procedure in respect of imports of certain seamless pipes and tubes of iron or non-alloy steel originating in Russia, the
         Czech Republic, Romania and the Slovak Republic (OJ C 253, p. 26). 
         
            
As part of the anti-dumping investigation, Petrotub and Republica completed and returned the questionnaire which had been
         submitted to them by the Commission before their views were heard by the latter. The Commission subsequently carried out an
         inspection at the premises of those two companies. 
         
            
On May the Commission adopted Regulation (EC) No 981/of May imposing provisional anti-dumping duties on
         imports of certain seamless pipes and tubes of iron or non-alloy steel originating in Russia, the Czech Republic, Romania
         and the Slovak Republic (OJ L 141, p. 36,  
         the provisional regulation). 
         
            
Having been informed, in accordance with Article 20(1) of the basic regulation, of the details underlying the essential facts
         and considerations on the basis of which those provisional duties had been imposed (
         the provisional disclosure), Petrotub and Republica submitted their written comments in that regard before their views were heard by the Commission.
         Pursuant to the same provision, they also replied in writing to the notification of the final disclosure of the essential
         facts and considerations on the basis of which the Commission intended to recommend the imposition of a definitive anti-dumping
         duty on their products (
         the final disclosure). 
         
            
By the contested regulation, the Council imposed definitive anti-dumping duties of 9.8% on exports by Petrotub and Republica
         to the Community. 
         
            
On February Petrotub and Republica respectively brought an action before the Court of First Instance, seeking the
         annulment of Article of the contested regulation in so far as it concerns them. After the two cases were joined, those actions
         were dismissed by the contested judgment. 
         
            
With regard to the first part of the fourth plea put forward by Petrotub, complaining that the Council had failed to explain,
         in breach of  
          inter alia  Article 2.4.of the Anti-dumping Code, why the asymmetrical method used by the Council reflected the full degree of
         dumping better than the symmetrical methods, the Court of First Instance held, in particular, as follows: 
         
            
Although, according to settled case-law, the provisions of the basic regulation must be interpreted in the light of the Anti-dumping Code (Case C-69/Nakajima  v  
          Council  [1991] ECR I-2069, paragraphs to 32), the rules governing anti-dumping measures are contained in that regulation alone.
         The obligation referred to in Article 2.4.of the Anti-dumping Code to explain why the symmetrical methods of comparison
         cannot show the real extent of the dumping does not therefore, as such, constitute a rule which is to be applied, and Article
         2(11) of the basic regulation clearly does not mention any specific obligation to give such an explanation. 
         
            
However, in so far as this plea can be understood as meaning that the applicant alleges that the statement of reasons given
         for the contested regulation is inadequate, it should be borne in mind that the statement of reasons required by Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC) must show clearly and unequivocally the reasoning of the Community authority which adopted
         the contested measure, so as to inform the persons concerned of the justification for the measure adopted and thus enable
         them to defend their rights and the Community judicature to exercise its powers of review. The extent of the obligation to
         state reasons must be assessed in the light of the context and the procedure in which the contested regulation was adopted
         and the body of legal rules governing the field concerned (see, most recently, Case T-48/Acme Industry  v  
          Council  [1999] ECR II-3089, paragraph 141). 
         
            
In this case, the statement of reasons for the contested regulation must be appraised having regard, in particular, to the
         information disclosed to the applicant and to its observations concerning the method of comparison to be applied with a view
         to determining the dumping margin during the administrative procedure. 
         
            
In recital of the provisional regulation the Commission stated: The weighted average normal value for each product group was compared with the adjusted individual export prices in accordance
         with Article 2(11) of the basic regulation. This was necessary in order to reflect the full degree of dumping being practised
         and because there was a pattern of export prices which differed significantly between different customers and regions.It maintained that view in the provisional disclosure of June 1997. 
         
            
In its provisional submissions on dumping dated July and at the hearing on July 1997, the applicant challenged that
         view, contending that the Commission should have used the symmetrical method which consists in comparing the weighted average
         normal value with the weighted average of the prices of all Petrotub's exports to the Community. In its letter of July
         it also claimed that a comparison of the weighted average normal value with the weighted average of the prices of all
         its exports to the Community in fact yielded a dumping margin significantly lower than that obtained by the method used by
         the Commission. 
         
            
The Commission stated in its final disclosure of August that, as regards Petrotub, the pattern of export prices differed
         considerably as between the periods (from August to April and from May to August respectively). It indicated
         that, for all Romanian companies taken together, the difference in the dumping margin obtained by applying the methods of
         comparison of weighted average to weighted average or of weighted average to individual transactions was such that it could
         be concluded that the first of those methods did not enable the real extent of the dumping to be reflected. 
         
            
In its final observations on dumping of September 1997, the applicant contended that the dumping margin should be determined
         by applying the weighted average to weighted average method of comparison. 
         
            
In recital of the contested regulation, the Council stated:One company claimed that the calculation of the dumping margin should not be made on the basis of a comparison of weighted
         average normal values with the adjusted export price of each corresponding group on a transaction-by-transaction basis, but
         on a weighted average to weighted average basis. This claim was rejected after the methodology used for all Romanian companies was reconsidered and it was found that: 
         
─
for one company, there was no difference in dumping margin between both methods as all export transactions were made at dumped
            prices; 
         
─
for three companies, a pattern of export prices which differed significantly by destination or time period was found. In view of the above, and in accordance with Article 2(11) of the basic regulation, the method comparing the weighted average
            normal value by time period to individual adjusted export prices on a transaction-by-transaction basis was retained for the
            purposes of the definitive determination.
         
            
The contested regulation thus sets out the reasons for which the Community institutions decided to apply the criterion of
         comparison of weighted average normal value with the prices of individual exports. 
         
            
In those circumstances, and in the absence of any specific challenge on the applicant's part in the course of the administrative
         procedure which might possibly have called for more detailed reasons (see Case T-164/Ferchimex  v  
          Commission  [1995] ECR II-2681, paragraphs and 118), the contested regulation cannot be regarded as vitiated by an inadequate statement
         of reasons regarding the application by the Community institutions of Article 2(11) of the basic regulation. 
         
            
As regards the applicant's complaint that the Community institutions confined themselves to considering the first symmetrical
         method (namely that of the weighted average to weighted average comparison) and failed to verify whether the second of the
         symmetrical methods referred to in Article 2(11) of the basic regulation (namely the method consisting in comparing individual
         normal values with individual export prices) might not reflect the real extent of the dumping engaged in, the Court finds
         that this is a separate plea in law which was not raised until the stage of the reply. This plea must therefore be rejected
         as inadmissible pursuant to Article 48(2) of the Rules of Procedure. 
         
            
Finally, it is clear from the foregoing that, contrary to the applicant's assertions, the methods of comparison used to determine
         the existence of dumping were applied individually for each of the four Romanian exporting companies. 
         
            
It follows that the first part of the fourth plea cannot be upheld.
         
            
With regard to the second part of the second plea put forward by Republica, alleging infringement of the third subparagraph
         of Article 2(1) of the basic regulation and lack of an adequate statement of reasons for the contested regulation, the Court
         of First Instance further held as follows: 
         
            
The third subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the basic regulation provides that:  
         Prices between parties which appear to be associated or to have a compensatory arrangement with each other may not be considered
         to be in the ordinary course of trade and may not be used to establish normal value unless it is determined that they are
         unaffected by the relationship. 
         
            
It is plain that the applicant has produced no evidence to show or any reason to conclude that the compensatory arrangements
         to which it refers, mentioned in the document entitled  
         Total Value of Compensatory Arrangements relating to sales made on the basis of compensatory arrangements made during the investigation period, affected the prices
         charged in such transactions, as required by the third subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the basic regulation. 
         
            
Moreover, in the absence of any contrary indication from the applicant, the Council gave, in the contested regulation, an
         adequate statement of the reasons for its refusal to exclude compensatory sales from the determination of normal value, by
         stating that  
         it was found that sales made using compensation were indeed made in the ordinary course of trade. 
         
            
It follows that both parts of the second plea must in any event be rejected.
         
The appeals
            
By their appeals, Petrotub and Republica claim that the Court should set aside the contested judgment in so far as they are
         respectively concerned by it and, ruling on the substance of the case, annul the contested regulation in so far as it concerns
         them and order the Council to pay the costs of both sets of proceedings. Should the contested regulation be annulled at the
         request of either of them, Petrotub and Republica also claim that the Court should extend the legal effects of such annulment
         to the other party. 
         
            
The Council and the Commission contend that the Court should dismiss the appeals and order the appellants to pay the costs.
         
         Petrotub's appeal
         
            
In support of its appeal, Petrotub puts forward a single plea in law, alleging that the Court of First Instance erred in law
         in paragraph of the contested judgment with regard to the scope of the Council's duty to state reasons when it applied
         the asymmetrical method in order to calculate the dumping margin.  In support of that plea, Petrotub also relies on the errors
         of law which, it claims, the Court of First Instance made in paragraphs and of that judgment. 
         
            
Under the first part of its plea, Petrotub submits that the Court of First Instance was not entitled to hold that the statement
         of reasons for the contested regulation was adequate since that regulation does not contain any reference to the second symmetrical
         method or,  
          a fortiori , the slightest explanation as to why that method was discarded in favour of the asymmetrical method.  It is clear from the
         actual wording of Article 2(11) of the basic regulation that recourse to the asymmetrical method is permitted only if neither
         of the two symmetrical methods reflects the full degree of dumping.  Since such an examination therefore concerns essential
         matters of law or fact relevant to the basis of the decision to impose anti-dumping duties, the statement of reasons for the
         contested regulation should at the very least have indicated that the Council had in fact carried out such an examination.
         
         
            
Moreover, the Court of First Instance was not entitled, according to Petrotub, to refrain from finding such a breach of the
         obligation to state reasons by holding, at paragraph of the contested judgment, that the argument based on such breach
         was inadmissible since it was put forward too late. On the one hand, that argument was put forward implicitly in the application,
         as evidenced by the use of the words  
         symmetrical methods in the plural in the relevant passage thereof, and, on the other hand, the lack of a statement of reasons thus alleged should
         in any event have been considered by the Court of First Instance of its own motion. 
         
            
Under the second and third parts of its plea, Petrotub claims that the Court of First Instance failed to have regard to the
         scope of the Council's duty to state reasons. According to Petrotub, the Court of First Instance was wrong to hold that that
         duty is fulfilled by the mere fact that it is clear from the contested regulation, read in conjunction with the acts which
         preceded it, including the provisional regulation, the provisional disclosure and the final disclosure, that, in this case,
         the asymmetrical method produced a dumping margin which was arithmetically greater than that resulting from the first symmetrical
         method and that the use of the asymmetrical method was necessary in order to reflect the full extent of the dumping. 
         
            
According to Petrotub, the second of those statements is merely a self-justifying paraphrase of the wording of Article 2(11)
         of the basic regulation.  That wording implies an examination on the part of the Council of essential matters of law or fact
         relevant to the basis of the decision to impose anti-dumping duties, so that the logical link supporting that conclusion should
         have been specified in the contested regulation in order that it could be ascertained that the necessary examination had in
         fact taken place. 
         
            
In that regard, Petrotub submits, in particular, that the mere finding that the asymmetrical method produces a dumping margin
         arithmetically greater than that resulting from the symmetrical method cannot constitute an adequate statement of reasons
         since the asymmetrical method will always produce a result equal to or greater than that resulting from the first symmetrical
         method. 
         
            
According to Petrotub, the condition that the symmetrical methods  
         would not reflect the full degree of dumping being practised requires in reality that the existence of  
         targeted dumping be established, that is to say, that the exporter's conduct constitute manoeuvres to disguise dumping. 
         
            
By the fourth part of its plea, Petrotub submits that, unlike Article 2(11) of the basic regulation, Article 2.4.of the
         Anti-dumping Code provides that, if the competent authority uses the asymmetrical method, it is obliged to explain why
         significant differences in export prices as among different purchasers, regions or time periods cannot be taken appropriately
         into account by the use of the symmetrical methods. 
         
            
Petrotub produces in that regard an extract from a communication dated February from the Commission to the secretariat
         of the Committee on Anti-Dumping Practices of the World Trade Organisation (
         the WTO), including in particular a reply to questions raised by several WTO Member States concerning the textual difference mentioned
         in the previous paragraph (
         the communication of February 1996), according to which: The term  
         full degree of dumping simply refers to targeted dumping which is the heading under which this problem was addressed in the Uruguay Round negotiations.  This
         is understood as meaning that there may be occasions when [the first or second symmetrical method] may not be appropriate
         where targeted dumping is taking place.  Any departure from the abovementioned methods will be explained both to the parties
         concerned and in regulations imposing anti-dumping measures.
         
            
According to Petrotub, that communication means that the Community considers that the explanation referred to in Article 2.4.of the Anti-dumping Code must be provided as part of the statement of reasons required by Article of the Treaty,
         that is to say, the adequacy of the reasons for recourse to the asymmetrical method must be assessed in the light of the said
         Article 2.4.2.  The Court of First Instance therefore erred in law in paragraph of the contested judgment by not taking
         account of that provision of the code in determining whether the contested regulation contained an adequate statement of reasons
         for the purposes of Article 190. 
         
            
However, such an explanation is lacking in this case, primarily for two reasons. First, the contested regulation merely paraphrases
         Article 2(11) of the basic regulation, and this cannot constitute an  
         explanation ... as to why such differences cannot be taken into account appropriately by the use of a weighted average-to-weighted
         average or transaction-to-transaction comparison as required by Article 2.4.of the Anti-dumping Code.  Second, as is clear from the account of the second and third
         parts of the plea, the contested regulation does not make any assessment as to whether there was  
         targeted dumping even though, according to the communication of February 1996, the term  
         full degree of dumping used in Article 2(11) of the basic regulation specifically refers to such a situation. 
         Admissibility
         
            
The Council and the Commission contend that the appeal is inadmissible. 
         
            
First, they argue that Petrotub has merely reproduced the arguments raised before the Court of First Instance, without specifically
         challenging the legal assessments made by it. 
         
            
In that regard, it is sufficient to observe that, as may be seen from paragraphs to of the present judgment, Petrotub
         clearly identified, in accordance with Article EC, the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice
         and Article 112(1)(c) of the Rules of Procedure, the aspects of the contested judgment which are criticised and the legal
         arguments which specifically support its appeal, so that the fact that the arguments developed by Petrotub in support of its
         plea were also raised at first instance cannot entail their inadmissibility (see, in particular, the order in Case C-338/P  
          De Hoe  v  
          Commission  [1994] ECR I-819, paragraph 18, and Case C-386/P  
          Dreyfus  v  
          Commission  [1998] ECR I-2309, paragraph 38). 
         
            
Second, the Council and the Commission submit that the first part of the plea is inadmissible in that it raises an argument
         which was declared inadmissible at first instance on the ground that it had not been raised until the stage of the reply.
         
         
            
It must be pointed out in that regard that the plea in law so rejected in paragraph of the contested judgment sought to
         obtain a finding that the Community institutions confined themselves to considering the first symmetrical method and that
         they failed to verify whether the second symmetrical method might not reflect the real extent of the dumping engaged in. Contrary
         to what is maintained by the Council and the Commission, such a plea relates solely to the substance, so that the fact that
         it was declared inadmissible at first instance cannot in any way affect the admissibility at the appeal stage of a plea alleging
         an error in law relating to the scope of the obligation to state reasons. 
         
            
Moreover, as Petrotub pointed out, the fourth plea put forward by it in the application before the Court of First Instance
         alleges that the Community institutions  
         failed to explain ... why a comparison of the weighted average normal value with the prices of all individual export transactions
         reflects the full degree of dumping better than the normal methods .... 
         
            
Third, the Council and the Commission contend, as regards the fourth part of the plea, that any argument based on the communication
         of February is inadmissible on the ground that that communication, which is described as  evidence by the Commission,
         was not submitted to the Court of First Instance. 
         
            
It need merely be observed in that regard that the action for annulment brought by Petrotub before the Court of First Instance
         sought, in particular, a declaration that Article 2.4.of the Anti-dumping Code had been infringed and that the fourth
         part of the plea claims that the Court failed to take account of that provision in the assessment of the scope of the Council's
         duty to state reasons. 
         
            
In those circumstances, there is nothing to prevent the Court of Justice from taking into consideration the communication
         of February if it were to be established that that document, which was addressed to the secretariat of the WTO Committee
         on Anti-Dumping Practices in the circumstances described in paragraph of this judgment, is relevant for the purpose of
         assessing the legal force of Article 2.4.of the Anti-dumping Code and the possible validity of the plea. 
         
            
Fourth, the Council maintains that, under cover of an alleged error in law by the Court of First Instance with regard to the
         scope of the obligation to state reasons, Petrotub is actually complaining that the contested regulation incorrectly interprets
         or applies Article 2(11) of the basic regulation.  A similar contention applies, in particular, to the first part of the plea
         which in reality is not so much a complaint concerning an inadequate statement of reasons as a complaint that the Council
         did not take the second symmetrical method into consideration in its decision to use the asymmetrical method. 
         
            
Since such arguments are closely connected with the points of substance raised by the appeal, which specifically concern the
         scope of the Council's duty to state reasons, they must be examined together with the substance. 
         
            
Fifth, the Commission contends that Petrotub's argument relating to an obligation for the institution using the asymmetrical
         method to substantiate the claim as to the existence of  
         manoeuvres to disguise dumping is inadmissible on the ground that it was not included in the application to the Court of First Instance. 
         
            
On that point, it should be observed that, as is clear from paragraph of the present judgment, Petrotub's appeal is based
         solely on the error of law allegedly committed by the Court of First Instance with regard to the Council's duty to state reasons.
          That appeal cannot therefore be construed as raising a new plea relating to an error of law by which the contested regulation
         is vitiated as regards the interpretation of the substantive rules contained in Article 2(11) of the basic regulation and
         Article 2.4.of the Anti-dumping Code respectively. 
         
            
An account of the interpretation which, according to Petrotub, must be placed on those substantive provisions, even if it
         is more detailed than that formulated at first instance, is limited to clarifying the scope of the provisions which the Court
         must take into consideration when it determines whether the requirements arising from the obligation to state reasons have
         been correctly assessed by the Court of First Instance. 
         
            
It follows from all the foregoing that Petrotub's appeal must be declared admissible in its entirety. 
         Substance
         First and second parts of the plea
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
As is clear from paragraphs and to of the present judgment, Petrotub submits under the first and fourth parts of
         its plea that the Court of First Instance erred in law by holding that the obligation to state reasons was complied with even
         though the contested regulation contained no explanation as to why the second symmetrical method was discarded in favour of
         the asymmetrical method. 
         
            
In that regard, the Council contends, first, as is clear from paragraph of the present judgment, that Petrotub's appeal
         fails to take account of the distinction between the substance of, and the statement of reasons for, the contested regulation.
          In this case, under cover of an inadequate statement of reasons, Petrotub is in reality complaining of the very fact that
         the second symmetrical method was not taken into consideration for the purpose of determining whether recourse could be had
         to the asymmetrical method. 
         
            
Second, the Council maintains that the wide discretion which it enjoys in applying the methods for calculating the dumping
         margin cannot be affected by strengthening the purely formal and procedural requirement constituted by the statement of reasons.  It
         is settled case-law that only the essential considerations which determined the exercise of the Council's discretion are required
         to appear in the statement of reasons.  There is no need to add, as Petrotub suggests, a new requirement relating to explanation
         of the logical link between the assessment made and the legislation applied. 
         
            
In particular, the Council contends that, after making a choice, in the exercise of its discretion, as between the two symmetrical
         methods, only the symmetrical method thus chosen should have to be compared with the asymmetrical method where the institution
         is considering using the latter.  Account should also be taken of the fact that the second symmetrical method is very rarely
         used on account of its impracticable and arbitrary nature. 
         
            
Third, the Council argues that the scope of the obligation to state reasons is more restricted where the essential aspects
         of the case have been the subject of detailed discussions during the administrative procedure.  In order to be entitled to
         a more detailed statement of reasons in the definitive anti-dumping regulation, it is, in particular, for the parties concerned
         to make full use in good faith of the procedural rights which they enjoy under the basic regulation for the purpose of specifically
         challenging the essential points of law and fact on the basis of which the Community authority intends to adopt definitive
         anti-dumping measures. 
         
            
In the absence of any challenge on this point on the part of Petrotub during the administrative stage, there was no need,
         according to the Council, to explain why, in line with a practice consistently followed by the Community institutions, an
         exceptional method such as the second symmetrical method was not chosen. 
         
            
The Commission likewise contends that, in view of the background against which the contested regulation was adopted, the statement
         of reasons for that regulation did not require explanations to be provided in connection with the discarding of the second
         symmetrical method. 
         
            
The Council and the Commission also submit that the fourth part of the plea is unfounded.  The Court of First Instance was
         entitled to hold that the obligation referred to in Article 2.4.of the Anti-dumping Code is not, as such, a rule to
         be applied.  Nor can such a conclusion be affected by the communication of February 1996, since that document remains irrelevant
         as regards the legal force of that code. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
First, it is clear from the actual wording of Article 2(11) of the basic regulation that the existence of a dumping margin
         is normally to be established using one of the two symmetrical methods and that recourse to the asymmetrical method, by way
         of an exception to that rule, may be had only on the twofold condition that, on the one hand, the pattern of export prices
         differs significantly among different purchasers, regions or time periods and, on the other hand, the symmetrical methods
         do not reflect the full degree of dumping being practised. 
         
            
The Council was therefore wrong to claim that the effect of that provision is that, having made a choice, in the exercise
         of its discretion, as between the two symmetrical methods, it is sufficient for it to satisfy itself that the symmetrical
         method thus chosen does not reflect the full degree of dumping being practised in order for it then to be entitled to use
         the asymmetrical method. 
         
            
However, both the question whether the two conditions referred to in paragraph of the present judgment are fulfilled in
         this case and, more generally, the question whether the Council correctly applied Article 2(11) of the basic regulation go
         to the substance of the case and therefore fall outside the scope of the Court's review in the present appeal. 
         
            
Second, it is necessary, contrary to what the Court of First Instance held at paragraph of the contested judgment, to
         take account of Article 2.4.of the Anti-dumping Code in so far as that provision states that an explanation must be
         provided as to why significant differences in the pattern of export prices as among different purchasers, regions or time
         periods cannot be taken into account appropriately by the use of the symmetrical methods. 
         
            
It is true that it is settled case-law of the Court of Justice that, having regard to their nature and structure, the WTO
         Agreement and the agreements and understandings annexed to it are not in principle among the rules in the light of which the
         Court is to review the legality of measures adopted by the Community institutions, pursuant to the first paragraph of Article
         EC (see Case C-149/Portugal  v  
          Council  [1999] ECR I-8395, paragraph 47, and the order in Case C-307/OGT Fruchthandelsgesellschaft  [2001] ECR I-3159, paragraph 24). 
         
            
However, where the Community intended to implement a particular obligation assumed in the context of the WTO, or where the
         Community measure refers expressly to precise provisions of the agreements and understandings contained in the annexes to
         the WTO Agreement, it is for the Court to review the legality of the Community measure in question in the light of the WTO
         rules (see, in particular,  
          Portugal  v  
          Council , paragraph 49). 
         
            
The preamble to the basic regulation, and more specifically the fifth recital therein, shows that the purpose of that regulation
         is,  
          inter alia , to transpose into Community law as far as possible the new and detailed rules contained in the Anti-dumping Code, which
         include, in particular, those relating to the calculation  of the dumping margin, so as to ensure a proper and transparent
         application of those rules. 
         
            
It is therefore established that the Community adopted the basic regulation in order to satisfy its obligations arising from
         the Anti-dumping Code and that, by means of Article 2(11) of that regulation, it intended to implement the particular
         obligations laid down by Article 2.4.of that code.  To that extent, as is clear from the case-law cited in paragraph of the present judgment, it is for the Court to review the legality of the Community measure in question in the light of the
         last-mentioned provision. 
         
            
In that regard, it should be recalled that Community legislation must, so far as possible, be interpreted in a manner that
         is consistent with international law, in particular where its provisions are intended specifically to give effect to an international
         agreement concluded by the Community (see, in particular, Case C-341/Bettati  [1998] ECR I-4355, paragraph 20). 
         
            
However, in this case, the fact that it was not expressly specified in Article 2(11) of the basic regulation that the explanation
         required by Article 2.4.of the Anti-dumping Code had to be given by the Community institution in the event of recourse
         to the asymmetrical method may be explained by the existence of Article of the Treaty.  Once Article 2.4.is transposed
         by the Community, the specific requirement to state reasons laid down by that provision can be considered to be subsumed under
         the general requirement imposed by the Treaty for acts adopted by the institutions to state the reasons on which they are
         based. 
         
            
Such an interpretation coincides in essence with the international assurances given in the communication of February from the Commission to the secretariat of the WTO Committee on Anti-Dumping Practices, according to which the explanation
         referred to in Article 2.4.of the Anti-dumping Code will be given directly to the parties and in regulations imposing
         anti-dumping duties. 
         
            
In view of the reasoning set out in paragraphs to of the present judgment, it must be held that a Council regulation
         imposing definitive anti-dumping duties and having recourse to the asymmetrical method for the purposes of calculating the
         dumping margin must in particular contain, as part of the statement of reasons required by Article of the Treaty, the
         specific explanation provided for in Article 2.4.of the Anti-dumping Code. 
         
            
It is evident in this case that the contested regulation does not contain even the merest reference to the second symmetrical
         method or,  
          a fortiori , the slightest explanation as to why that method would not enable significant differences in the pattern of export prices
         among different purchasers, regions or time periods to be taken appropriately into account. 
         
            
In those circumstances, it must be held that the Court of First Instance erred in law by holding, at paragraph of the
         contested judgment, that there was no need to take into consideration Article 2.4.of the Anti-dumping Code for the
         purposes of determining whether the Council had fulfilled the obligation to state reasons for the contested regulation and
         by therefore finding, at paragraph of that judgment, that the statement of reasons given for that regulation was adequate
         for the purposes of Article of the Treaty. 
         
            
The contested judgment must therefore be set aside on that ground without there being any need to rule on the other parts
         of the plea put forward by Petrotub in support of its appeal. 
         
            
Since, under the first paragraph of Article of the EC Statute of the Court of Justice, the state of the proceedings so
         permits, final judgment may be given on Petrotub's appeal by annulling the contested regulation in so far as it concerns that
         company, on the same grounds as those set out in paragraphs and of the present judgment. 
         Republica's appeal
         
            
In support of its appeal, Republica puts forward a single plea in law based on the error of law which the Court of First Instance
         is alleged have made in paragraph of the contested judgment by holding that the statement of reasons given for the contested
         regulation is adequate with respect to the Council's refusal to exclude from the determination of normal value certain sales
         made by Republica using compensation. 
         
            
Republica submits more specifically that once it was accepted that  
         sales made using compensation and thus  
         prices between parties which appear to be associated or to have a compensatory arrangement with each other within the meaning of the third subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the basic regulation were involved, the Council was not entitled
         to use such prices to establish normal value without the proof required by that provision that such prices were not affected
         by the relationship. The Court of First Instance therefore erred in finding, at paragraph of the contested judgment, that
          
         ... the applicant has produced no evidence to show or any reasons to conclude that the compensatory arrangements ... affected
         the prices charged in such transactions .... 
         
            
The passage from the contested regulation upon which the Court of First Instance relies, namely the statement contained in
         the fifth paragraph of recital in the preamble to that regulation that  
         during the course of the investigation, it was found that sales made using compensation were indeed made in the ordinary course
         of trade, merely repeats the words of the third subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the basic regulation.  Since it contains no explanation
         as to why the Council considered that the prices of those sales using compensation had not been affected by the relationship,
         such a self-justifying paraphrase does not constitute an adequate statement of reasons. 
         
            
According to Republica, the wording of the third subparagraph of Article 2(1) implies, on the part of the Council, an examination
         of essential elements of law or of fact relevant to the basis of the decision to impose anti-dumping duties, so that the logical
         link supporting that conclusion should have been specified in the contested regulation.  More specifically, the Council should
         have explained why the sales in question had indeed been made in the ordinary course of trade. 
         Admissibility
         
            
The Council and the Commission contend that Republica's appeal is inadmissible. 
         
            
First, Republica has merely reproduced the arguments raised before the Court of First Instance, without specifically challenging
         the legal assessments made by it. 
         
            
In that regard, it is sufficient to observe that, as may be seen from paragraphs to of the present judgment, Republica
         clearly identified, in accordance with Article EC, the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice
         and Article 112(1)(c) of the Rules of Procedure, the aspects of the contested judgment which are criticised and the legal
         arguments which specifically support its appeal.  In those circumstances, the fact that the arguments developed by Republica
         in support of its plea were also raised at first instance cannot, as was pointed out in paragraph of the present judgment,
         entail their inadmissibility. 
         
            
Second, the Council maintains that, under cover of an alleged error of law by the Court of First Instance with regard to the
         scope of the obligation to state reasons, Republica is actually complaining that the contested regulation incorrectly interprets
         or applies the third subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the basic regulation. The appeal is in reality contending, not so much
         that the statement of reasons is inadequate, but rather that the Council did not establish, as it was obliged to do, that
         the sales in question had taken place in the ordinary course of trade. 
         
            
Since such arguments are closely connected with the points of substance raised by the appeal, which specifically concern the
         scope of the Council's duty to state reasons, they must be examined together with those on the substance. 
         
            
It follows that Republica's appeal must be declared admissible in its entirety. 
         Substance
         Arguments of the Council
         
            
As is clear from paragraph of the present judgment, the Council contends that Republica's appeal fails to take account
         of the distinction between the substance of, and the statement of reasons for, the contested regulation. 
         
            
Second, the Council contends that the arguments put forward in its response to Petrotub's appeal, as set out in paragraphs
         and of the present judgment, must,  
          mutatis mutandis , lead to the dismissal of Republica's appeal. 
         
            
In particular, according to the Council, an indication of the reasons which led it to consider that the selling prices charged
         by Republica in the context of compensatory arrangements had not been affected by the relationship might have had relevance
         only if Republica had substantiated its claim in sufficient time during the administrative procedure.  The burden of proof
         in support of widening the scope of the Community institutions' duty to state reasons rests with the party which is the subject
         of the investigation. 
         
            
According to the Council, the obligation to state reasons did not, therefore, require it to explain in greater detail the
         reasons which led it to conclude that the sales in question had taken place in the ordinary course of trade. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
As a preliminary point, it must be observed that the following questions, namely, whether the Council correctly applied the
         third subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the basic regulation, whether the prices of the sales using compensation made by Republica
         were or were not affected by the relationship and whether this latter circumstance can be proven, and, if so, with whom the
         burden of proof rests, or the question whether the Council was entitled to claim, in the contested regulation, that Republica
         had been late in informing it of that difficulty concerning the selling prices charged, all go to the substance of the case
         and fall outside the scope of the Court's review in the present appeal. 
         
            
The appeal is confined to a plea of error in law by the Court of First Instance in misdirecting itself as to the scope of
         the Council's duty to state reasons, so that the Court of Justice must confine itself to examining that plea. 
         
            
In that regard, it is settled case-law that the statement of reasons required by Article of the Treaty must be appropriate
         to the act at issue and must disclose in a clear and unequivocal fashion the reasoning followed by the institution which adopted
         the measure in question in such a way as to enable the persons concerned to ascertain the reasons for the measure and to enable
         the competent Community court to exercise its power of review.  The requirements to be satisfied by the statement of reasons
         depend on the circumstances of each case, in particular the content of the measure in question, the nature of the reasons
         given and the interest which the addressees of the measure, or other parties to whom it is of direct and individual concern,
         may have in obtaining explanations.  It is not necessary for the reasoning to go into all the relevant facts and points of
         law, since the question whether the statement of reasons meets the requirements of Article must be assessed with regard
         not only to its wording but also to its context and to all the legal rules governing the matter in question (see, in particular,
         Case C-367/P  
          Commission   v  
          Sytraval and Brink's France   [1998] ECR I-1719, paragraph 63, and the case-law cited). 
         
            
In the present case, the determination of normal value constitutes one of the essential steps required to prove the existence
         of any dumping. 
         
            
The first subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the basic regulation provides, in that regard, that normal value is to be normally
         based on prices paid or payable, in the ordinary course of trade, by independent customers in the exporting country. 
         
            
The third subparagraph of the same provision states, for its part, that prices between parties which appear to be associated
         or to have a compensatory arrangement with each other may not be considered to be in the ordinary course of trade and may
         not be used to establish normal value unless it is determined that they are unaffected by the relationship. 
         
            
It therefore follows from the first and third subparagraphs of Article 2(1) of the basic regulation that, in principle, prices
         between parties which have a compensatory arrangement with each other may not be taken into account in determining normal
         value, and that there is no exception to this, unless it is determined that those prices are unaffected by the relationship.
         
         
            
In those circumstances, it must be held that, by merely stating, in the contested regulation, that it had been  
         found that sales made using compensation were indeed made in the ordinary course of trade, the Council did not satisfy the requirements of the obligation to state reasons. 
         
            
Such a peremptory statement, which amounts to no more than a reference to the provisions of Community law, does not contain
         any explanatory element of such a kind as to enlighten the parties concerned and the Community judicature as to the reasons
         which led the Council to consider that the prices charged in connection with those sales made using compensation had not been
         affected by the relationship (see, to similar effect, Case 185/Usinor  v  
          Commission  [1986] ECR 2079, paragraph 21). 
         
            
Consequently, that statement does not enable the parties concerned to know whether those prices were, by way of exception,
         correctly taken into consideration for the purpose of calculating normal value, or whether this latter circumstance may constitute
         a flaw affecting the legality of the contested regulation. 
         
            
As the Advocate General points out in paragraphs and of his Opinion, this total absence of any explanation is also
         such as to prevent the Community judicature from exercising its power of review, and, in particular, from determining whether
         there may have been a manifest error of assessment on the part of the Council. 
         
            
In those circumstances, the question whether Republica's request that the prices charged in connection with sales made using
         compensation be excluded from the basis of determination of normal value was submitted too late in the preliminary procedure
         is irrelevant, as the Advocate General points out in paragraph of his Opinion. 
         
            
In view of the foregoing, it must be held that the Court of First Instance erred in law by holding, at paragraph of the
         contested judgment, that, in the absence of any contrary indication from the applicant, the Council gave, in the contested
         regulation, an adequate statement of the reasons for its refusal to exclude sales made using compensation from the determination
         of normal value, by specifying that it had been  
         found that sales made using compensation were indeed made in the ordinary course of trade. 
         
            
The contested judgment must therefore be set aside on that ground. 
         
            
Since, under the first paragraph of Article of the EC Statute of the Court of Justice, the state of the proceedings so
         permits, final judgment may be given on Republica's appeal by annulling the contested regulation in so far as it concerns
         that company, on the same grounds as those set out in paragraphs to of the present judgment. 
         
Costs
            
Under the first paragraph of Article of the Rules of Procedure, where the appeal is unfounded or where the appeal is well
         founded and the Court itself gives final judgment in the case, the Court is to make a decision as to costs. Under Article
         69(2) of those Rules, which is rendered applicable to appeal proceedings by virtue of Article 118, the unsuccessful party
         is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been asked for in the successful party's pleadings.  The first subparagraph
         of Article 69(4) of those Rules provides that institutions which intervene in the proceedings are to bear their own costs.
         
         
            
Since the appeals brought by Petrotub and Republica have been allowed and the contested regulation is annulled in so far as
         it concerns them, the Council must be ordered to pay the costs incurred by Petrotub and Republica, both at first instance
         and in connection with the present proceedings, as asked for in their pleadings.  The Commission must also be ordered to bear
         its own costs, both at first instance and in connection with the present proceedings. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
hereby: 
         
1.
 Sets aside the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities of December in Joined Cases T-33/and T-34/Petrotub and Republica v  
                Council  ;
2.
 Annuls Council Regulation (EC) No 2320/of November imposing definitive anti-dumping duties on imports of certain
               seamless pipes and tubes of iron or non-alloy steel originating in Hungary, Poland, Russia, the Czech Republic, Romania and
               the Slovak Republic, repealing Regulation (EEC) No 1189/and terminating the proceeding in respect of such imports originating
               in the Republic of Croatia in so far as it concerns Petrotub SA and Republica SA; 
3.
 Orders the Council of the European Union to pay the costs incurred by Petrotub SA and Republica SA both in the present proceedings
               and in the proceedings at first instance which culminated in the judgment in  
                Petrotub and Republica  v  
                Council  , cited above;
4.
 Orders the Commission of the European Communities to bear its own costs both in the present proceedings and in the proceedings at
               first instance which culminated in the judgment in  
                Petrotub and Republica  v  
                Council  .
Wathelet
Timmermans 
Edward 
La Pergola
Jann 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on January 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
M. Wathelet  
Registrar
President of the Fifth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: English.
Top  
 