
Joined Cases C-261/and C-299/VTB-VAB NV
v
Total Belgium NV 
and
Galatea BVBA
v
Sanoma Magazines Belgium NV 
(References for a preliminary ruling from the
 Rechtbank van koophandel te Antwerpen)
(Directive 2005/29/EC – Unfair commercial practices – National legislation prohibiting combined offers to consumers)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Acts of the institutions – Directives – Implementation by Member States
2.        Acts of the institutions – Directives – Implementation by Member States – Obligations of Member States during the period prescribed
            for transposition
(Arts 10, second para, EC and 249, third para., EC)
3.        Approximation of laws – Unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices –  Directive 2005/(European Parliament and Council Directive 2005/29)
1.        Not only the national provisions specifically intended to transpose a directive but also, from the date of that directive’s
         entry into force, the pre-existing national provisions capable of ensuring that the national law is consistent with it must
         be considered to fall within the scope of that directive.
      
(see para. 35)
2.        During the period prescribed for transposition of a directive, the Member States to which it is addressed must refrain from
         taking any measures liable seriously to compromise the attainment of the result prescribed by that directive.
      
All the authorities of the Member States concerned, including the national courts, have such an obligation to refrain from
         taking measures. It follows that, from the date upon which a directive has entered into force, the courts of the Member States
         must refrain as far as possible from interpreting domestic law in a manner which might seriously compromise, after the period
         for transposition has expired, attainment of the objective pursued by that directive.
      
(see paras 38-39)
3.        Directive 2005/concerning unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices in the internal market and amending Directives
         84/450, 97/7, 98/and 2002/and Regulation No 2006/must be interpreted as precluding national legislation which,
         with certain exceptions, and without taking account of the specific circumstances – therefore generally and as a preventative
         measure – imposes a general prohibition of combined offers made by a vendor to a consumer.
      
That legislation lays down the principle that combined offers are prohibited, notwithstanding the fact that such practices
         are not referred to in Annex I to the Directive, which annex exhaustively lists the only commercial practices which are prohibited
         in all circumstances and accordingly do not have to be assessed on a case-by-case basis. By operating in that manner, that
         legislation runs counter to the content of Article of the Directive, which expressly prohibits Member States from maintaining
         or adopting more restrictive national measures, even where such measures are designed to ensure a higher level of consumer
         protection. 
      
(see paras 60-61, 63, 68, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Directive 2005/29/EC – Unfair commercial practices – National legislation prohibiting combined offers to consumers)
In Joined Cases C‑261/and C‑299/07,
REFERENCES for a preliminary ruling under Article EC made by the Rechtbank van koophandel te Antwerpen (Belgium) by decisions
         of May and June 2007, received at the Court on and June respectively, in the proceedings
      
VTB-VAB NV (C-261/07)
      
v
Total Belgium NV,
and
Galatea BVBA (C-299/07)
      
v
Sanoma Magazines Belgium NV,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann, President of the Chamber, A. Tizzano (Rapporteur), A. Borg Barthet, E. Levits and J.-J. Kasel, Judges,
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on June 2008,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        VTB-VAB NV, by L. Eliaerts and B. Gregoir, advocaten,
–        Total Belgium NV, by J. Stuyck, advocaat,
–        Sanoma Magazines Belgium NV, by P. Maeyaert, advocaat,
–        the Belgian Government, by L. Van den Broeck and T. Materne, acting as Agents, assisted by E. Balate, avocat,
–        the Spanish Government, by M. Muñoz Pérez, acting as Agent,
–        the French Government, by G. de Bergues and R. Loosli-Surrans, acting as Agents,
–        the Portuguese Government, by L. Inez Fernandes, acting as Agent,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by W. Wils, acting as Agent,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on October 2008,
gives the following
Judgment
The references for a preliminary ruling relate to the interpretation of Article EC and of Directive 2005/29/EC of the European
         Parliament and of the Council of May concerning unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices in the internal market
         and amending Council Directive 84/450/EEC, Directives 97/7/EC, 98/27/EC and 2002/65/EC of the European Parliament and of the
         Council and Regulation (EC) No 2006/of the European Parliament and of the Council (‘Unfair Commercial Practices Directive’)
         (OJ L 149, p. 22; ‘the Directive’).
      
Those references have been submitted in the course of proceedings between, in the first case, VTB-VAB NV (‘VTB’) and Total
         Belgium NV (‘Total Belgium’) and, in the second, Galatea BVBA (‘Galatea’) and Sanoma Magazines Belgium NV (‘Sanoma’) concerning
         commercial practices of Total Belgium and Sanoma regarded as unfair by VTB and by Galatea.
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
Recitals 5, 6, and in the preamble to the Directive state:
      
‘(5)      … obstacles to the free movement of services and goods across borders or the freedom of establishment … should be eliminated.
         These obstacles can only be eliminated by establishing uniform rules at Community level which establish a high level of consumer
         protection and by clarifying certain legal concepts at Community level to the extent necessary for the proper functioning
         of the internal market and to meet the requirement of legal certainty.
      
(6)      This Directive therefore approximates the laws of the Member States on unfair commercial practices, including unfair advertising,
         which directly harm consumers’ economic interests and thereby indirectly harm the economic interests of legitimate competitors.
         …
      
(11)      The high level of convergence achieved by the approximation of national provisions through this Directive creates a high common
         level of consumer protection. This Directive establishes a single general prohibition of those unfair commercial practices
         distorting consumers’ economic behaviour. It also sets rules on aggressive commercial practices, which are currently not regulated
         at Community level.
      
(17)      It is desirable that those commercial practices which are in all circumstances unfair be identified to provide greater legal
         certainty. Annex I therefore contains the full list of all such practices. These are the only commercial practices which can
         be deemed to be unfair without a case-by-case assessment against the provisions of Articles to 9. The list may only be modified
         by revision of the Directive.’
      
Article of the Directive provides:
      
‘The purpose of this Directive is to contribute to the proper functioning of the internal market and achieve a high level
         of consumer protection by approximating the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States on unfair
         commercial practices harming consumers’ economic interests.’
      
Article of the Directive provides:
      
‘For the purposes of this Directive:
…
(d)      “business-to-consumer commercial practices” (hereinafter also referred to as commercial practices) means any act, omission,
         course of conduct or representation, commercial communication including advertising and marketing, by a trader, directly connected
         with the promotion, sale or supply of a product to consumers;
      
…’
Article 3(1) of the Directive provides:
      
‘This Directive shall apply to unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices, as laid down in Article 5, before, during
         and after a commercial transaction in relation to a product.’ 
      
In accordance with Article of the Directive:
      
‘Member States shall neither restrict the freedom to provide services nor restrict the free movement of goods for reasons
         falling within the field approximated by this Directive.’
      
Article of the Directive, entitled ‘Prohibition of unfair commercial practices’, states as follows:
      
‘1.      Unfair commercial practices shall be prohibited.
2.      A commercial practice shall be unfair if:
(a)      it is contrary to the requirements of professional diligence,
and
(b)      it materially distorts or is likely materially to distort the economic behaviour with regard to the product of the average
         consumer whom it reaches or to whom it is addressed, or of the average member of the group when a commercial practice is directed
         to a particular group of consumers.
      
3.      Commercial practices which are likely materially to distort the economic behaviour only of a clearly identifiable group of
         consumers who are particularly vulnerable to the practice or the underlying product because of their mental or physical infirmity,
         age or credulity in a way which the trader could reasonably be expected to foresee, shall be assessed from the perspective
         of the average member of that group. This is without prejudice to the common and legitimate advertising practice of making
         exaggerated statements or statements which are not meant to be taken literally.
      
4.      In particular, commercial practices shall be unfair which:
(a)      are misleading as set out in Articles and 7,
or
(b)      are aggressive as set out in Articles and 9.
5.      Annex I contains the list of those commercial practices which shall in all circumstances be regarded as unfair. The same single
         list shall apply in all Member States and may only be modified by revision of this Directive.’ 
      
Article of the Directive, entitled ‘Misleading actions’, provides:
      
‘1.      A commercial practice shall be regarded as misleading if it contains false information and is therefore untruthful or in any
         way, including overall presentation, deceives or is likely to deceive the average consumer, even if the information is factually
         correct, in relation to one or more of the following elements, and in either case causes or is likely to cause him to take
         a transactional decision that he would not have taken otherwise:
      
(a)      the existence or nature of the product;
(b)      the main characteristics of the product, such as its availability, benefits, risks, execution, composition, accessories, after-sale
         customer assistance and complaint handling, method and date of manufacture or provision, delivery, fitness for purpose, usage,
         quantity, specification, geographical or commercial origin or the results to be expected from its use, or the results and
         material features of tests or checks carried out on the product;
      
(c)      the extent of the trader’s commitments, the motives for the commercial practice and the nature of the sales process, any statement
         or symbol in relation to direct or indirect sponsorship or approval of the trader or the product;  
      
(d)      the price or the manner in which the price is calculated, or the existence of a specific price advantage;
(e)      the need for a service, part, replacement or repair; 
(f)      the nature, attributes and rights of the trader or his agent, such as his identity and assets, his qualifications, status,
         approval, affiliation or connection and ownership of industrial, commercial or intellectual property rights or his awards
         and distinctions; 
      
(g)      the consumer’s rights, including the right to replacement or reimbursement under Directive 1999/44/EC of the European Parliament
         and of the Council of May on certain aspects of the sale of consumer goods and associated guarantees [(OJ L 171,
         p. 12)], or the risks he may face. 
      
2.      A commercial practice shall also be regarded as misleading if, in its factual context, taking account of all its features
         and circumstances, it causes or is likely to cause the average consumer to take a transactional decision that he would not
         have taken otherwise, and it involves: 
      
(a)      any marketing of a product, including comparative advertising, which creates confusion with any products, trade marks, trade
         names or other distinguishing marks of a competitor; 
      
(b)      non-compliance by the trader with commitments contained in codes of conduct by which the trader has undertaken to be bound,
         where: 
      
(i)      the commitment is not aspirational but is firm and is capable of being verified,
and
(ii)      the trader indicates in a commercial practice that he is bound by the code.’
Article of the Directive, entitled ‘Misleading omissions’, states:
      
‘1.      A commercial practice shall be regarded as misleading if, in its factual context, taking account of all its features and circumstances
         and the limitations of the communication medium, it omits material information that the average consumer needs, according
         to the context, to take an informed transactional decision and thereby causes or is likely to cause the average consumer to
         take a transactional decision that he would not have taken otherwise.
      
2.      It shall also be regarded as a misleading omission when, taking account of the matters described in paragraph 1, a trader
         hides or provides in an unclear, unintelligible, ambiguous or untimely manner such material information as referred to in
         that paragraph or fails to identify the commercial intent of the commercial practice if not already apparent from the context,
         and where, in either case, this causes or is likely to cause the average consumer to take a transactional decision that he
         would not have taken otherwise.
      
3.      Where the medium used to communicate the commercial practice imposes limitations of space or time, these limitations and any
         measures taken by the trader to make the information available to consumers by other means shall be taken into account in
         deciding whether information has been omitted.
      
4.      In the case of an invitation to purchase, the following information shall be regarded as material, if not already apparent
         from the context:
      
(a)      the main characteristics of the product, to an extent appropriate to the medium and the product; 
(b)      the geographical address and the identity of the trader, such as his trading name and, where applicable, the geographical
         address and the identity of the trader on whose behalf he is acting;
      
(c)      the price inclusive of taxes, or where the nature of the product means that the price cannot reasonably be calculated in advance,
         the manner in which the price is calculated, as well as, where appropriate, all additional freight, delivery or postal charges
         or, where these charges cannot reasonably be calculated in advance, the fact that such additional charges may be payable;
      
(d)      the arrangements for payment, delivery, performance and the complaint handling policy, if they depart from the requirements
         of professional diligence; 
      
(e)      for products and transactions involving a right of withdrawal or cancellation, the existence of such a right.
5.      Information requirements established by Community law in relation to commercial communication including advertising or marketing,
         a non-exhaustive list of which is contained in Annex II, shall be regarded as material.’ 
      
Article of the Directive, entitled ‘Aggressive commercial practices’, provides:
      
‘A commercial practice shall be regarded as aggressive if, in its factual context, taking account of all its features and
         circumstances, by harassment, coercion, including the use of physical force, or undue influence, it significantly impairs
         or is likely significantly to impair the average consumer’s freedom of choice or conduct with regard to the product and thereby
         causes him or is likely to cause him to take a transactional decision that he would not have taken otherwise.’
      
Article of the Directive, entitled ‘Use of harassment, coercion and undue influence’, states as follows:
      
‘In determining whether a commercial practice uses harassment, coercion, including the use of physical force, or undue influence,
         account shall be taken of: 
      
(a)      its timing, location, nature or persistence;
(b)      the use of threatening or abusive language or behaviour;
(c)      the exploitation by the trader of any specific misfortune or circumstance of such gravity as to impair the consumer’s judgment,
         of which the trader is aware, to influence the consumer’s decision with regard to the product; 
      
(d)      any onerous or disproportionate non-contractual barriers imposed by the trader where a consumer wishes to exercise rights
         under the contract, including rights to terminate a contract or to switch to another product or another trader;
      
(e)      any threat to take any action that cannot legally be taken.’
Finally, in accordance with Article of the Directive:
      
‘Member States shall adopt and publish the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive
         by June 2007. …
      
They shall apply those measures by December 2007. …’
 National legislation
Article of the Law of July on commercial practices, consumer information and consumer protection (Belgisch Staatsblad of August 1991; ‘the Law’) states as follows:
      
‘For the purposes of this article, a combined offer exists where the acquisition, whether or not free of charge, of products,
         services or other advantages, or of vouchers with which they can be acquired, is tied to the acquisition of other, even identical,
         products or services.
      
Subject to the exceptions specified below, any combined offer to consumers which is made by a vendor is hereby prohibited.
         Any combined offer to a consumer which is made by several vendors acting with a common purpose is also hereby prohibited.’
      
Articles to of the Law provide for a number of exceptions to that prohibition.
      
Article of the Law provides as follows:
      
‘It is hereby permitted to offer the following in combination at an all-inclusive price: 
1.      products or services which form a whole; 
The King may, on a proposal from the competent Ministers and the Minister for Finance, designate the services offered in the
         financial sector which constitute a whole;
      
2.      identical products or services, provided that: 
(a)      each product and service can be acquired separately at the normal price in the same establishment; 
(b)      the purchaser is informed clearly of that possibility and of the individual price of each product and service; 
(c)      any price reduction granted to the purchaser on the totality of the products or services does not exceed one third of the
         individual prices added together.’ 
      
Under Article of the Law:
      
‘It is hereby permitted to offer the following free of charge in combination with a main product or service: 
1.      accessories of a main product, which the manufacturer of the product has specifically adapted to that product and which are
         supplied together with that product in order to extend or facilitate its use; 
      
2.      the packaging or containers used for the protection and market preparation of products, taking into account the nature and
         value of those products;
      
3.      small products and services accepted as customary in trade, as well as the delivery, installation, inspection and maintenance
         of the products sold; 
      
4.      samples from the product range of the manufacturer or supplier of the main product, provided that they are offered in the
         quantities or sizes strictly necessary for an assessment of the characteristics of the product; 
      
5.      colour photographs, stickers and other images with minimal commercial value; 
6.      tickets for legally authorised lotteries; 
7.      objects with indelible and clearly visible advertising inscriptions, which are not found as such in shops, provided that the
         cost price paid by the supplier does not exceed 5% of the retail price of the main product or service with which they are
         given away.’
      
Finally, Article of the Law provides:
      
‘It shall also be permitted to offer, free of charge, in connection with a main product or service: 
1.       vouchers conferring entitlement to the acquisition of an identical product or service, provided that the reduction in price
         resulting from that acquisition does not exceed the percentage fixed in Article 55(2);
      
2.       vouchers conferring entitlement to the acquisition of one of the benefits referred to in Article 56(5) and (6);
3.       vouchers conferring entitlement exclusively to a cash refund, on condition:
(a)      that they state the cash value which they represent;
(b)      that, on premises where products are sold or services supplied, the rate or size of the refund offered be clearly stated,
         in the same way as for products or services the acquisition of which confers an entitlement to receive vouchers;
      
4.      vouchers conferring entitlement, after the acquisition of a certain number of products or services, to a free offer or a price
         reduction upon the acquisition of a similar product or service, on condition that that benefit is provided by the same vendor
         and does not exceed one third of the price of the products or services previously acquired.
      
The vouchers must indicate any time-limit on their validity as well as the conditions applicable to the offer.
When the vendor ends his offer, the consumer must receive the benefits offered in proportion to the purchases previously made.’
         
      
On June 2007, the Kingdom of Belgium adopted the Law amending the Law of July on commercial practices, consumer
         information and consumer protection (Belgisch Staatsblad, June 2007, p. 34272; ‘the Law of June 2007’) which, in accordance with Article thereof, transposes the provisions
         of the Directive. 
      
 The disputes in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 Case C-261/It is apparent from the decision for reference that, since January 2007, Total Belgium, a subsidiary of the Total group,
         the primary business of which is the sale of fuels at filling stations, has been offering free breakdown services for a period
         of three weeks to consumers who are Total Club cardholders with every purchase of at least litres of fuel for a car or
         at least litres for a motorcycle.
      
On February 2007, VTB, an undertaking which operates in the breakdown-service sector, brought an action before the Rechtbank
         van koophandel te Antwerpen (Antwerp Commercial Court) (Belgium) by which it sought an order requiring Total Belgium to discontinue
         that commercial practice on the ground that it constituted, inter alia, a combined offer prohibited by Article of the Law.
      
In those circumstances, the Rechtbank van koophandel te Antwerpen decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following
         question to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘Does [the] Directive … preclude a national provision such as Article of the [Law] on commercial practices, consumer
         information and consumer protection, which, except in the cases listed exhaustively in that Law, prohibits any combined offer
         by a vendor to a consumer, including an offer in which goods which the consumer has to buy are tied to a free service, the
         acquisition of which is linked to the purchase of the goods, and this regardless of the circumstances of the case, in particular
         regardless of the influence which the specific offer may have on the average consumer and of whether that offer can be considered
         in the specific circumstances to be contrary to professional diligence or fair commercial practices?’ 
      
 Case C-299/The dispute in the main proceedings is between Galatea, a firm which runs a lingerie shop in Schoten (Belgium), and Sanoma,
         a subsidiary of the Finnish Sanoma group, which publishes a number of magazines, including the weekly magazine Flair.
      
The issue of Flair of March contained a voucher entitling the holder to a reduction of 15% to 25% on products sold in various lingerie
         shops in Flanders during the period from March to May 2007.
      
On March 2007, Galatea brought an action before the Rechtbank van koophandel te Antwerpen seeking an order prohibiting
         that commercial practice, submitting that Sanoma had infringed, inter alia, Article of the Law.
      
In those circumstances, the Rechtbank van koophandel te Antwerpen decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following
         question to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Do Article of the EC Treaty concerning the freedom to provide services and [the] Directive … preclude a national provision
         such as Article of the Law …, which, except in the cases listed exhaustively in that Law, prohibits any combined offer
         by a vendor to a consumer whereby the acquisition, whether or not free of charge, of products, services or other advantages
         or of vouchers with which they can be obtained is linked to the acquisition of other, even identical, products or services,
         and this regardless of the circumstances of the case, in particular regardless of the influence which the specific offer may
         have on the average consumer and of whether that offer can be considered in the specific circumstances to be contrary to professional
         diligence or fair commercial practices?’
      
By order of the President of the Court of Justice of August Cases C‑261/and C‑299/were joined for the purposes
         of the written and oral procedure and also for judgment.
      
 The questions referred
By its two questions, the national court asks essentially whether the Directive is to be interpreted as precluding a national
         rule, such as Article of the Law, which, subject to certain exceptions, and without taking account of the specific
         circumstances, lays down a general principle prohibiting the making of combined offers by a vendor to a consumer.
      
 Admissibility of the reference for a preliminary ruling in Case C‑261/VTB calls into question the admissibility of the question referred, on the ground that it concerns the interpretation of a
         directive the period for the transposition of which, which ended on December 2007, had not yet expired at the date on which
         the decision to refer was made, that is to say, May 2007.
      
For the same reasons, and without expressly raising an objection of inadmissibility, the Belgian and Spanish Governments are
         of the view that the Directive is not applicable to the dispute in the main proceedings. In particular, in the view of the
         Spanish Government, a national provision cannot be declared by a court to be inapplicable on the ground that it infringes
         the Directive so long as the period set for the transposition thereof has not yet expired.
      
Those arguments cannot, however, be accepted.
      
In that regard, it should be noted that, according to settled case-law, in the context of the cooperation between the Court
         of Justice and the national courts provided for by Article EC, it is solely for the national court before which a dispute
         has been brought, and which must assume responsibility for the subsequent judicial decision, to determine, in the light of
         the particular circumstances of the case, both the need for a preliminary ruling in order to enable it to deliver judgment
         and the relevance of the questions which it submits to the Court. Consequently, where the questions submitted concern the
         interpretation of Community law, the Court of Justice is bound, in principle, to give a ruling (see, inter alia, Case C‑379/PreussenElektra [2001] ECR I‑2099, paragraph 38; Case C‑18/Korhonen and Others [2003] ECR I‑5321, paragraph 19; and Case C‑295/Asemfo [2007] ECR I‑2999, paragraph 30).
      
It follows that the presumption that questions referred by national courts for a preliminary ruling are relevant may be rebutted
         only in exceptional cases and, in particular, where it is quite obvious that the interpretation which is sought of the provisions
         of Community law referred to in the questions bears no relation to the actual facts of the main action or to its purpose (see,
         inter alia, Case C‑415/Bosman [1995] ECR I‑4921, paragraph 61, and Case C‑212/Gouvernement de la Communauté française et gouvernement wallon [2008] ECR I‑1683, paragraph 29).
      
In this case, it is not obvious that the present question referred is irrelevant in the light of the decision which the national
         court is called upon to take.
      
Firstly, it follows from the case-law that not only the national provisions specifically intended to transpose a directive
         but also, from the date of that directive’s entry into force, the pre-existing national provisions capable of ensuring that
         the national law is consistent with it must be considered to fall within the scope of that directive (see, to that effect,
         Case C‑81/Cordero Alonso [2006] ECR I‑7569, paragraph 29).
      
While it is true that, in the main proceedings, the Law of June amending the Law and intended formally to transpose
         the Directive is later in time than the main proceedings and the adoption of the decision to refer, the fact remains that,
         as is apparent from that decision and as the Belgian Government acknowledged at the hearing, the disputed provisions in Articles
         to of the Law, that is to say, those laying down the principle of a general prohibition of combined offers and
         providing for certain exceptions to that principle, were neither repealed nor even amended by the Law of June 2007. 
      
In other words, both at the time of the main proceedings and at the time when the decision to refer was adopted, those pre-existing
         provisions were regarded by the national authorities as being capable of ensuring transposition of the Directive from the
         date of its entry into force, that is to say, from June 2005, and, accordingly, as falling within its scope. 
      
Secondly, in any event, it follows from the case-law of the Court that, during the period prescribed for transposition of
         a directive, the Member States to which it is addressed must refrain from taking any measures liable seriously to compromise
         the attainment of the result prescribed by that directive (Case C‑129/Inter-Environnement Wallonie [1997] ECR I‑7411, paragraph 45; Case C‑14/ATRAL [2003] ECR I‑4431, paragraph 58; and Case C‑144/Mangold [2005] ECR I‑9981, paragraph 67). 
      
In that respect, the Court has had occasion to hold that all the authorities of the Member States concerned, including the
         national courts, have such an obligation to refrain from taking measures. It follows that, from the date upon which a directive
         has entered into force, the courts of the Member States must refrain as far as possible from interpreting domestic law in
         a manner which might seriously compromise, after the period for transposition has expired, attainment of the objective pursued
         by that directive (see, in particular, Case C‑212/Adeneler and Others [2006] ECR I‑6057, paragraphs and 123).
      
Since the Directive had already entered into force at the time of the facts in the main proceedings, the interpretation sought
         by the Rechtbank van koophandel te Antwerpen, which relates to crucial provisions of the Directive, must be regarded as being
         useful to that court for the purpose of enabling it to rule in the case before it in compliance with that obligation to refrain.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the reference for a preliminary ruling made by the national court in Case C‑261/is admissible.
      
 Substance
 Observations submitted to the Court
Total Belgium, Sanoma, the Portuguese Government and the Commission of the European Communities submit that the Directive
         precludes a prohibition of combined offers, such as that laid down by Article of the Law. 
      
In that regard, Total Belgium, Sanoma and the Commission submit that combined offers are covered by the notion of ‘commercial
         practice’ within the meaning of the Directive. Since that directive undertakes a full harmonisation in the field of unfair
         commercial practices, only those practices that are listed in Annex I to the Directive can be prohibited ‘in all circumstances’
         by the Member States, in accordance with Article 5(5) thereof. Since combined offers are not referred to in that annex, they
         cannot, accordingly, simply be prohibited per se, but only if the national court considers the requirements of Article of
         the Directive to be satisfied in the light of the actual circumstances of the particular case. Consequently, as the Portuguese
         Government also submits, a general prohibition of combined offers, such as that set out in Article of the Law, is
         contrary to the Directive.
      
Taking the opposite view, VTB and the Belgian and French Governments submit, in essence, that combined offers do not fall
         within the notion of ‘commercial practice’ as used in the Directive and are therefore not covered by it.
      
In that regard, the Belgian Government points out that combined offers were the subject of the Proposal for a Regulation concerning
         sales promotions in the Internal Market (OJ C E, p. 11), which distinguished clearly the legal treatment of combined
         offers from that of the commercial practices covered by the Directive. However, since that proposal was withdrawn only in
         2006, the Belgian authorities were entitled to assume that combined offers did not constitute ‘commercial practices’. Consequently,
         in transposing the Directive, the Belgian legislature did not take the view that it had to amend Article of the Law
         or to interpret it in the light of the criteria set out in Article of the Directive.
      
The French Government adds, in particular, that, although the Directive obliges Member States to prohibit unfair business-to-consumer
         commercial practices, that nevertheless does not prevent those States, in order better to protect consumers, from prohibiting
         other practices, such as combined offers, regardless of whether they are unfair within the terms of the Directive. 
      
Finally, in the view of VTB, Article of the Directive does not in any event preclude Member States from classifying as unfair
         commercial practices other than those mentioned in Annex I to the Directive.
      
 Reply of the Court
For the purpose of answering these questions, it is necessary first of all to determine whether combined offers, which are
         the subject of the disputed prohibition, constitute commercial practices within the meaning of Article 2(d) of the Directive
         and are therefore subject to the rules laid down by that directive. 
      
In that regard, it should be borne in mind that Article 2(d) of the Directive gives a particularly wide definition to the
         concept of commercial practices: ‘any act, omission, course of conduct or representation, commercial communication including
         advertising and marketing, by a trader, directly connected with the promotion, sale or supply of a product to consumers’.
      
As the Advocate General observed in points and of her Opinion, combined offers constitute commercial acts which clearly
         form part of an operator’s commercial strategy and relate directly to the promotion thereof and its sales development. It
         follows that they do indeed constitute commercial practices within the meaning of Article 2(d) of the Directive and, consequently,
         fall within its scope.
      
That having been determined, it must first be recalled that the Directive is intended to establish, in accordance with recitals
         and in the preamble thereto and Article thereof, uniform rules on unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices in
         order to contribute to the proper functioning of the internal market and to achieve a high level of consumer protection.
      
Thus, the Directive fully harmonises those rules at the Community level. Accordingly, as Article thereof expressly provides
         and contrary to the assertions of VTB and the French Government, Member States may not adopt stricter rules than those provided
         for in the Directive, even in order to achieve a higher level of consumer protection. 
      
Next, Article of the Directive provides that unfair commercial practices are to be prohibited and sets out the criteria
         on the basis of which practices are to be classified as being unfair. 
      
Thus, in accordance with Article 5(2), a commercial practice is unfair if it is contrary to the requirements of professional
         diligence and materially distorts or is likely materially to distort the economic behaviour of the average consumer with regard
         to the product. 
      
Furthermore, Article 5(4) of the Directive defines two precise categories of unfair commercial practices, that is to say,
         ‘misleading’ practices and ‘aggressive’ practices corresponding to the criteria specified in Articles and and Articles
         and of the Directive respectively. Pursuant to those provisions, such practices are prohibited where, having regard to
         their nature and the factual context, they cause or are likely to cause the average consumer to take a transactional decision
         that he would not have taken otherwise.
      
Annex I to the Directive also establishes an exhaustive list of commercial practices which, in accordance with Article
         5(5) of the Directive, are regarded as unfair ‘in all circumstances’. Consequently, as recital in the preamble to the Directive
         expressly states, these are the only commercial practices which can be deemed to be unfair without a case-by-case assessment
         under the provisions of Articles to of the Directive.
      
Finally, it should be noted that combined offers are not included in the practices listed in Annex I to the Directive.
      
It is therefore in the light of the content and the general scheme of the provisions of the Directive noted in the preceding
         paragraphs that the questions referred by the national court must be examined.
      
In that regard, clearly, by establishing a presumption of unlawfulness of combined offers, national legislation such as that
         at issue in the main proceedings does not meet the requirements of the Directive.
      
In the first place, Article of the Law lays down the principle that combined offers are prohibited, notwithstanding
         the fact that such practices are not referred to in Annex I to the Directive.
      
As has been pointed out in paragraph of the present judgment, that annex exhaustively lists the only commercial practices
         which are prohibited in all circumstances and accordingly do not have to be assessed on a case-by-case basis.
      
Thus, the Directive precludes the system implemented by Article of the Law in so far as that article prohibits, generally
         and pre-emptively, combined offers without any verification of their unfairness in the light of the criteria laid down in
         Articles to of the Directive.
      
Next, by operating in that manner, a rule of the type at issue in the main proceedings runs counter to the content of Article
         of the Directive, which expressly prohibits Member States from maintaining or adopting more restrictive national measures,
         even where such measures are designed to ensure a higher level of consumer protection.
      
Finally, it should be added that such an interpretation cannot be called into question by the fact that the Law provides,
         in Articles to thereof, for a number of exceptions to that prohibition of combined offers.
      
Although those exceptions are liable to restrict the scope of the prohibition of combined offers, the fact remains that, because
         of their limited and pre-defined nature, they cannot take the place of the analysis, which must of necessity be undertaken
         having regard to the facts of each particular case, of the ‘unfairness’ of a commercial practice in the light of the criteria
         set out in Articles to of the Directive, where, as in the main proceedings, that practice is not listed in Annex I thereto.
      
That finding is, moreover, confirmed by the very content of certain of the derogations at issue. Thus, for example, Article
         of the Law authorises combined offers for an overall price only on condition that they relate to products or services
         which form a whole or which are identical. As the Commission rightly points out in its answer to the written question put
         by the Court, the possibility cannot be excluded, particularly if correct information is provided to consumers, that a combined
         offer of different products or services which neither form a whole nor are identical may satisfy the requirements of fairness
         laid down in the Directive.
      
In those circumstances, the Directive precludes a prohibition of combined offers such as that provided for by the Law.
         Accordingly, there is no need to examine the possibility of a breach of Article EC raised in the question referred in Case
         C‑299/07.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the questions referred for a preliminary ruling are that the Directive must be
         interpreted as precluding national legislation, such as that at issue in the disputes in the main proceedings, which, with
         certain exceptions, and without taking account of the specific circumstances, imposes a general prohibition of combined offers
         made by a vendor to a consumer. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
Directive 2005/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of May concerning unfair business-to-consumer commercial
            practices in the internal market and amending Council Directive 84/450/EEC, Directives 97/7/EC, 98/27/EC and 2002/65/EC of
            the European Parliament and of the Council and Regulation (EC) No 2006/of the European Parliament and of the Council
            (‘Unfair Commercial Practices Directive’) must be interpreted as precluding national legislation, such as that at issue in
            the disputes in the main proceedings, which, with certain exceptions, and without taking account of the specific circumstances,
            imposes a general prohibition of combined offers made by a vendor to a consumer. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the cases: Dutch.
      
Top  
 