
Case C-400/B.A.S. Trucks BV
v
Staatssecretaris van Financiën
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Hoge Raad der Nederlanden)
(Common Customs Tariff – Combined Nomenclature – Tariff classification – Subheading – Vehicle designed for use on construction sites for the transport and unloading of materials and also for use on the highway)
Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber), January Summary of the Judgment
Common Customs Tariff – Tariff headings – Dumper trucks capable of being incidentally driven on paved public roads
The fact that dumper trucks designed specifically and primarily for use off paved, public roads have distinctive characteristics
         which enable them to be driven, incidentally, on such roads does not preclude their classification as dumpers within the meaning
         of Subheading of the combined nomenclature, in Annex I to Regulation No 2658/on the tariff and statistical nomenclature
         and on the Common Customs Tariff.
      
Even if, in order to be classifiable under that subheading, dumpers must have been specially designed for off-highway use
         for the transport and unloading of materials, neither the wording of the subheading nor the explanatory notes to the combined
         nomenclature and the harmonised system indicate that those dumpers must have been designed in such a way that they can be
         used exclusively off-highway.
      
(see paras 36-37, 41, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
January (*)
      
(Common Customs Tariff – Combined Nomenclature – Tariff classification – Subheading – Vehicle designed for use on construction sites for the transport and unloading of materials and also for use on the highway)
In Case C-400/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden (Netherlands), made by decision
         of November 2005, received at the Court on November 2005, in the proceedings 
      
B.A.S. Trucks BV
v
Staatssecretaris van Financiën,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
composed of R. Schintgen, President of the Chamber, A. Borg Barthet (Rapporteur) and E. Levits, Judges,
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on November 2006,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       B.A.S. Trucks BV, by H. de Bie and M. Ouwehand, advocaten,
–       the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster, C. ten Dam and P. van Ginneken, acting as Agents,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by J. Hottiaux, acting as Agent, assisted by  F. Tuytschaever, advocaat,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of subheading of the Combined Nomenclature, in
         Annex I to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common
         Customs Tariff (OJ L 256, p. 1), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 2261/of October (OJ L 292,
         p. 1) (‘the CN’). 
      
That reference was made in the course of proceedings between B.A.S. Trucks BV (‘BAS Trucks’), and the Inspecteur der Belastingdienst
         – Douanedistrict Rotterdam (Customs Inspector of Rotterdam District) on the tariff classification of two motor vehicles called
         ‘Dumptrucks’ in subheading of the CN as dumpers designed for off-highway use.
      
 Legal context
 International law
The International Convention establishing the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System (‘the HS’), concluded in
         Brussels on June 1983, and the Protocol of Amendment thereto of June (‘the HS Convention’) were approved on behalf
         of the Community by Council Decision 87/369/EEC of April (OJ L 198, p. 1).
      
Under Article 3(1) of that convention, each contracting party undertakes to ensure that its customs tariff and statistical
         nomenclatures will be in conformity with the HS, to use all of the headings and subheadings of the HS without addition or
         modification, together with their related codes, and to follow the numerical sequence of that system. Each contracting party
         also undertakes to apply the general rules for the interpretation of the HS and all the section, chapter and subheading notes
         of the HS, and not to modify their scope.
      
The Customs Cooperation Council, now the World Customs Organisation, established by the International Convention for creation
         of that council, signed at Brussels on December 1950, approves, under the conditions laid down in Article of the HS Convention,
         the explanatory notes to the HS adopted by the HS Committee provided for in Article thereof. 
      
The explanatory note to the HS relating to heading thereof states:
‘This heading also covers: 
(1)      Dumpers; sturdily built vehicles with a tipping or bottom opening body, designed for the transport of excavated or other materials.
         These vehicles, which may have a rigid or articulated chassis, are generally fitted with off-the-road wheels and can work
         over soft ground. ...
      
... ’
As regards subheading 10, the HS explanatory note contains the following passages:
‘These dumpers can generally be distinguished from other vehicles for the transport of goods (in particular, tipping lorries)
         by the following characteristics:
      
–      …
–      lack of axle suspension;
–      high braking capacity;
–      limited speed and area of operation;
–      special earth-moving tyres;
–      …
It should be noted, however, that certain dumpers are specially designed for working in mines or tunnels, for example, those
         with a bottom‑opening body. ...’
      
 Community law
Regulation No 2658/established, for the needs of both the Common Customs Tariff and the external trade statistics of the
         Community, the combined nomenclature, which is based on the HS, from which it takes the six-digit headings and subheadings,
         only the seventh and eighth digits forming subdivisions specific to the combined nomenclature.
      
The version of the combined nomenclature applicable at the time of the facts in the main proceedings is set out in Annex I
         to Regulation No 2261/98. The second part of that annex includes a Section XVII, entitled ‘Vehicles, aircraft, vessels and
         associated transport equipment’. That section contains, inter alia, a Chapter 87, entitled ‘Vehicles other than railway or
         tramway rolling-stock, and parts and accessories thereof’. Under that chapter, heading is found with, inter alia, the
         following subheadings:
      
‘Motor vehicles for the transport of goods:
– Dumpers designed for off-highway use:
– – With compression-ignition internal combustion piston engine (diesel or semi-diesel), or with spark‑ignition internal combustion
                  piston engine:
               
– – – With compression-ignition internal combustion piston engine (diesel or semi-diesel) of a cylinder capacity exceeding
                  cm³, or with spark‑ignition internal combustion piston engine of a cylinder capacity exceeding cm³.
               
…
– Other, with compression-ignition internal combustion piston engine (diesel or semi-diesel):
…
– – Of a gross vehicle weight exceeding tonnes:
…
– – – Other:
…
– – – – Used’.
All the sections and, within each section, all the chapters of the CN are preceded by some notes, that is section or chapter
         notes.
      
Section XVII does not contain any note which should be taken into account in these proceedings.
The Commission of the European Communities has however, published explanatory notes to the combined nomenclature in accordance
         with Article 10(1) of Regulation No 2658/(OJ C 287, p. 1). In the version applicable at the date of the facts in the
         main proceedings, those explanatory notes provide, inter alia, the following as regards subheadings to of the CN: 
      
‘These subheadings mainly cover vehicles fitted with a front or rear tipping body or a bottom-opening body that have been
         specially designed to transport sand, gravel, earth, stones, etc. and are intended for use in quarries, mines or on building
         sites, at roadworks, airports and ports. ...’
      
The general rules for the interpretation of the CN, which are in Part One, Section I, A, of the CN, state in particular:
 ‘Classification of goods in the combined nomenclature shall be governed by the following principles:
1.      The titles of sections, chapters and sub-chapters are provided for ease of reference only; for legal purposes, classification
         shall be determined according to the terms of the headings and any relative section or chapter notes and, provided such headings
         or notes do not otherwise require, according to the following provisions.
      
…
3.      When ... goods are prima facie classifiable under two or more headings, classification shall be effected as follows:
(a)      the heading which provides the most specific description shall be preferred to headings providing a more general description.
         ... 
      
…
6.      For legal purposes, the classification of goods in the subheadings of a heading shall be determined according to the terms
         of those subheadings and any related subheading notes and, mutatis mutandis, to the above rules, on the understanding that
         only subheadings at the same level are comparable. For the purposes of this rule, the relative section and chapter notes also
         apply, unless the context requires otherwise.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
BAS Trucks imports into the European Union, inter alia, second-hand dumper trucks. In the course of June 1998, it submitted
         two applications for binding tariff information with respect to a MAN vehicle and a Scania vehicle.
      
By tariff information of July 1998, the Netherlands customs authorities classified the two vehicles at issue in subheading
         of the CN. 
      
Taking the view that those vehicles should be classified under subheading of the CN, BAS Trucks brought an objection
         against that binding tariff information, which was rejected. It appealed against the decision of rejection, which was confirmed
         by the Gerechtshof te Amsterdam (Amsterdam Regional Court of Appeal). BAS Trucks therefore brought an appeal in cassation
         before the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden (Supreme Court of the Netherlands). 
      
The referring court describes the products in question as follows:
‘Both vehicles are fitted with driver cabs and a flat-bottomed tipper and are designed for the transport of sand, stones,
         rubble and such like. The forward end of the tipper can be raised to the upper edge of the cab.  The vehicles are also fitted
         with a rigid and reinforced chassis, to which are attached four axles, the two forward ones of which can be steered.  The
         axles are equipped with hub reduction to provide greater wheel purchase over rough ground.
      
The vehicles are fitted with or inch wheels with a special type of tyre (zig-zag profile) for use over unpaved terrain.
         Their maximum unladen speed is kph.  The fuel tank capacity is 300/litres respectively and with an average fuel consumption
         of litre/1.kilometres, the vehicles have an operating range of 400/km respectively.  The braking power of the vehicles,
         kW, is greater than that of an ordinary lorry (to kW).  The vehicles have compression-ignition internal
         combustion piston engines. The Scania P 8xhas an engine capacity of cm³.  The engine capacity of the MAN 8xis cm³.
      
The unladen weight of the Scania P 8xis kg and it has a load capacity of kg.  The unladen weight of the
         MAN 8xis kg and it has a load capacity of kg.  The ratio for both vehicles between unladen weight and
         payload capacity does not exceed 1:1.6.’
      
The referring court considers that the wording of subheading of the CN provides insufficient support for a definite
         tariff classification of the vehicles in question, even in the light of the information on heading provided by the World
         Customs Organisation and the European Community. It also takes the view that, although the judgment in Case C-396/DFDS [2004] ECR I-establishes beyond reasonable doubt that the vehicles here in issue are to be treated as ‘dumpers’ within
         the terms of subheading of the CN, it does not explain how to interpret the criterion ‘designed for off-highway use’
         which is also part of the wording of that subheading. 
      
In those circumstances, the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following question to the
         Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Does the fact that dumpers are, in view of their distinctive characteristics, also designed for use on paved, public roads
         preclude their classification under subheading of the [CN]?’
      
 On the question referred 
 Observations submitted to the Court
BAS Trucks claims that the dumper trucks in dispute are designed for off‑highway use. It is of the view that the fact that
         those trucks can be driven on paved, public roads does not preclude them having been designed for off-highway use. It submits
         that neither the notes relating to Chapter nor subheading of the CN states that dumpers must be designed exclusively
         to be used off public roads. It adds that, although those trucks can be driven on roads, that is not economically profitable
         in the light of the high costs and their limited area of operation in comparison with ordinary lorries.
      
Consequently, BAS Trucks suggests that the Court’s answer to the question should be that the fact that dumpers designed for
         use off public roads can also, incidentally, be driven on them because of their properties does not preclude their classification
         under subheading of the CN. 
      
The Netherlands Government contends that the wording of subheading of the CN is based on the premiss that a vehicle
         must fulfil two cumulative conditions in order to be classified under that subheading, namely, be a ‘dumper’ and be designed
         for off-highway use. That government contends that that second condition is an independent requirement which must be fulfilled
         separately from the first, and contends that the fact that those trucks are not intended solely for off‑highway use, but also
         for use on public roads, does not allow them to be classified under subheading of the CN. The Netherlands Government
         interprets the words ‘designed for off-highway use’ as meaning that the trucks must be designed exclusively for off-highway
         use in order to be covered by subheading of the CN. 
      
Consequently, the Netherlands Government requests that the Court’s answer to the question should be that the fact that dumpers
         are designed to be used also on paved, public roads, in view of their distinctive characteristics, precludes their classification
         under subheading of the CN.   
      
The Commission considers that nothing in the wording of the CN heading itself, the explanatory notes to the CN or those to
         the HS indicates that dumpers must be designed exclusively for off-highway use. That institution takes the view that the competent
         national authorities must, in practice, check in each case whether the dumper truck is in the first place designed for off‑highway
         use or use on public paved roads. In the latter case, the truck cannot be classified under subheading of the CN. 
      
Consequently, the Commission suggests that the Court’s answer to the question should be that the fact that dumpers are designed
         to be used also on paved, public roads, in view of their distinctive characteristics, does not itself preclude their classification
         under subheading of the CN. It adds that it is for the national court to assess, on the basis of all of the characteristics
         of the dumpers, and in the light of the relevant explanatory notes to the CN and the HS, whether they are covered or not under
         subheading of the CN. 
      
 The Court’s answer
The referring court is essentially asking whether the fact that ‘dumpers’ within the meaning of subheading of the
         CN are designed in such a way as to be capable of being used also on paved, public roads, precludes their classification under
         that subheading. 
      
It should be noted at the outset that it is settled case-law that, in the interests of legal certainty and ease of verification,
         the decisive criterion for the classification of goods for customs purposes is in general to be found in their objective characteristics
         and properties as defined in the wording of the relevant heading of the combined nomenclature and of the notes to the sections
         or chapters (see, inter alia, DFDS, paragraph 27; Case C‑495/Intermodal Transports [2005] ECR I‑8151, paragraph 47; and Case C-445/Possehl Erzkontor [2005] ECR I-10721, paragraph 19).
      
The explanatory notes drawn up, as regards the combined nomenclature, by the Commission and, as regards the HS, by the World
         Customs Organisation may be an important aid to the interpretation of the scope of the various headings but do not have legally
         binding force (see Case C-405/Mövenpick Deutschland [1999] ECR I-2397, paragraph 18).
      
In addition, the intended use of a product may constitute an objective criterion for classification if it is inherent to the
         product, and that inherent character must be capable of being assessed on the basis of the product’s objective characteristics
         and properties (see Case C-459/Thyssen Haniel Logistic [1995] ECR I-1381, paragraph 13).
      
As the Court observed in paragraph of DFDS, the wording of subheading of the CN requires that a vehicle meets two conditions to be classifiable thereunder,
         namely be a ‘dumper’ and be designed for use off-highway. 
      
The only criterion noted by the Netherlands Government to refuse the classification of the vehicles at issue as ‘dumpers’
         within the meaning of subheading of the CN is the fact that those trucks are designed to be used not exclusively off-highway,
         but also on paved, public roads.
      
It is apparent from its wording that subheading of the CN is a specific heading for vehicles designed for a special
         use, namely use off-highway for the loading and unloading of various materials. The other categories of motor vehicles for
         the transport of goods are covered by general subheadings which make a distinction on the basis of the specific technical
         characteristics of those vehicles rather than according to the use made of them. It follows that, as Advocate General Stix-Hackl
         pointed out in point of her Opinion in DFDS, the special purpose of the dumpers is the decisive criterion for classification under subheading of the CN. 
      
The explanatory notes to the combined nomenclature relating to subheadings to describe dumpers as vehicles
         ‘specially designed to transport sand, gravel, earth, stones, etc. and ... intended for use in quarries, mines or on building
         sites, at roadworks, airports and ports’.
      
The explanatory notes to the HS relating to subheadings and describe dumpers as vehicles ‘generally fitted with
         off-the-road wheels and [able to] work over soft ground’, whose speed and area of operation are limited in comparison with
         vehicles designed at the outset to be used on paved, public roads and which are in general fitted with special earth-moving
         tyres.
      
As a general rule, in the light of the inherent characteristics of the dumpers covered by subheading of the CN, namely
         off-the-road wheels, special earth-moving tyres and limited speed and area of operation, such vehicles seem to be intended
         primarily for the transport of materials in quarries, mines or on building sites, that is to say, off-highway. Those characteristics
         distinguish them from other vehicles intended for the transport of goods in so far as, unlike those vehicles, they are primarily
         intended to be driven on ground other than paved, public roads.
      
It follows from the foregoing that, in order to be classifiable under subheading of the CN, dumpers must have been
         specially designed for off-highway use for the transport and unloading of materials. 
      
However, neither the wording of subheading of the CN nor the explanatory notes to the combined nomenclature and the
         HS indicate that those dumpers must have been designed in such a way that they can be used exclusively off-highway.
      
In contrast to what the Netherlands Government contends, the essential characteristic of the dumpers covered by subheading
         of the CN does not lie in the fact that they must be incapable of being driven on the highway, but that they are primarily
         designed to be capable of being driven on ground which is more or less uneven. The fact that dumpers are designed so as to
         be also capable, incidentally, of being driven on paved, public roads is therefore not a decisive factor for their classification
         in the CN. 
      
It follows from the foregoing that the fact that a truck is designed so as to be capable of being driven not only off-highway
         but also on paved, public roads cannot in itself suffice to preclude that vehicle from classification as a dumper within the
         meaning of subheading of the CN. 
      
It is for the national authorities to ascertain on a case-by-case basis, under the court’s supervision, whether a truck is
         designed specifically and primarily for off-highway use or whether, on the contrary, it is designed primarily to be used on
         paved, public roads. Accordingly, it is appropriate to establish on the basis of all the characteristics of the vehicle concerned
         whether it has the essential characteristics listed in the relevant explanatory notes to the combined nomenclature and to
         the HS.  
      
Consequently, the answer to the question referred is that subheading of the CN must be interpreted as meaning that
         it covers dumpers within the meaning of that subheading which are specifically and primarily designed for use off paved, public
         roads. The fact that dumper trucks have distinctive characteristics which enable them to be driven, incidentally, on paved,
         public roads does not preclude their classification as dumpers within the meaning of that subheading.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fifth Chamber) hereby rules:
Subheading of the combined nomenclature, in Annex I to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July on the
            tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff, as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 2261/of October 1998, must be interpreted as meaning that it covers dumpers within the meaning of that subheading which are
            designed specifically and primarily for use off paved, public roads. The fact that dumper trucks have distinctive characteristics
            which enable them to be driven, incidentally, on paved, public roads does not preclude their classification as dumpers within
            the meaning of that subheading. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 