
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-499/P
Peter Biegi Nahrungsmittel GmbH
and
Commonfood Handelsgesellschaft für Agrar-Produkte mbH
v
Commission of the European Communities
(Appeal – Common Customs Tariff – Subsequent recovery of import duties – Waiver of duties to be recovered – Conditions – Article 220(2)(b) of Regulation (EEC) No 2913/– Error of the customs authorities – Detectable error – Combined nomenclature – Remarks – Scope)
Opinion of Advocate General Geelhoed delivered on October Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), March 2005. 
Summary of the Judgment
1.     Appeals – Grounds – Incorrect assessment of the facts – Inadmissibility – Dismissal –Definition of the legal nature of the
            facts – Admissibility
(Art. EC; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58)
2.     Own resources of the European Communities – Subsequent recovery of import or export duties – Conditions of non-entry in the
            accounts of import duties set out in Article 220(2)(b) of Regulation No 2913/– Error of the  authorities which could not
            ‘reasonably have been detected by the person liable for payment’ – Criteria of assessment – Regulation No 1359/containing
            provisions capable of being described as complex
(Council Regulations Nos 2913/92, Art. 220(2)(b), and 1359/95)
1.     It follows from Article EC and Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice that an appeal is limited to points of
         law. The Court of First Instance therefore has exclusive jurisdiction to find the facts, save where a substantive inaccuracy
         in its findings is attributable to the documents submitted to it, and to appraise those facts. That appraisal thus does not,
         save where the clear sense of the evidence has been distorted, constitute a point of law which is subject, as such, to review
         by the Court of Justice in an appeal. However, where the Court of First Instance has found or appraised the facts, the Court
         of Justice has jurisdiction, pursuant to Article EC, to carry out a review of the legal classification of those facts
         and the legal inferences drawn from them by the Court of First Instance. Such a classification is a question of law which,
         as such, may be subject to review by the Court of Justice in an appeal.
      
(see paras 40-41)
2.     Under Article 220(2)(b) of Regulation No 2913/establishing the Community Customs Code, for the competent authorities to
         be able not to make subsequent entry in the accounts of import duties, three cumulative conditions must be satisfied: the
         failure to collect the duties must have been due to an error by the competent authorities themselves; their error must be
         of such a kind that it could not reasonably have been detected by a person liable for payment acting in good faith; and that
         person must have complied with all the provisions laid down by the legislation in force as regards his customs declaration.
      
Whether an error of the competent customs authorities was detectable must be assessed having regard to the nature of the error,
         the professional experience of the operators concerned and the care which they exercised. The nature of the error must be
         assessed in the light of the complexity or sufficient simplicity of the rules concerned and the period of time during which
         the authorities persisted in their error.
      
In this respect, certain provisions of Regulation No 1359/amending Annexes I and II to Regulation No 2658/on the tariff
         and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff and repealing Regulation No 802/create a situation which
         is not sufficiently simple for it to be easily detectable from an examination of them that, from July 1995, use of the tariff
         quotas relating to certain goods remains subject to the condition, laid down by Regulation No 1431/laying down detailed
         rules for the application in the poultrymeat sector of the import arrangements provided for in Regulation No 774/94, of producing
         an import licence. In those circumstances, those rules may objectively be described as complex and the errors committed by
         the customs authorities, in amending their working tariff while omitting to state that the importation of those goods was
         subject to production of such a licence, are of such a kind that they could not reasonably be detected by the economic operators.
      
(see paras 46-48, 54-56)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)March 2005(1)
(Appeal  –  Common Customs Tariff  –  Subsequent recovery of import duties  –  Waiver of duties to be recovered  –  Conditions  –  Article 220(2)(b) of Regulation (EEC) No 2913/–  Error of the customs authorities  –  Detectable error  –  Combined nomenclature  –  Remarks  –  Scope)
 In Case C-499/P,APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, brought on November 2003,
            
Peter Biegi Nahrungsmittel GmbH,  established in Frankfurt am Main (Germany),Commonfood Handelsgesellschaft für Agrar-Produkte mbH,  established in Langen (Germany),
            appellants, represented by K. Landry and L. Harings, Rechtsanwälte,
            
 the other party to the proceedings being:
            Commission of the European Communities, represented by X. Lewis and J. Schieferer, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
 composed of A. Borg Barthet, President of the Chamber,  J.-P. Puissochet and J. Malenovský (Rapporteur), Judges,
            
 Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed,Registrar: R. Grass,
             having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2004,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on October 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By their appeal Peter Biegi Nahrungsmittel GmbH and Commonfood Handelsgesellschaft für Agrar-Produkte mbH (‘Biegi’ and ‘Commonfood’,
         referred to together as ‘the appellants’) request the Court to set aside the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the
         European Communities of September in Joined Cases T‑309/and T‑239/Biegi Nahrungsmittel and Commonfood v Commission [2003] ECR II‑(‘the judgment under appeal’), by which that Court, first, dismissed Biegi’s application for partial annulment
         of Commission Decision C (2001) of August (REC 4/00) finding it appropriate to make subsequent entry in the accounts
         of the import duties not charged in respect of the importation of poultrymeat from Thailand during the periods from to
         July and to September and, second, dismissed Commonfood’s application for annulment of Commission Decision C
         (2002) of March (REC 4/01) finding it appropriate to make subsequent entry in the accounts of the import duties
         not charged in respect of the importation of poultrymeat from Thailand on July (‘the contested decisions’).
         
Legal context
            
 The Court of First Instance stated in paragraph of the judgment under appeal:
         
‘Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 774/of March opening and providing for the administration of certain Community
               tariff quotas for high quality beef, and for pigmeat, poultrymeat, wheat and meslin, and brans, sharps and other residues
               (OJ L 91, p. 1) opened, as from [January 1994], a Community tariff quota of an annual total volume of [500] tonnes
               for poultrymeat falling within CN codes 10, and 71. Within that quota volume, the relevant duty
               under the Common Customs Tariff was fixed at 0%. That same annual Community quota volume at zero duty was maintained by Article
               of Commission Regulation (EC) No 2198/of September 1995, amending Regulation No 774/(OJ L 221, p. 3), which
               applied, in accordance with Article thereof, as from July 1995.’
            
            
 Article of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1431/of June laying down detailed rules for the application in the poultrymeat
         sector of the import arrangements provided for in Regulation (EC) No 774/(OJ L 156, p. 9), which, in accordance with
         Article 8, entered into force on June 1994, reads:
         ‘All imports into the Community under the tariff quotas opened in Articles and of Regulation … No 774/of products in
         the groups referred to in Annex I to this Regulation shall be subject to the presentation of an import licence.
          The quantities of products to which these arrangements apply and the rate of reduction in the levy shall be those listed for
         each group in Annex I.’
         
            
 In Annex I to Regulation No 1431/94, a rate of levy of 0% was applied in respect of up to tonnes per annum of chicken
         meat under CN codes 10, and coming from Thailand (Group 2). The same rate of levy was applied
         to an annual quantity of tonnes of chicken meat, falling under those CN codes, coming from Brazil (Group 1) and to an
         annual quantity of tonnes of chicken meat coming from other non-member countries (Group 3).
         
            
 Article of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common
         Customs Tariff (OJ L 256, p. 1) established a new goods nomenclature called the ‘combined nomenclature’ or, in abbreviated
         form, ‘CN’. The combined nomenclature appears in Annex I to that regulation, in which the rates of duty applicable and other
         required information are also fixed.
         
            
 Commission Regulation (EC) No 1359/of June (OJ L 142, p. 1) amended Annexes I and II to Regulation (EEC) No
         2658/and repealed Regulation (EEC) No 802/80. In accordance with Article of Regulation No 1359/95, it entered into force
         on July 1995.
         
            
 In its version thus amended, the combined nomenclature contained, in Part Three ‘Tariff Annexes’, Section III ‘Quotas’, an
         Annex headed ‘WTO tariff quotas to be opened by the competent Community authorities’. The following appears under Order
         No in that annex:
         
Order No
                  
CN code
                  
Description
                  
Quota quantity
                  
Rate of duty (%)
                  
Other terms and conditions
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
…
                  
…
                  
…
                  
…
                  
…
                  
…
                  
                  
Cuts of fowls of the species Gallus domesticus, frozen:BonelessBreasts and cuts thereofOther
                  
t
                  
                  
    
            
 Article 220(2)(b) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/of October establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L 302, p. 1, ‘the CCC’) provides:
         ‘2.    … subsequent entry in the accounts shall not occur where
         …
         
(b)
the amount of duty legally owed failed to be entered in the accounts as a result of an error on the part of the customs authorities
               which could not reasonably have been detected by the person liable for payment, the latter for his part having acted in good
               faith and complied with all the provisions laid down by the legislation in force as regards the customs declaration’.
            
            
 Under Article of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2454/of July laying down provisions for the implementation of
         Regulation No 2913/(OJ L 253, p. 1):
         ‘… where the customs authorities either consider that the conditions laid down in Article 220(2)(b) of the Code are fulfilled
         or are in doubt as to the precise scope of the criteria of that provision with regard to a particular case, those authorities
         shall submit the case to the Commission, so that a decision may be taken in accordance with the procedure laid down in Articles
         to 876.’
         
            
 Under Article of that regulation:
         ‘After consulting a group of experts composed of representatives of all Member States, meeting within the framework of the
         Committee to consider the case in question, the Commission shall decide whether the circumstances under consideration are
         or are not such that the duties in question need not be entered in the accounts.’
         
Facts of the dispute
            
 The facts giving rise to the dispute are set out as follows in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal:
         
‘… Biegi … and Commonfood … are German companies, linked with one another, operating in the poultrymeat trade. The [appellants]
               are among the main importers of [chicken meat] in Germany.
            
By a decree of June (known as “Eilverteiler”), the German Federal Minister of Finance amended the working tariff of
               the German customs authorities by inserting, inter alia, the tariff quota K (chicken meat) at zero duty as from July
               1995. That quota corresponds to CN codes 10, and referred to above. The Eilverteiler did not
               contain any indication as to the requirement of an import licence for the importation of products falling within the tariff
               quota abovementioned.
            
During the period from to July and from to September 1995, Biegi declared the importation, in various consignments,
               of frozen chicken pieces (CN Code No 10) originating in Thailand. On July 1995, Commonfood declared the importation,
               in various consignments, of frozen chicken pieces under the same CN Code originating in Thailand. The [appellants] did not
               attach import licences to their customs declarations.
            
However, following the amendment of the German customs authorities’ working tariff introduced by the Eilverteiler, the competent
               customs office used the Community tariff quota referred to above and allowed the [appellants] the benefit of exemption from
               customs duties.
            
During August 1995, the [appellants], having had doubts as to the duties applied at the time of the customs clearance operations
               of July 1995, telephoned the Federal Ministry of Finance and the central service for monitoring tariff quotas, through the
               intermediary of their manager responsible for the management of import licences, in order to obtain clarifications as to the
               system applicable to imports of the products in question. Initially, the officials of whom enquiry was made stated by telephone
               that the duties applied were correct even without the presentation of an import licence in support of the customs declaration.
               The [appellants] then asked for confirmation of that information in writing.
            
However, the written response of the German customs administration, sent to the [appellants] by letter of August 1995,
               indicated that use of the quota required the presentation of an import licence in support of the customs declaration. On the
               same day, the Federal Minister for Finance amended the working tariff of the German customs authorities with retrospective
               effect. That amendment had the effect of making it necessary, as from July 1995, to present an import licence when using
               the tariff quota in question.
            
By two amending tax decisions, adopted on and August 1996, the competent customs office, namely the Hauptzollamt Bremen-Freihafen,
               then undertook post-clearance recovery of the import duties, totalling DEM 116.in respect of Commonfood’s imports (decision
               of August 1996), and DEM 270.in respect of Biegi’s imports, of which DEM 605.related to the imports of July
               and DEM 664.to the imports of September (decision of August 1996).
            
Relying on their good faith, the error on the part of the German authorities and the fact that the latter was undiscoverable,
               the [appellants] claimed that the import duties should not be taken into account post-clearance.
            
Their claims having been rejected by the competent customs office on July 1997, the [appellants] referred the matter to
               the Finanzgericht Bremen (Germany). The minutes of the hearing of December show that, after investigating the matter,
               that court took the view that Biegi’s action had little chance of success in relation to its customs declarations of September
               1995, as Biegi had been duly informed of the exact legal situation by the German customs administration’s letter of August
               1995, referred to above. The Finanzgericht Bremen therefore recommended to Biegi that it should consider withdrawing its action
               in relation to those declarations.  Regarding the customs declarations of July 1995, however, the court took the provisional
               view that it was possible to grant the [appellants] protection of their legitimate expectations for the purposes of Article
               220(2) of the CCC, and suggested to the competent customs office that it find out whether it was possible to withdraw the
               amending tax decisions of and August 1996, referred to above, in relation to the declarations in question.
            
Pursuant to Article of Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2454/… the Federal Republic of Germany asked the Commission,
               by letters of August and April 2001, to decide under Article 220(2)(b) of the CCC whether it would be justifiable
               to waive retrospective accounting for the import duties in the administration’s disputes with Biegi and Commonfood.
            
Taking the view that the circumstances did not reveal an error by the customs authorities themselves, not detectable by an
               operator acting in good faith within the meaning of Article 220(2)(b) of the CCC, the Commission decided, by decisions adopted
               on August (Case T-309/01) and March (Case T-239/02) … that the import duties forming the subject-matter of
               the Federal Republic of Germany’s requests, referred to above, should be taken into account.’
            
The actions before the Court of First Instance and the judgment under appeal
            
 By applications lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on December and August 2002, the appellants
         brought actions for the annulment of the contested decisions.
         
            
 In support of their applications, they relied on three pleas in law: first, infringement of Article 220(2)(b) of the CCC;
         second, infringement of the principle of proportionality; and, third, infringement of the principles of sound administration
         and equal treatment.
         
            
 By the judgment under appeal – Cases T‑309/and T‑239/having been joined – the Court of First Instance dismissed the
         actions in their entirety, rejecting as unfounded all the appellants’ pleas in law.
         
            
 On the first plea in law, the Court of First Instance considered, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the Commission
         had been right to take the view that the second of the cumulative conditions laid down by Article 220(2)(b) of the CCC, namely
         that the error of the customs authorities could not have been detected by experienced operators, had not been fulfilled in
         this case, and that making subsequent entry in the accounts of the import duties for the disputed imports had been justified.
         
            
 To reach that conclusion, the Court of First Instance, after recalling the case-law applicable, found, in paragraph of
         the judgment under appeal, that it was common ground that two errors had been made by the German customs authorities, namely
         the issue of an erroneous version of the Eilverteiler and the clearance of the goods imported by the appellants in July with the granting of the tariff preference without presentation of an import licence.
         
            
 On the other hand, the Court of First Instance rejected the appellants’ claim of a further error, consisting in the alleged
         communication to their manager Mr Steiner by an official of the central service for monitoring tariff quotas of inaccurate
         information over the telephone before July 1995, that is, before the disputed imports. The Court found, in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, that, quite apart from its late production and the question of its relevance, which was
         disputed by the Commission, that telephone information was not in any way demonstrated by the documents in the case-file.
         
            
 The Court of First Instance then found that the rules applicable were not complex, observing in paragraph of the judgment
         under appeal that it is clear from Article of Regulation No 1431/that every importation carried out in the context of
         the long-term tariff quota at issue is subject to presentation of an import licence.
         
            
 The Court of First Instance observed, moreover, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, that Regulation No 1359/introducing a new version of the combined nomenclature for goods applicable from July set out, in Annex 7, a list of
         World Trade Organisation (WTO) tariff quotas to be granted by the competent Community authorities, and that the references
         in that list to other rules of customs law were of declaratory value only. Regulation No 1359/thus did not open from July a new preferential tariff quota claiming to be separate from that of Regulation No 774/94, as amended by Regulation
         No 2198/95.
         
            
 The Court of First Instance also took into account that the competent customs authorities had not persisted in their error
         but corrected it within a very short period, namely a month after making it.
         
            
 The Court of First Instance further observed, in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, that the appellants fell
         into the category of experienced economic operators and had been aware of the importance of the import licence in order to
         qualify for the long-term tariff quota.
         
            
 Finally, to reach the conclusion that the appellants had not shown the care they should have shown, the Court of First Instance
         considered, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that an economic operator whose business essentially consists of
         import and export transactions and who already has some experience in that field must, by reading the relevant issues of the
         Official Journal, acquaint himself with the Community law applicable to the transactions he undertakes. It concluded that
         such an operator cannot, in order to determine the applicable rate of duty, rely solely on the information in a national working
         tariff. The Court further considered, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, that the appellants could also
         not rely on mere information over the telephone or claim not to have had the necessary time to write to the competent authorities
         to ask them to clarify the legal position concerned.
         
            
 In rejecting the second plea in law, the Court of First Instance held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that
         in this case, since the conditions for applying Article 220(2)(b) of the CCC were not met, the fact that the contested decisions
         made subsequent entry in the accounts of the duties in respect of the disputed imports could not in itself constitute an infringement
         of the principle of proportionality.
         
            
 In rejecting the third plea in law, the Court of First Instance considered, in paragraphs and of the judgment under
         appeal, that the claim of infringement of the principle of sound administration was not supported in any way, and that the
         claim of infringement of the principle of equal treatment was irrelevant, as the situations referred to by the appellants
         in support of that claim were not comparable.
         
Forms of order sought by the parties
            
 Biegi and Commonfood claim that the Court should:
         
–
set aside the judgment under appeal;
–
annul in part Commission Decision C (2001) of August (REC 4/00), in so far as it finds that it is appropriate
               to make subsequent entry in the accounts of import duties amounting to DEM 605.64;
            
–
annul Commission Decision C (2002) of March (REC 4/01) finding that it is appropriate to make subsequent entry
               in the accounts of import duties amounting to DEM 116.06;
            
–
order the Commission to pay the costs.
            
 The Commission contends that the Court should:
         
–
dismiss the appeal;
–
order the appellants to pay the costs.
The appeal
            
 In support of their appeal, the appellants put forward two pleas in law, infringement of Article 220(2)(b) of the CCC and
         procedural error.
         
            
 The Commission argues that those pleas are inadmissible and, in the alternative, that they are unfounded.
         
Infringement of Article 220(2)(b) of the CCC Arguments of the parties
         
            
 The appellants complain that the Court of First Instance, in dismissing their applications on the ground that the error of
         the customs authorities had been detectable by them, exaggerated the requirements of care on the part of economic operators
         and failed to appreciate the complexity of the applicable rules.
         
            
 According to the appellants, Article 220(2)(b) of the CCC must be interpreted, in accordance with the case-law of the Court,
         in the light of the purpose of that provision, which is to protect the legitimate expectation of the person liable that all
         the factors on which the decision whether or not to proceed with recovery of customs duties is based are correct (Case C‑251/Ilumitrónica [2002] ECR I‑10433, paragraph 39). While, according to the case-law, the character of the error depends on the complexity
         of the rules in question and the period of time during which the authorities persisted in their error, such a period constitutes
         only a mere indication, not a separate condition necessary for the error to be regarded as not detectable. In the present
         case, the error made by the two competent German departments was a consistent and repeated one. The complexity of the rules
         derives from the application of several sets of rules which combine without specifying clearly how, and reading the Official Journal of the European Communities is not sufficient to identify specifically the applicable law.
         
            
 The appellants submit that, at the time when they took their decisions, the Eilverteiler made no mention of any obligation
         to produce an import licence and referred to Regulation No 1359/95, the annex to which, under order number concerning the
         new WTO tariff quotas concerned, did not contain any remarks in column 6, whereas for most other tariff quotas that column
         specified that qualification for those quotas was subject to the conditions laid down by the relevant Community provisions.
         It was that omission under order number which led the competent German authorities and the appellants to conclude that
         the two tariff quotas for poultrymeat determined in the context of the agreements reached in the Uruguay Round of multilateral
         negotiations (1986-1994), concluded on behalf of the European Community, as regards matters within its competence, by Council
         Decision 94/800/EC of December (OJ L 336, p. 1), were tariff quotas which were not subject to the production
         of import licences.
         
            
 In the appellants’ view, the Court of First Instance erred in its assessment of the facts in regarding as short the period
         of nearly two months during which the highest German customs authorities were mistaken in their rule-making activity. That
         such authorities made that error suffices to show that it was not detectable by experienced operators, especially as it related
         to new tariff quotas which were not covered by earlier Community provisions.
         
            
 As to their obligations of care, the appellants submit that it was precisely their repeated questions to the various departments
         concerned, relating solely to the need to produce an import licence, which induced the customs authorities to correct the
         error in the Eilverteiler. As regards the Court of First Instance’s assertion that the appellants had had enough time to write
         to the Commission, they refer to their observations made in the reply they submitted at first instance. They add that it is
         for the customs authorities of the Member States to implement customs law and that Article 220(2) of the CCC would be deprived
         of effect if undertakings had to apply to the Commission for information.
         
            
 According to the Commission, this first plea is inadmissible, since it constitutes essentially a mere repetition of the pleas
         and arguments submitted to the Court of First Instance or relates to points of fact. In so far as it relates to tenders of
         evidence which the Court of First Instance did not think it necessary to examine, the appeal concerns a point of fact and
         is really a mere repetition of the application. Such a repetition should also be noted as regards the argument in the appeal
         as to the complexity of the rules, the impossibility of detecting the customs authorities’ errors in certain cases, and the
         undertakings’ obligation of care. The complaint as to the incorrect assessment by the Court of First Instance of the circumstances
         which led it to regard as short the period during which the error had been made concerns an assessment of facts.
         
            
 The Commission submits, in the alternative, that the plea of infringement of Community law is unfounded. It points out that
         the Ilumitrónica judgment relied on by the appellants concerned an error of the Turkish authorities which continued for more than years
         and legislation which was more complex, as it was scattered and predated the CCC. It also concerned the Agreement establishing
         an Association between the European Economic Community and Turkey, signed in Ankara on September by the Republic of
         Turkey of the one part and the Member States of the EEC and the Community of the other part and concluded, approved and confirmed
         on behalf of the Community by Council Decision 64/732/EEC of December (Journal Officiel 1964, 217, p. 3685), the relevant
         decisions of the Association Council established by that agreement not having been published in the Official Journal of the European Communities. There was no comparison between the complexity of that case and that of the present case.
         
            
 The Commission submits that it has not been shown that the error was not detectable, since the appellants do not substantiate
         their allegations that the German customs authorities on several occasions confirmed over the telephone that an import licence
         was not required. The complexity of the rules cannot be relied on in the present case, as the obligation to produce such a
         certificate in order to qualify for the tariff quotas, in existence for over a year at the time of the contested imports,
         could manifestly not be called into question by Regulation No 1359/relating merely to the tariff and statistical nomenclature.
         The references made by that regulation to other rules of customs law are only declaratory, and the absence of such references
         cannot possibly indicate that those rules are not applicable. The German working customs tariff constitutes merely a manual
         intended to facilitate work.
         
 Assessment by the Court
         
– Admissibility of the first plea in law
         
            
 As regards the admissibility of this plea, it should be recalled, first, that according to settled case-law it follows from
         Article EC, the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice and Article 112(1)(c) of the Rules
         of Procedure of the Court of Justice that an appeal must indicate precisely the contested elements of the judgment which the
         appellant seeks to have set aside and also the legal arguments specifically advanced in support of the appeal (see, inter
         alia, Case C‑41/P Interporc v Commission [2003] ECR I‑2125, paragraph 15, and Case C‑496/P Commission v CAS Succhi di Frutta [2004] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 48).
         
            
 An appeal which merely repeats or reproduces verbatim the pleas in law and arguments previously submitted to the Court of
         First Instance, including those based on facts expressly rejected by that Court, does not satisfy the requirements to state
         reasons under those provisions (see, inter alia, Interporc v Commission, paragraph 16, and Commission v CAS Succhi di Frutta, paragraph 49).
         
            
 However, provided that the appellant challenges the interpretation or application of Community law by the Court of First Instance,
         the points of law examined at first instance may be discussed again in the course of an appeal. Indeed, if an appellant could
         not thus base his appeal on pleas in law and arguments already relied on before the Court of First Instance, an appeal would
         be deprived of part of its purpose (see, inter alia, Interporc v Commission, paragraph 17, and Commission v CAS Succhi di Frutta, paragraph 50).
         
            
 It should be recalled, second, that it follows from Article EC and Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice that
         an appeal is limited to points of law. According to settled case-law, the Court of First Instance therefore has exclusive
         jurisdiction to find the facts, save where a substantive inaccuracy in its findings is attributable to the documents submitted
         to it, and to appraise those facts. That appraisal thus does not, save where the clear sense of the evidence has been distorted,
         constitute a point of law which is subject, as such, to review by the Court of Justice in an appeal (see, inter alia, Case
         C‑136/P Commission v Brazzelli Lualdi and Others [1994] ECR I‑1981, paragraphs to 49, and Case C‑470/P Parliament v Ripa di Meana and Others [2004] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 40).
         
            
 However, it is settled law that, where the Court of First Instance has found or appraised the facts, the Court of Justice
         has jurisdiction, pursuant to Article EC, to carry out a review of the legal classification of those facts and the legal
         inferences drawn from them by the Court of First Instance. As the Court of Justice has held on several occasions, such a classification
         is a question of law which, as such, may be subject to review by the Court of Justice in an appeal (see, inter alia, Case
         C‑19/P Rendo and Others v Commission [1995] ECR I‑3319, paragraph 26, and Parliament v Ripa di Meana and Others, paragraph 41).
         
            
 In the present case, Biegi and Commonfood submit that the Court of First Instance infringed Community law by holding that
         the errors on the part of the German customs authorities were detectable by the appellants. More particularly, they criticise
         the Court for having thereby exaggerated, in the implementation of Article 220(2)(b) of the CCC, as interpreted by the Court
         of Justice, the requirements of care of the economic operators concerned, and for having wrongly assessed the complexity of
         the customs rules in question.
         
            
 In those circumstances, the appellants contest the Court of First Instance’s answer to a question of the legal classification
         of the facts, and thus submit a question of law to review by the Court of Justice.
         
            
 The first plea in law is therefore admissible.
         
– Merits of the first plea in law
         
            
 It should be noted to begin with, as the Court of First Instance observed in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that
         two errors on the part of the German customs authorities, namely the issue of an erroneous version of the Eilverteiler and
         the clearance of the goods imported by the appellants in July with the granting of the tariff preference without an import
         licence being presented are not disputed in the present case.
         
            
 Under Article 220(2)(b) of the CCC, the competent authorities are not to make subsequent entry in the accounts of import duties
         if three cumulative conditions are satisfied. First, the failure to collect the duties must have been due to an error by the
         competent authorities themselves; next, their error must be of such a kind that it could not reasonably have been detected
         by a person liable for payment acting in good faith; and, finally, that person must have complied with all the provisions
         laid down by the legislation in force as regards his customs declaration (see, by analogy, Case 161/Binder [1989] ECR 2415, paragraphs and 16; Joined Cases C‑153/and C‑204/Faroe Seafood and Others [1996] ECR I‑2465, paragraph 83; order in Case C‑299/P CPL Imperial and Unifrigo v Commission [1999] ECR I‑8683, paragraph 22; and order in Case C‑30/William Hinton & Sons [2001] ECR I‑7511, paragraphs 68, 69, and 72).
         
            
 With respect to the second of those conditions, which is the only one at issue in the present appeal, it should be recalled
         that, according to settled case-law, whether an error of the competent customs authorities was detectable must be assessed
         having regard to the nature of the error, the professional experience of the operators concerned and the care which they exercised
         (Faroe Seafood and Others, paragraph 99, and Ilumitrónica, paragraph 54).
         
            
 As regards the nature of the error, it must be assessed in the light of the complexity or sufficient simplicity of the rules
         concerned (see Case C‑187/Belovo [1992] ECR I‑4937, paragraph 18, and Faroe Seafood and Others, paragraph 100) and the period of time during which the authorities persisted in their error (see Case C‑38/Foods Import [1996] ECR I‑6543, paragraph 30, and Ilumitrónica, paragraph 56).
         
            
 In the present case the Court of First Instance, in finding that the rules in question were not complex, relied in paragraph
         of the judgment under appeal on the fact that the rules applicable to the use of the disputed Community tariff quota were
         defined by the enactments on the opening and management of that quota and the detailed rules for applying it, namely Regulation
         No 774/94, as amended by Regulation No 2198/95, and Regulation No 1431/94, Article of which clearly provided that every
         importation into the Community carried out in the context of that long-term tariff quota was subject to presentation of an
         import licence.
         
            
 It should be noted, however, that by Regulation No 1359/the Commission published a new version of the combined nomenclature
         of goods applicable from July 1995, Annex to which sets out a list of the WTO tariff quotas to be granted by the competent
         Community authorities. Column 6, headed ‘Other terms and conditions’, of Annex 7, set out in paragraph above, does not contain
         any remarks under order number concerning the combined nomenclature of the goods at issue in the present case, whereas
         in the same column it is stated, with reference to other goods, that ‘Qualification for the quota is subject to conditions
         laid down in the relevant Community provisions’.
         
            
 It follows from the above, first, that for the first time from July the combined nomenclature resulting from Regulation
         No 1359/showed separately the WTO tariff quotas to be granted by the competent Community authorities. That regulation,
         the third recital in the preamble to which stated that it was necessary to implement, with effect from July 1995, certain
         tariff measures, in particular for agricultural products as defined within the framework of the Uruguay Round multilateral
         negotiations, could therefore appear to be opening, on that date, new tariff quotas distinct from those which had been opened
         as from January by Regulation No 774/94. Moreover, it was only under Regulation No 2198/of September 1995, subsequent
         to the importations at issue, that the actual tariff quotas relating to the goods which were the subject of those importations
         were opened retroactively from July 1995.
         
            
 Second, having regard to the remarks made in respect of other goods, the absence of any other information in the new combined
         nomenclature on the conditions to which qualification for the quotas concerning the goods at issue in the present case was
         subject could also give the impression that use of the tariff quotas concerned was not subject to any condition.
         
            
 Finally, Regulation No 1359/did not contain any indication which could allow operators to consider that the information
         in the annexes to the regulation was of purely declaratory value.
         
            
 From those considerations, it must be concluded that Regulation No 1359/in itself contained an ambiguity as to the actual
         scope of the points in it concerning the WTO tariff quotas, in particular in so far as it referred to goods coming under CN
         codes 40, and 71. In particular, the combination of the heading and the various remarks in column
         of Annex to that regulation created a situation which was not sufficiently simple for it to be easily detectable from
         an examination of them that, from July 1995, use of the tariff quotas relating to those goods remained subject to the condition,
         laid down by Regulation No 1431/94, of producing an import licence. The rules applicable in the present case may thus objectively
         be described as complex (see, for example, Ilumitrónica, paragraph 57).
         
            
 That description thus follows directly from the content of Annex to Regulation No 1359/95, which, only a few days before
         the import operations at issue, showed the WTO tariff quotas separately in the combined nomenclature for the first time. The
         experience of the operators concerned in the field of trade in the goods in question cannot thus be taken into account in
         the present case to consider that they could easily have detected the error in the Eilverteiler. That error was moreover committed
         by the highest German customs authorities themselves, who, when amending their working tariff to take account of Regulation
         No 1359/95, omitted to state that the importation of the goods covered by the above codes was subject to production of an
         import licence. That error was also not corrected until several weeks after the publication of that document, following the
         approaches made by the operators, in appropriate manner, to those authorities to make sure that their importation operations
         were in order. In that respect, those operators cannot be criticised for not having shown the care required of them on the
         ground that they did not apply in writing to the competent authorities before carrying out the importations at issue.
         
            
 It follows from all the foregoing that the Court of First Instance was wrong to consider that the errors on the part of the
         customs authorities were not of such a kind that they could not reasonably be detected by the appellants. The latter are therefore
         correct in submitting that the Court of First Instance erred in law by making such a classification and by holding as a consequence
         that the second of the cumulative conditions laid down by Article 220(2)(b) of the CCC was not satisfied in the present case.
         The judgment under appeal must accordingly be set aside on that ground, without it being necessary to consider the appellants’
         other plea in law.
         
Substance
            
 In accordance with Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, since the state of the proceedings so permits, it is
         appropriate to give final judgment on the appellants’ claim for annulment of the contested decisions.
         
            
 In the light of the above considerations, it must be concluded that, in order to justify, by the contested decisions, the
         subsequent entry in the accounts of import duties in the disputes between the appellants and the German customs administration,
         the Commission was wrong to consider that the circumstances of the cases did not disclose any error of the German customs
         authorities not detectable by an operator acting in good faith within the meaning of Article 220(2)(b) of the CCC.
         
            
 It follows that the appellants’ plea of infringement of that article must be upheld. The contested decisions must therefore
         be annulled, without it being necessary to consider the other pleas in law.
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, which applies to the procedure on appeal by virtue of Article 118, the unsuccessful
         party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since Biegi and
         Commonfood have applied for the Commission to be ordered to pay the costs and the Commission has been unsuccessful, it must
         be ordered to pay the costs.
         
 On those grounds, the Court (Sixth Chamber) hereby:
         
 
1.
Sets aside the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities of September in Joined Cases T‑309/and T‑239/Biegi Nahrungsmittel and Commonfood v Commission;
                  
 
2.
Annuls Commission Decision C (2001) of August (REC 4/00) in so far as it orders the subsequent entry in the accounts
                     of import duties payable by Peter Biegi Nahrungsmittel GmbH in the amount of DEM 605.64;
                  
 
3.
Annuls Commission Decision C (2002) of March (REC 4/01) ordering the subsequent entry in the accounts of import
                     duties payable by Commonfood Handelsgesellschaft für Agrar-Produkte mbH in the amount of DEM 116.06;
                  
 
4.
Orders the Commission of the European Communities to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
      
 –
            
Language of the case: German.
Top  
 