
Case C-551/P
General Motors BV, formerly
General Motors Nederland BV and Opel Nederland BV
v
Commission of the European Communities
(Appeals – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Article EC – Regulations (EEC) No 123/and (EC) No 1475/– Distribution of Opel motor vehicles – Partitioning of the market – Restrictions on exports – Restrictive bonus policy – Fine – Guidelines for the calculation of fines)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Appeals – Grounds – Mistaken assessment of the facts – Inadmissibility – Review by the Court of Justice of the assessment
            of evidence – Possible only where the clear sense of the evidence has been distorted 
(Art. 225(1) EC; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.)
2.        Competition – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Prejudicial to competition 
(Art. 81(1) EC)
3.        Competition – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Agreements between undertakings – Prejudicial to competition
            
(Art. 81(1) EC)
4.        Competition – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Prejudicial to competition 
(Art. 81(1) EC)
5.        Competition – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Prejudicial to competition 
(Art. 81(1) EC)
6.        Competition – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Prejudicial to competition 
(Art. 81(1) EC)
1.        It is clear from Article EC and the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice that the Court
         of First Instance has exclusive jurisdiction, first to find the facts except where the substantive inaccuracy of its findings
         is apparent from the documents submitted to it and, second, to assess those facts. When the Court of First Instance has found
         or assessed the facts, the Court of Justice has jurisdiction under Article EC to review the legal characterisation of
         those facts by the Court of First Instance and the legal conclusions it has drawn from them. 
      
The Court of Justice thus has no jurisdiction to establish the facts or, in principle, to examine the evidence which the Court
         of First Instance accepted in support of those facts. Provided that the evidence has been properly obtained and the general
         principles of law and the rules of procedure in relation to the burden of proof and the taking of evidence have been observed,
         it is for the Court of First Instance alone to assess the value which should be attached to the evidence produced to it. Save
         where the clear sense of the evidence has been distorted, that appraisal does not therefore constitute a point of law which
         is subject as such to review by the Court of Justice.
      
In that respect, such distortion must be obvious from the documents on the Court’s file, without there being any need to carry
         out a new assessment of the facts and the evidence.
      
(see paras 51-52, 54)
2.        An agreement may be regarded as having a restrictive object even if it does not have the restriction of competition as its
         sole aim but also pursues other legitimate objectives.
      
(see para. 64)
3.        In order to determine whether an agreement has a restrictive object for the purposes of Article EC, account must be taken
         not only of the terms of an agreement but also of other factors, such as the aims pursued by the agreement as such, in the
         light of the economic and legal context.
      
(see para. 66)
4.        An agreement concerning distribution has a restrictive object for the purposes of Article EC if it clearly manifests the
         will to treat export sales less favourably than national sales and thus leads to a partitioning of the market in question.
      
Such an objective can be achieved not only by direct restrictions on exports but also through indirect measures, such as the
         implementation by a motor manufacturer in its dealership contracts of a measure excluding export sales from the system of
         bonuses granted to dealers, since they influence the economic conditions of such transactions.
      
(see paras 67-68)
5.        In order to determine whether an agreement is to be considered to be prohibited by reason of the distortion of competition
         which is its effect, the competition in question should be assessed within the actual context in which it would occur in the
         absence of the agreement in dispute.
      
Therefore, in a situation such as the implementation by a motor manufacturer in its dealership contracts of a measure excluding
         export sales from the system of bonuses granted to dealers, it has to be examined what the conduct of those dealers and the
         competitive situation in the market in question would have been, if export sales had not been excluded from the bonus policy.
      
(see paras 72-73)
6.        Proof of the intention of the parties to an agreement to restrict competition is not a necessary factor in determining whether
         an agreement has such a restriction as its object.
      
However, even if the intention of the parties does not constitute a necessary factor in determining the restrictive character
         of an agreement, there is nothing to prohibit the Commission or the Community courts from taking that intention into account.
      
(see paras 77-78)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Appeals – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Article EC – Regulations (EEC) No 123/and (EC) No 1475/– Distribution of Opel motor vehicles – Partitioning of the market – Restrictions on exports – Restrictive bonus policy – Fine – Guidelines for the calculation of fines)
In Case C-551/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, lodged on December 2003,
General Motors BV, formerly General Motors Nederland BV and Opel Nederland BV, established in Lage Mosten (Netherlands), represented by D. Vandermeersch
         and R. Snelders, advocaten, and T. Graf, Rechtsanwalt, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
appellant,
the other party to the proceedings being:
Commission of the European Communities, represented by W. Mölls and A. Whelan, acting as Agents, assisted by J. Flynn, QC, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of A. Rosas, President of the Chamber, J. Malenovský, S. von Bahr (Rapporteur), A. Borg Barthet and U. Lõhmus, Judges,
Advocate General: A. Tizzano,
Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on July 2005,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on October 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
In its appeal, General Motors BV has applied for the partial annulment of the judgment of the Court of First Instance in Case
         T‑368/00General Motors Nederland and Opel Nederland v Commission [2003] ECR II‑(‘the contested judgment’), whereby the Court of First Instance partially annulled the Commission’s decision
         C(2000) of September relating to a proceeding under Article EC (Case COMP/36.– Opel) (OJ L 59, p.
         1; ‘the contested decision’).
      
 Background
The facts and legal background, as they appear in the contested judgment, may be summarised as follows.
      
Opel Nederland BV (‘Opel Nederland’) was established on December as a 100% subsidiary of General Motors Nederland
         BV (‘General Motors Nederland’). It is the sole national sales company for the ‘Opel’ brand in the Netherlands. Its business
         activities comprise import, export and wholesale trade in motor vehicles and associated spare parts and accessories. It has
         concluded dealership agreements for sales and service with about dealers who, as a result, are integrated in the Opel
         distribution network in Europe as authorised resellers.
      
Dealership contracts are, subject to certain conditions, exempted from the application of Article 85(1) of the EC Treaty (now
         Article 81(1) EC) by Commission Regulation (EEC) No 123/of December on the application of Article [81(3)] of the
         EEC Treaty to certain categories of motor vehicle distribution and servicing agreements (OJ L 15, p. 16). That regulation
         was replaced, with effect from October 1995, by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1475/of June (OJ L 145, p.
         25). 
      
Article 3(10)(a) of each of those regulations permits the manufacturer and/or its importer to forbid dealers to supply contract
         goods, or corresponding goods, to resellers who are not part of the sales network. However, those regulations do not permit
         the manufacturer and/or its importer to prohibit dealers from supplying contract goods, or corresponding goods, to final consumers,
         their authorised intermediaries or other dealers who are part of the distribution network of the manufacturer and/or importer.
      
On and August 1996, Opel Nederland sent a letter to dealers who, during the first half of 1996, had exported at least
         vehicles. In that letter, it stated: 
      
‘... We have noticed that your company has sold an important amount of Opels abroad during the first half of 1996. To us,
         the quantity is so large that we have a strong suspicion that the sales are not in accordance with the letter and spirit of
         the current and the coming Opel Dealer Sale and Service Contract. ... We intend to check your answer with the data that is
         registered about this in your books. We will subsequently inform you about what happens next. The above does not change the
         fact that you are primarily responsible for a satisfactory sale performance in your special sphere of influence ...’
      
At a meeting held on September 1996, the management of Opel Nederland decided to adopt measures concerning exports from
         the Netherlands. The minutes of that meeting describe those measures as follows:
      
‘... Decisions made:
1) All known export dealers (20) will be audited by Opel Nederland BV. Priority is top-down as indicated on the list “Export
         dealers”, dated September 1996. Mr Naval [Director of Finance] will organise this.
      
2) Mr de Heer [Director of Sales and Marketing] will respond to all dealers who answered the first letter on export activities
         which Opel sent to them. They will be advised about the audits and that product shortage will result in limited allocation.
      
3) The district sales managers will discuss the export business with the export dealers within the next two weeks. The dealers
         will be informed that due to restricted product availability they will (until further notice) only receive a number of units
         which equals their sales evaluation guide. They will be asked to indicate to the district manager which units from their outstanding
         orders they really want to receive. The dealers themselves will have to solve any problem with their purchaser.
      
4) Dealers who inform the district manager that they do not want to stop exporting vehicles on a large scale will be requested
         to meet Messrs de Leeuw [General Manager] and de Heer on October 1996. 
      
5) Mr Notenboom [Director of Sales Personnel] will ask GMAC to audit the dealer stock to establish the right number of units
         still present. It is expected that an important part could meanwhile have been exported.
      
6) In future sales campaigns vehicles which will be registered outside Holland will not qualify. Competitors are applying
         similar conditions.
      
7) Mr Aukema [Merchandising Manager] will delete the names of the exporting dealers from the campaign lists. The audit results
         will determine future qualification.
      
8) Mr Aelen [Director of Personnel and Finance] will draft a letter to the dealers informing them that as of October Opel Nederland BV will charge NLG for supplying upon request for official importers declarations, like type approval,
         and the preparation of customs documents for certain tax-free vehicles (e.g. diplomats).’ 
      
Following letters of and August and the dealers’ replies, Opel Nederland wrote a second letter to the dealers
         concerned on September 1996. In that letter, it stated:
      
‘... Your answer was disappointing to us, as it means that you do not have any understanding of the common interests of all
         Opel dealers and Opel Nederland. Our audit department will be instructed to investigate your statements. Pending the investigation,
         you will not receive the information on the campaigns, as we doubt whether your retail figures are correct ...’
      
The audits announced took place between September and November 1996.
      
On October 1996, Opel Nederland sent all dealers a circular concerning sales to end users abroad. According to that circular,
         dealers are free to sell to end users residing in the European Union and end users may also use the services of an intermediary.
         
      
On December 1996, having received information according to which Opel Nederland was pursuing a policy of systematically
         obstructing exports of new vehicles from the Netherlands to other Member States, the Commission of the European Communities
         adopted a decision ordering investigations under Article 14(3) of Council Regulation No of February 1962: First Regulation
         implementing Articles [81] and [82] of the Treaty (OJ, English Special Edition 1959-1962, p. 87). Those investigations ordered
         were carried out on and December at the premises of Opel Nederland and van Twist, an Opel dealer in Dordrecht (Netherlands).
         
      
On December 1996, Opel Nederland issued dealers with guidelines regarding the sale of new vehicles to resellers and intermediaries.
         
      
By circular of January 1998, Opel Nederland informed its dealers that the exclusion of payment of a bonus for an export
         sale had been removed with retrospective effect.
      
On April 1999, the Commission sent the applicants a statement of objections.
      
On September 2000, the Commission adopted the contested decision.
      
 The contested decision 
By the contested decision, the Commission imposed on the applicants a fine of EUR million for infringement of Article 81(1)
         EC. In that decision, it concluded that Opel Nederland had entered into agreements with Opel dealers in the Netherlands aimed
         at restricting or prohibiting export sales of Opel vehicles to end users resident in other Member States and to Opel dealers
         established in other Member States.
      
That conclusion was based on the following key allegations: first, in September 1996, Opel Nederland had adopted a general
         strategy aimed at restricting or preventing all export sales from the Netherlands; secondly, Opel Nederland’s general strategy
         was implemented through individual measures which were adopted by mutual consent with its dealers as part of the practical
         implementation of the dealership contracts and which became an integral part of Opel Nederland’s contractual relations with
         dealers in its selective distribution system in the Netherlands.
      
According to the contested decision, the general strategy comprised, inter alia, the following measures:
      
–        a restrictive supply policy;
–        a restrictive bonus policy excluding export sales to final consumers from retail bonus campaigns, applied from October to January 1998; 
      
–        an indiscriminate direct export ban applied from August to October 1996, with respect to sales to final consumers, and
         from August to December 1996, with respect to sales to other Opel dealers. 
      
With respect to determining the amount of the fine, the contested decision states that, in accordance with Article of Regulation
         No 17, the Commission must have regard to all circumstances of the case and, in particular, the gravity and duration of the
         infringement.
      
In the contested decision, the Commission described the infringement as very serious since Opel Nederland had impeded achievement
         of the objective of a single market. It took account of the Opel brand’s important position on the relevant markets in the
         Union. According to that decision, the infringement had also affected the markets in other Member States. Opel Nederland had
         acted intentionally, since it could not have been unaware that the measures were intended to restrict competition. In conclusion,
         the Commission considered that an amount of EUR million constituted an appropriate basis for determining the amount of
         the fine. 
      
With regard to the duration of the infringement, the Commission considered that it lasted from the end of August or the
         beginning of September until January 1998, thus totalling months, which was an infringement of medium duration. Taking
         into account the respective duration of the three specific measures, the Commission considered that it was justified in increasing
         the amount of EUR million by 7.5%, that is EUR million, to a fine of EUR million.
      
Finally, the Commission considered that there were no extenuating circumstances in the present case, particularly since Opel
         Nederland continued to implement one major element of that infringement, namely the restrictive bonus policy, after the investigations
         carried out on and December 1996.
      
 The contested judgment
By an application lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on November 2000, General Motors Nederland and
         Opel Nederland brought an action seeking annulment of the contested decision and, in the alternative, annulment of the fine
         imposed by that decision or reduction in its amount. 
      
In their first plea, General Motors Nederland and Opel Nederland denied that Opel Nederland had ever adopted a strategy to
         prevent or restrict all exports without distinction. A proper reading of the documents on which the Commission relied, in
         particular the minutes of the meeting of September 1996, would, they argued, reveal that the strategy was aimed solely
         at limiting irregular export sales to unauthorised resellers and not at restricting lawful export sales to final consumers
         or other dealers. 
      
The Court of First Instance found, in paragraph of the contested judgment, that the Commission’s allegations were based
         on the minutes of the management meeting of September 1996, which constituted a final document concerning measures taken
         by the most senior managers of Opel Nederland. 
      
It indicated, in paragraph of the contested judgment, that the applicants’ argument that Opel Nederland merely sought to
         limit exports which did not comply with the dealership contracts was not in any way reflected in the terms of the minutes.
      
In paragraph of the contested judgment, the Court added that that interpretation was confirmed by a reading of certain
         internal documents showing that the senior managers of Opel Nederland were worried by the growth of exports and that they
         studied measures designed to limit, or halt, all exports.
      
The Court further pointed out, in paragraph of the contested judgment, that the decision by Opel Nederland no longer to
         grant bonuses for export sales could only concern sales which complied with the dealership contracts, given that the bonuses
         had never been granted in respect of sales to persons other than final consumers.
      
The Court added, in paragraph of the contested judgment, that the Commission’s interpretation was corroborated by the fact
         that, at the time of the adoption of the decision, the audits at the premises of dealers suspected of selling for export had
         not yet been carried out, and that Opel Nederland therefore could not know whether the ‘exporting’ dealers had in fact agreed
         to sell to unauthorised resellers.
      
In paragraph of the contested judgment, the Court held that the Commission had rightly concluded that, on September
         1996, Opel Nederland had adopted a general strategy designed to hinder all exports. 
      
In their second plea, General Motors Nederland and Opel Nederland argued that the Commission had erred in fact and in law
         by holding that Opel Nederland had implemented a policy of restricting supply, contrary to Article EC.
      
In paragraph of the contested judgment, the Court of First Instance held that it had not been established to the requisite
         legal standard that the restrictive supply measure was communicated to the dealers and still less that that measure entered
         into the field of the contractual relations between Opel Nederland and its dealers. 
      
In those circumstances, the Court held that the second plea was well founded. It therefore annulled the contested decision
         in so far as it had established the existence of a restrictive supply measure contrary to Article 81(1) EC.
      
In their third plea, General Motors Nederland and Opel Nederland argued that the Commission had erred in fact and in law by
         holding that Opel Nederland had implemented a system restricting retail bonuses, contrary to Article EC.
      
In paragraph of the contested judgment, the Court of First Instance held that the exclusion of export sales from the bonus
         system, which had become an integral part of the dealership contracts between Opel Nederland and its dealers, constituted
         an agreement within the meaning of Article 81(1) EC.
      
It then examined, from paragraph onwards, whether the measure in question was designed to restrict competition.
      
In paragraph of the contested judgment, the Court upheld the Commission’s argument that, as bonuses were no longer granted
         for export sales, the margin of economic manoeuvre which dealers had to carry out such sales was reduced in comparison with
         that which they had to carry out domestic sales. Dealers were thereby obliged either to apply less favourable conditions to
         foreign customers than domestic customers, or to be content with a smaller margin on export sales. By withdrawing bonuses
         for export sales, the latter became less attractive to foreign customers or to dealers. The Court therefore held that, by
         its very nature, the measure was likely to inhibit export sales, even without any restriction on supply.
      
Referring to the assessment of the first plea, the Court added, in paragraph of the contested judgment, that the measures
         adopted by the management of Opel Nederland were prompted by the increase in export sales and were designed to reduce them.
      
Having regard both to the nature of the measure and the aims which it pursued, and in the light of the economic context in
         which it was to be applied, the Court found in paragraph of the contested judgment, in accordance with consistent case-law,
         that the measure constituted an agreement with the object of restricting competition (see, to that effect, Case 19/Miller v Commission [1978] ECR 131, paragraph 7; Joined Cases 96/to 102/82, 104/82, 105/and 110/IAZ and Others v Commission [1983] ECR 3369, paragraphs to 25; Joined Cases 29/and 30/CRAM and Rheinzink v Commission [1984] ECR 1679, paragraph 26).
      
In the alternative, General Motors Nederland and Opel Nederland argued that the fine of EUR million bore no reasonable
         relation to the gravity and duration of the alleged infringement. In addition, they argued, the Commission had taken no account
         of the lack of intent, the limited impact of that infringement on intra-Community trade and the immediate corrective action
         taken by Opel Nederland on its own initiative.
      
In paragraph of the contested judgment, the Court held that, given the existence of the three measures alleged, the basic
         amount of EUR million appeared to be justified and that sufficient reasons had been stated for it in the contested decision.
         It held in paragraph 200, however, that, since the existence of the restrictive supply measure had not been established, that
         amount should be reduced. In the circumstances of the case, the Court determined the basic amount, reflecting the gravity
         of the infringement, at EUR million. In paragraph of the contested judgment, the Court held that the 7.5% increase
         in the amount, applied by the Commission in the light of the duration of the infringements, was justified. Therefore, the
         amount of the fine was taken to EUR 000.
      
 The appeal
General Motors Nederland and Opel Nederland have claimed that the Court of Justice should:
      
–        annul the contested judgment insofar as it relates to Opel Nederland’s alleged restrictive export strategy and bonus policy
         and confirms a fine in that regard;
      
–        annul the contested decision to the extent not yet annulled by the contested judgment and insofar as it relates to Opel Nederland’s
         alleged export strategy and bonus policy, and imposes a fine in that regard; 
      
–        in any event, reduce the fine of EUR 000;
–        alternatively, remand the case to the Court of First Instance for reconsideration in accordance with the Court’s judgment;
         
      
–        order the Commission to pay the costs.
The Commission contends that the Court should dismiss the appeal and order General Motors Nederland and Opel Nederland to
         pay the costs.
      
By letter of June 2005, the Court was informed by General Motors Nederland and Opel Nederland that those two companies
         had merged to form a single company called ‘General Motors BV’ (‘General Motors’).
      
 The first ground of appeal 
 Arguments of General Motors
By its first ground of appeal, General Motors argues that the Court of First Instance erred in law in upholding the Commission’s
         finding that Opel Nederland engaged in a general policy seeking to restrict all exports.
      
It maintains, first, that the reasoning of the Court of First Instance manifestly distorts the wording of the minutes of the
         meeting of September 1996, which contains no reference to any general strategy to restrict all exports.
      
Secondly, it argues, the Court of First Instance infringed the duty to state reasons by, on the one hand, taking the view
         that the Commission did not base its claims on Opel Nederland’s internal documents, whilst on the other hand itself relying,
         in reality, on those same documents for its conclusion that there was a general strategy to restrict all exports.
      
Thirdly, it considers that the reasoning of the Court of First Instance is circular. The Court first used the bonus policy
         to conclude that there was a general strategy to restrict all exports, and then uses that alleged general strategy to conclude
         that that bonus policy had a restrictive object.
      
General Motors argues lastly that the Court of First Instance infringed the duty to state reasons and distorted the evidence
         by stating, in paragraph of the contested judgment, that the Commission’s interpretation was corroborated by the fact that,
         at the time of the meeting on September 1996, the audits at dealers’ premises had not yet taken place, so that Opel Nederland
         could not know whether the ‘exporting’ dealers had in fact agreed to sell to unauthorised resellers. In fact, General Motors
         argues, at least one audit was carried out before the meeting of September 1996. Moreover, that meeting had been preceded
         by a letter to dealers in which Opel Nederland had enquired about the lawfulness of sales activities, but to which those dealers
         had not given satisfactory replies. 
      
 Findings of the Court
As the Advocate General points out in point of his Opinion, although General Motors refers to errors of reasoning, it is
         in reality seeking by its first ground of appeal to call into question the assessment of facts by the Court of First Instance
         and, in particular, to challenge the probative value of certain facts and documents which led the Court to conclude that Opel
         Nederland had adopted a general strategy designed to hinder all exports.
      
In that regard, it is clear from Article EC and the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice
         that the Court of First Instance has exclusive jurisdiction, first to find the facts except where the substantive inaccuracy
         of its findings is apparent from the documents submitted to it and, second, to assess those facts. When the Court of First
         Instance has found or assessed the facts, the Court of Justice has jurisdiction under Article EC to review the legal characterisation
         of those facts by the Court of First Instance and the legal conclusions it has drawn from them (see, in particular, Case C-185/P Baustahlgewebe v Commission [1998] ECR I-8417, paragraph 23).
      
The Court of Justice thus has no jurisdiction to establish the facts or, in principle, to examine the evidence which the Court
         of First Instance accepted in support of those facts. Provided that the evidence has been properly obtained and the general
         principles of law and the rules of procedure in relation to the burden of proof and the taking of evidence have been observed,
         it is for the Court of First Instance alone to assess the value which should be attached to the evidence produced to it (see,
         in particular, the order of September in Case C-19/P San Marco v Commission [1996] ECR I-4435, paragraph 40). Save where the clear sense of the evidence has been distorted, that appraisal does not
         therefore constitute a point of law which is subject as such to review by the Court of Justice (Baustahlgewebe, paragraph 24).
      
This Court therefore needs to examine only the arguments of General Motors seeking to demonstrate that the Court of First
         Instance distorted evidence.
      
In that respect, it should be noted that such distortion must be obvious from the documents on the Court’s file, without there
         being any need to carry out a new assessment of the facts and the evidence (order of July in Case C‑116/P Fichtner v Commission, not published in the ECR, paragraph 34).
      
As regards the argument of General Motors that the Court of First Instance distorted the terms of the minutes of the meeting
         of September by confirming that those minutes demonstrated a general strategy designed to limit export sales, there
         is no dispute that General Motors Nederland and Opel Nederland acknowledged before the Court of First Instance that the documents
         on which the Commission had relied, and those minutes in particular, demonstrated the existence of a strategy designed to
         restrict export sales to unauthorised resellers, prohibited by the dealership contracts. 
      
Since the minutes of September mention different measures designed to limit exports and, in particular, the exclusion
         of export sales from bonus campaigns, without making any distinction between authorised and unauthorised exports, General
         Motors has not succeeded in showing that the Court of First Instance clearly misconstrued that document.
      
Concerning the argument of General Motors that the Court of First Instance distorted the evidence in paragraph of the contested
         judgment by attaching importance to the fact that all the audits of dealers took place after September 1996, this Court
         finds that, in any event, the statement by the Court of First Instance in that paragraph cannot constitute a distortion
         of evidence capable of affecting that Court’s conclusion as regards the existence of the general strategy referred to above.
      
In those circumstances, the first ground of appeal must be rejected as partly inadmissible and partly unfounded.
      
 The second ground of appeal
 Arguments of General Motors
In its second ground of appeal, General Motors argues that the Court of First Instance erred in law by upholding the Commission’s
         finding that Opel Nederland had implemented a restrictive retail bonus system in breach of Article EC. 
      
General Motors submits first that an agreement can be considered to have a restrictive object only if, at first sight, it
         manifestly has the sole objective purpose or obvious consequence of appreciably restricting competition. According to General
         Motors, Opel Nederland’s bonus policy cannot be considered to be such an agreement. 
      
Secondly, General Motors argues that the case-law cited by the Court of First Instance in paragraph of the contested judgment,
         which relates to prohibitions on exports and other barriers to export, does not support the conclusion of the Court of First
         Instance that Opel Nederland’s bonus policy constituted an agreement having a restrictive object for the purposes of Article
         EC. An excessively broad interpretation of that concept ran the risk, moreover, of condemning agreements that were perfectly
         harmless to competition and, in the absence of opportunities to disprove it, infringed the presumption of innocence and the
         right to be heard.
      
Thirdly, General Motors considers that the comparison made by the Court of First Instance in paragraph of the contested
         judgment between national sales and export sales is irrelevant. It argues that, since dealers could achieve a profit margin
         irrespective of the payment of bonuses, and the supply of vehicles was not limited, Opel Nederland’s bonus policy did not
         reduce the incentive of Netherlands dealers to export during bonus campaigns. In any event, since economic conditions for
         domestic sales in the Netherlands and for export sales are very different, especially in the light of the high level of Netherlands
         car tax, the exclusion of export sales from bonus campaigns did not necessarily lead to higher prices or to lower margins
         for export sales in comparison with domestic sales.
      
Fourthly, General Motors argues that, in paragraph of the contested judgment, the Court of First Instance was wrong to
         rely on the intention of Opel Nederland in support of its conclusion that there was an agreement having a restrictive object
         for the purposes of Article EC. The object of an agreement for the purposes of that article must, it argues, be assessed
         objectively and not by reference to any subjective intention of one of the parties. 
      
 Findings of the Court
Regarding the first part of this ground of appeal, it is sufficient to note, as the Advocate General states in point of
         his Opinion, that, contrary to what General Motors argues, an agreement may be regarded as having a restrictive object even
         if it does not have the restriction of competition as its sole aim but also pursues other legitimate objectives (Joined Cases
         56/and 58/Consten and Grundig v Commission [1966] ECR 299, 342; IAZ, paragraph 25; Case C‑235/P Montecatini v Commission [1999] ECR I‑4539, paragraph 122; Joined Cases C‑238/P, C-244/P, C‑245/P, C‑247/P, C‑250/P to C‑252/P and C‑254/P Limburgse Vinyl Maatschappij and Others v Commission [2002] ECR I‑8375, paragraph 491). 
      
It follows that the first part of the second ground of appeal must be dismissed.
      
As for the second part of the second ground of appeal, it is clear from the case-law cited in paragraph of the contested
         judgment, as the Court of First Instance rightly states in that paragraph, that account must be taken not only of the terms
         of an agreement but also of other factors, such as the aims pursued by the agreement as such, in the light of the economic
         and legal context, in order to determine whether an agreement has a restrictive object for the purposes of Article EC.
      
Even if the case-law cited in paragraph of the contested judgment concerns export prohibitions or comparable restrictions,
         that case-law shows that an agreement concerning distribution has a restrictive object for the purposes of Article EC if
         it clearly manifests the will to treat export sales less favourably than national sales and thus leads to a partitioning of
         the market in question (see in particular, to that effect, IAZ, paragraph 23). 
      
As the Advocate General points out in point of his Opinion, such an objective can be achieved not only by direct restrictions
         on exports but also through indirect measures, such as those at issue in this case, since they influence the economic conditions
         of such transactions.
      
The Court of First Instance was therefore justified in supporting its reasoning by reference to the case-law cited in paragraph
         of the contested judgment.
      
In those circumstances, that judgment cannot be regarded as containing an excessively broad definition of the concept of an
         agreement having a restrictive object for the purposes of Article EC, in breach of the presumption of innocence or the
         right to be heard.
      
The second part of the second ground of appeal must therefore be dismissed.
      
Concerning the third part of the second ground of appeal, it is settled case-law that, in order to determine whether an agreement
         is to be considered to be prohibited by reason of the distortion of competition which is its effect, the competition in question
         should be assessed within the actual context in which it would occur in the absence of the agreement in dispute (Case C-7/P Deere v Commission [1998] ECR I-3111, paragraph 76; Case C-8/P New Holland Ford v Commission [1998] ECR I-3175, paragraph 90).
      
As the Advocate General points out in point of his Opinion, it was necessary in a situation such as that in this case to
         examine what the conduct of Netherlands dealers and the competitive situation in the market in question would have been, if
         export sales had not been excluded from the bonus policy. 
      
It is clear that the Court of First Instance carried out just such an examination by finding, in paragraph of the contested
         judgment in particular, that, as bonuses were no longer granted for export sales, the margin of economic manoeuvre which dealers
         had to carry out such sales was reduced in comparison with that which they had to carry out domestic sales.
      
The fact that, in the absence of tax harmonisation, domestic sales in the Netherlands and export sales are not subject to
         identical conditions does not affect that conclusion. 
      
Therefore, the third part of the second ground of appeal must be dismissed as unfounded.
      
Finally, concerning the fourth part of the second ground of appeal, whereby General Motors claims that the Court of First
         Instance erred, in paragraph of the contested judgment, by basing its reasoning on the intention of Opel Nederland to
         restrict competition, it is true that proof of that intention is not a necessary factor in determining whether an agreement
         has such a restriction as its object (see, to that effect, Miller, paragraph 18, and CRAM and Rheinzink, paragraph 26). 
      
However, even if the intention of the parties does not constitute a necessary factor in determining the restrictive character
         of an agreement, there is nothing to prohibit the Commission or the Community courts from taking that intention into account
         (see, to that effect, IAZ, paragraphs to 25). 
      
It follows, as the Advocate General points out in point of his Opinion, that the Court of First Instance could legitimately
         rely also on the intentions of Opel Nederland in order to determine whether the exclusion of export sales from the bonus system
         pursued a restrictive object for the purposes of Article EC. 
      
The fourth part of the second ground of appeal, and therefore that ground in its entirety, must therefore be dismissed.
      
 The third ground of appeal
 Arguments of General Motors
General Motors argues that the Court of First Instance erred in law by largely upholding the Commission’s calculation of the
         fine in the contested decision. 
      
It considers, first, that the reasoning in the contested judgment in respect of the fine contravenes Article 15(2) of Regulation
         No 17, since it is based on erroneous findings with respect to the existence of the alleged general strategy designed to limit
         exports and to the conformity of the bonus policy with Article EC.
      
Secondly, General Motors argues that the Court of First Instance erred in law and distorted the evidence in holding that Opel
         Nederland’s actions did not amount to a cessation of the infringements as soon as the Commission intervened. 
      
Thirdly, General Motors argues that, in a number of other cases, the Commission has recognised early termination of an infringement
         as an extenuating circumstance that justifies a reduction in the fine. It refers in particular to Decision 2002/405/EC of
         June 2001, relating to a proceeding pursuant to Article of the EC Treaty (COMP/E-2/36.041/PO – Michelin) (OJ L
         143, p. 1), where the termination of the infringement, which had occurred before the statement of objections but three years
         after the investigation had started and one and a half years after the Commission had conducted on-site inspections, fell
         ‘to be considered a mitigating circumstance’.
      
 Findings of the Court
It should be noted at the outset that the first part of this third ground of appeal is directly linked to the arguments of
         General Motors in support of the first two grounds, according to which the bonus system did not constitute an infringement
         of Article EC. Since those arguments have been dismissed in the context of the examination of those grounds, the first
         part of the third ground must therefore also be dismissed. 
      
Concerning the second and third parts of the third ground of appeal, the Guidelines on the method of setting fines imposed
         pursuant to Article 15(2) of Regulation No and Article 65(5) of the ECSC Treaty provide for a reduction in the basic amount
         of the fine for extenuating circumstances such as cessation of the infringements as soon as the Commission intervened.
      
It is undisputed that Opel Nederland did not put an end to the bonus system until January 1998, more than a year after
         the Commission first intervened.
      
In those circumstances, and even if the Commission had reduced the fine in a comparable situation, the Court of First Instance
         was right to hold, in paragraph of the contested judgment, that the Commission was not required to find extenuating circumstances
         in the contested decision.
      
The second and third parts of the third ground of appeal, and therefore the ground in its entirety, must therefore be dismissed.
      
Since none of the grounds raised by General Motors in support of its appeal is well founded, the appeal must be dismissed.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, applicable to the procedure on appeal by virtue of Article of those rules,
         the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings.
         Since the Commission has applied for costs against General Motors and the latter has been unsuccessful, General Motors must
         be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby:
1.      Dismisses the appeal;
2.      Orders General Motors BV to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 