
         				Ordonnance de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-259/La Mer Technology Inc.vLaboratoires Goemar SA(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the High Court of Justice of England and Wales, Chancery Division)
         
«(Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure – Trade marks – Directive 89/104/EEC – Articles 10(1) and 12(1) – Revocation of a trade mark – Notion of genuine use of a trade mark)»
Order of the Court (Third Chamber), January Summary of the Order
1..
Approximation of laws – Trade marks – Directive 89/– Reasons for revocation of the trade mark – Lack of genuine use of the trade mark – Definition  (Council Directive 89/104, Arts. 10(1) and 12(1)) 
2..
Approximation of laws – Trade marks – Directive 89/– Reasons for revocation of the trade mark – Lack of genuine use of the trade mark – Consideration of circumstances subsequent to the filing of the application for revocation – Whether permissible – Conclusion to be drawn by the national court  (Council Directive 89/104, Art. 12(1)) 
1.
 Articles 10(1) and 12(1) of First Directive 89/on trade marks must be interpreted as meaning that there is  
         genuine use of a trade mark where it is used in accordance with its essential function, which is to guarantee the identity of the origin
         of the goods or services for which it is registered, in order to create or preserve an outlet for those goods or services;
         genuine use does not include token use for the sole purpose of preserving the rights conferred by that mark. When assessing
         whether use of the trade mark is genuine, regard must be had to all the facts and circumstances relevant to establishing whether
         the commercial use of the mark is real in the course of trade, particularly whether such use is viewed as warranted in the
         economic sector concerned to maintain or create a share in the market for the goods or services protected by the mark, the
         nature of those goods or services, the characteristics of the market and the scale and frequency of use of the mark. When
         it serves a real commercial purpose, in the circumstances cited above, even minimal use of the mark or use by only a single
         importer in the Member State concerned can be sufficient to establish genuine use within the meaning of the directive. see para. 27, operative part 2.
 While First Directive 89/on trade marks makes the classification of use of the trade mark as  
         genuine use, within the meaning of Article 12(1), consequential only on consideration of the circumstances which pertain in respect of
         the relevant period and which predate the filing of the application for revocation, it does not preclude, in assessing the
         genuineness of use during the relevant period, account being taken, where appropriate, of any circumstances subsequent to
         that filing. It is for the national court to determine whether such circumstances confirm that the use of the mark during
         the relevant period was genuine or whether, conversely, they reflect an intention on the part of the proprietor to defeat
         that claim see para. 33, operative part ORDER OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)January (1)
((Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure – Trade marks – Directive 89/104/EEC – Articles 10(1) and 12(1) – Revocation of a trade mark – Notion of genuine use of a trade mark))
 In Case C-259/02, 
          REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the High Court of Justice of England and Wales, Chancery Division for a preliminary
         ruling in the proceedings pending before that court between
         
La Mer Technology Inc.
and
Laboratoires Goemar SA,
 on the interpretation of Articles 10(1) and 12(1) of First Council Directive 89/104/EEC of December to approximate
         the laws of the Member States relating to trade marks (OJ L 40, p. 1),
         
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
 composed of: J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, acting as President of the Third Chamber, J.-P. Puissochet (Rapporteur) and F. Macken, Judges, 
         
 Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer, Registrar: R. Grass, having informed the court of referral that the Court proposed to give its decision by a reasoned order
         in accordance with Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure, having invited the persons referred to in Article of the Statute
         of the Court of Justice to submit any observations which they might wish to make in that regard, 
         
after hearing the views of the Advocate General, makes the following 
Order
            
 By order of December 2001, received at the Court on July 2002, the High Court of Justice of England and Wales, Chancery
         Division, referred to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling under Article EC seven questions on the interpretation
         of Articles 10(1) and 12(1) of First Council Directive 89/104/EEC of December to approximate the laws of the Member
         States relating to trade marks (OJ L 40, p. 1, hereinafter  
         the Directive). 
         
            
 Those questions were raised in the course of proceedings between La Mer Technology Inc. (hereinafter  
         La Mer Technology), a company incorporated under United States law, and Laboratoires Goemar SA (hereinafter  
         Laboratoires Goemar), a company incorporated under French law, for a decision revoking the rights of Laboratoires Goemar in the two trade marks
         consisting of the words  
         Laboratoire de la mer, which it registered in the United Kingdom for goods which it markets.  
         
Legal framework
 Community legislation
         
            
 Article 10(1) to (3) of the Directive provides as follows: 
         
1.
 If, within a period of five years following the date of the completion of the registration procedure, the proprietor has not
         put the trade mark to genuine use in the Member State in connection with the goods or services in respect of which it is registered,
         or if such use has been suspended during an uninterrupted period of five years, the trade mark shall be subject to the sanctions
         provided for in this Directive, unless there are proper reasons for non-use.
         
2.
 The following shall also constitute use within the meaning of paragraph 1:
         
(a)
 use of the trade mark in a form differing in elements which do not alter the distinctive character of the mark in the form
         in which it was registered; 
         
(b)
 affixing of the trade mark to goods or to the packaging thereof in the Member State concerned solely for export purposes.
         
         
3.
  Use of the trade mark with the consent of the proprietor or by any person who has authority to use a collective mark or a
         guarantee or certification mark shall be deemed to constitute use by the proprietor.
         
            
 Article 12(1) of the Directive states: A trade mark shall be liable to revocation if, within a continuous period of five years, it has not been put to genuine use
         in the Member State in connection with the goods or services in respect of which it is registered, and there are no proper
         reasons for non-use; however, no person may claim that the proprietor's rights in a trade mark should be revoked where, during
         the interval between expiry of the five-year period and filing of the application for revocation, genuine use of the trade
         mark has been started or resumed; the commencement or resumption of use within a period of three months preceding the filing
         of the application for revocation which began at the earliest on expiry of the continuous period of five years of non-use,
         shall, however, be disregarded where preparations for the commencement or resumption occur only after the proprietor becomes
         aware that the application for revocation may be filed.
          Domestic legislation
         
            
 Section 46(1) of the Trade Marks Act provides: The registration of a trade mark may be revoked on any of the following grounds:
         
(a)
 that within the period of five years following the date of completion of the registration procedure it has not been put to
         genuine use in the United Kingdom, by the proprietor or with his consent, in relation to the goods or services for which it
         is registered, and there are no proper reasons for non-use; 
         
(b)
 that such use has been suspended for an uninterrupted period of five years, and there are no proper reasons for non-use.
         
Main proceedingsand questions referred to the Court
            
 Laboratoires Goemar, established in Saint-Malo (France), specialises in seaweed products. It registered the trade mark Laboratoire
         de la mer in the United Kingdom, first in 1988, in respect of  
         pharmaceutical, veterinary and sanitary products, dietetic products for medical use ... all containing marine products, included in Class as defined by the Nice Agreement concerning the International Classification of Goods and Services for
         the Purposes of the Registration of Marks of June 1957, as revised and amended (
         the Nice Agreement), and then in 1989, in respect of  
         perfumes and cosmetics containing marine products included in Class of the Nice Agreement. 
         
            
 La Mer Technology wishes to use the La Mer mark to market a range of cosmetics and similar goods in the United Kingdom. On
         March 1998, that is to say, more than five years after the date of registration of the Laboratoire de la mer marks, it
         made two applications to the Trade Mark Registry for revocation of the latter, claiming that Laboratoires Goemar had not put
         them to genuine use during the five years preceding those applications. 
         
            
 On June 2001, the Hearing Officer (the competent official in the Trade Mark Registry) granted the applications for revocation
         of the Laboratoire de la mer marks, but only for  
         perfumes in Class of the Nice Agreement and  
         pharmaceutical, veterinary and sanitary products in Class thereof. That part of the Hearing Officer's decision has not been challenged. The Hearing Officer rejected the
         remainder of the applications, relating to revocation of the registered trade marks for  
         cosmetics containing marine products in Class and  
         dietetic products for medical use in Class 5. 
         
            
 La Mer Technology brought two actions against that latter part of the Hearing Officer's decision before the High Court of
         Justice of England and Wales, Chancery Division. 
         
            
 On December 2001, the High Court allowed the appeal as regards the goods included in Class of the Nice Agreement and,
         accordingly, made an order for revocation of the trade mark at issue. 
         
            
 On the other hand, as regards the trade mark registered for  
         cosmetics containing marine products in Class of the Nice Agreement, the High Court found that Laboratoires Goemar had, during the five years prior to the applications
         for revocation, appointed the company Health Scope Direct Ltd, established in Scotland, to sell such products in the United
         Kingdom. The High Court held that while the sale of those products had during that period generated a very low turnover of
         some hundreds of pounds sterling, that situation reflected the commercial failure of the company which owned the trade mark
         rather than use of the trade mark solely for the purpose of maintaining its registration. In addition, the High Court observed
         that Laboratoires Goemar had, shortly following that same period, recruited a new sales agent in the United Kingdom in order
         to boost their sales.  
         
            
 The High Court found that the main question in the proceedings was whether, in the circumstances, the Laboratoire de la mer
         trade mark had been put to genuine use within the meaning of the Trade Marks Act 1994. It pointed out that the notion of genuine
         use had the same scope as that set out in the corresponding provisions of the Directive. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, the High Court of Justice of England and Wales, Chancery Division, decided to stay proceedings and
         to refer the following questions to the Court of Justice of the European Communities for a preliminary ruling: 
         
1.
 What factors should be taken into account when deciding whether a mark has been  
         put to genuine use in a Member State within the meaning of Articles 10(1) and 12(1) of [the Directive]? 
          In particular:
         
2.
 Should the extent of use of the mark in relation to the goods or services for which the mark is registered in the Member State
         be taken into account? 
         
3.
 Is any amount of use, however small, sufficient if it was made with no purpose other than commercially dealing in the goods
         or providing the service concerned? 
         
4.
 If the answer to the foregoing question is  
         no, what is the test for determining how much use is sufficient, and in particular does that test include a consideration of
         the nature and size of the business of the registered proprietor? 
         
5.
 Is token or sham use to be disregarded, and in particular is use whose sole or predominant purpose is defeating a potential
         claim for revocation to be disregarded? 
         
6.
 What types of use can be considered, and in particular is it necessary to show that the mark has been used in the course of
         trade in the Member State concerned and, in further particular, would importation by a single customer into that Member State
         be sufficient? 
         
7.
 Is it necessary to disregard use occurring after the filing of the application for revocation even for the purpose of testing
         whether use during the relevant period was genuine?
         
 Application of Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure
         
            
 Since it took the view that the answer to the first six questions could be clearly deduced from the judgment in Case C-40/Ansul [2003] ECR I-2439, given subsequent to delivery of the order for reference, and that the answer to the seventh question left
         no room for reasonable doubt, the Court, in accordance with Article 104(3) of its Rules of Procedure, informed the national
         court that it intended to give its decision by reasoned order and invited the persons referred to in Article of the Statute
         of the Court of Justice to submit any observations which they might wish to make in that regard. 
         
            
 The Commission and the French Government did not submit observations on that point. 
         
            
 On the other hand, by judgment of June 2003, the national court, while announcing that it was withdrawing the fifth question
         referred for a preliminary ruling, stated that it was maintaining the other questions, requesting the Court not to apply Article
         104(3) of the Rules of Procedure. La Mer Technology, by letter of July 2003, informed the Court that it was necessary to
         hold a hearing on the basis of Article 104(4) of the Rules of Procedure. By joint letter of November 2003, signed by their
         counsel, Laboratoires Goemar and La Mer Technology stated that they shared the assessment of the national court, set out in
         that judgment of June 2003. By letter of November 2003, the United Kingdom Government expressed the same opinion. 
         
            
 The observations referred to in the preceding paragraph are not such as to call in question the Court's decision to apply
         Article 104(3) of the Rules of Procedure and not to hold a hearing.  
          First, second, third, fourth and sixth questions
         
            
 By those questions, which it is appropriate to consider together, the national court is essentially asking what criteria and
         types of use of a trade mark make it possible to determine if the mark has been  
         put to genuine use in a Member State within the meaning of Articles 10(1) and 12(1) of the Directive. The national court asks, inter alia, whether
         use, even if minimal, can be characterised as genuine if the sole purpose of the proprietor is to market products and services
         protected by that mark. 
         
            
 The reply to those questions may be clearly deduced from paragraphs to of  
         Ansul, cited above, in which the Court set out the following conclusions: 
         
            
... as Ansul argued, the eighth recital in the preamble to the Directive states that trade marks  
         must actually be used or, if not used, be subject to revocation.  
         Genuine use therefore means actual use of the mark. That approach is confirmed,  
         inter alia, by the Dutch version of the Directive, which uses in the eighth recital the words  
         werkelijk wordt gebruikt, and by other language versions such as the Spanish (
         uso efectivo), Italian (
         uso effettivo) and English (
         genuine use). 
         
            
 Genuine use must therefore be understood to denote use that is not merely token, serving solely to preserve the rights conferred by the
         mark. Such use must be consistent with the essential function of a trade mark, which is to guarantee the identity of the origin
         of goods or services to the consumer or end user by enabling him, without any possibility of confusion, to distinguish the
         product or service from others which have another origin. 
         
            
 It follows that  
         genuine use of the mark entails use of the mark on the market for the goods or services protected by that mark and not just internal
         use by the undertaking concerned. The protection the mark confers and the consequences of registering it in terms of enforceability
         vis-à-vis third parties cannot continue to operate if the mark loses its commercial  
         raison d'être, which is to create or preserve an outlet for the goods or services that bear the sign of which it is composed, as distinct
         from the goods or services of other undertakings. Use of the mark must therefore relate to goods or services already marketed
         or about to be marketed and for which preparations by the undertaking to secure customers are under way, particularly in the
         form of advertising campaigns. Such use may be either by the trade mark proprietor or, as envisaged in Article 10(3) of the
         Directive, by a third party with authority to use the mark. 
         
            
 Finally, when assessing whether there has been genuine use of the trade mark, regard must be had to all the facts and circumstances
         relevant to establishing whether the commercial exploitation of the mark is real, in particular whether such use is viewed
         as warranted in the economic sector concerned to maintain or create a share in the market for the goods or services protected
         by the mark. 
         
            
 Assessing the circumstances of the case may thus include giving consideration,  
         inter alia, to the nature of the goods or service at issue, the characteristics of the market concerned and the scale and frequency
         of use of the mark. Use of the mark need not, therefore, always be quantitatively significant for it to be deemed genuine,
         as that depends on the characteristics of the goods or service concerned on the corresponding market.
         
            
 It follows from those considerations that the preservation by a trade mark proprietor of his rights is predicated on the mark
         being put to genuine use in the course of trade, on the market for the goods or services for which it was registered in the
         Member State concerned. 
         
            
 Moreover, it is clear from paragraph of  
         Ansul that use of the mark may in some cases be sufficient to establish genuine use within the meaning of the Directive, even if
         that use is not quantitatively significant. Even minimal use can therefore be sufficient to qualify as genuine, on condition
         that it is deemed to be justified, in the economic sector concerned, for the purpose of preserving or creating market share
         for the goods or services protected by the mark. 
         
            
 The question whether use is sufficient to preserve or create market share for those products or services depends on several
         factors and on a case-by-case assessment which is for the national court to carry out. The characteristics of those products
         and services, the frequency or regularity of the use of the mark, whether the mark is used for the purpose of marketing all
         the identical products or services of the proprietor or merely some of them, or evidence which the proprietor is able to provide,
         are among the factors which may be taken into account. 
         
            
 Similarly, as emerges from paragraphs to of  
         Ansul set out above, the characteristics of the market concerned, which directly affect the marketing strategy of the proprietor
         of the mark, may also be taken into account in assessing genuine use of the mark. 
         
            
 In addition, use of the mark by a single client which imports the products for which the mark is registered can be sufficient
         to demonstrate that such use is genuine, if it appears that the import operation has a genuine commercial justification for
         the proprietor of the mark. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, it is not possible to determine a priori, and in the abstract, what quantitative threshold should
         be chosen in order to determine whether use is genuine or not. A  
         de minimis rule, which would not allow the national court to appraise all the circumstances of the dispute before it, cannot therefore
         be laid down. 
         
            
 Finally, it can clearly be inferred from paragraph of  
         Ansul that, where use of the mark does not have as its essential aim the preservation or creation of market share for the goods
         or services which it protects, such use must be considered in fact to be intended to defeat any request for revocation. Such
         use cannot be characterised as  
         genuine within the meaning of the Directive. 
         
            
 In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the first, second, third, fourth and sixth questions must be that Articles 10(1)
         and 12(1) of the Directive must be interpreted as meaning that there is  
         genuine use of a trade mark where it is used in accordance with its essential function, which is to guarantee the identity of the origin
         of the goods or services for which it is registered, in order to create or preserve an outlet for those goods or services;
         genuine use does not include token use for the sole purpose of preserving the rights conferred by that mark. When assessing
         whether use of the trade mark is genuine, regard must be had to all the facts and circumstances relevant to establishing whether
         the commercial use of the mark is real in the course of trade, particularly whether such use is viewed as warranted in the
         economic sector concerned to maintain or create a share in the market for the goods or services protected by the mark, the
         nature of those goods or services, the characteristics of the market and the scale and frequency of use of the mark. When
         it serves a real commercial purpose, in the circumstances cited above, even minimal use of the mark or use by only a single
         importer in the Member State concerned can be sufficient to establish genuine use within the meaning of the Directive. 
          Seventh question
         
            
 By its seventh question, the national court is essentially asking whether the Directive must be interpreted as precluding
         account being taken of trade mark use which occurs after the filing of an application for revocation when assessing whether
         use during the relevant period, namely the five years prior to that filing, is genuine. 
         
            
 It is clear from Article 12(1) of the Directive that the preservation of a trade mark proprietor's right is predicated on
         the mark being put to genuine use, in any event before an application for revocation is filed, and that the commencement or
         resumption of use of the mark, even if it occurs before the filing of an application for revocation, does not necessarily
         serve to maintain the rights of the proprietor, if it appears that such commencement or resumption occurred only after he
         became aware that such an application might be filed. 
         
            
 It follows from the foregoing that the Directive makes the classification of use of the trade mark as  
         genuine use of the mark consequential on consideration of the circumstances which pertain during the relevant period and which therefore
         predate the filing of the application for revocation. 
         
            
 Nevertheless, the Directive does not expressly preclude in assessing the genuineness of use during the relevant period, account
         being taken, where appropriate, of any circumstances subsequent to that filing. Such circumstances may make it possible to
         confirm or better assess the extent to which the trade mark was used during the relevant period and the real intentions of
         the proprietor during that time. 
         
            
 It is for the national court to determine whether any circumstances subsequent to the filing of the application for revocation
         confirm the conclusion that the use of the mark was genuine during the relevant period or whether, conversely, they reflect
         an intention on the part of the proprietor to defeat that claim. 
         
            
 The answer to the seventh question must therefore be that, while the Directive makes the classification of use of the trade
         mark as  
         genuine use consequential only on consideration of the circumstances which pertain in respect of the relevant period and which predate
         the filing of the application for revocation, it does not preclude, in assessing the genuineness of use during the relevant
         period, account being taken, where appropriate, of any circumstances subsequent to that filing. It is for the national court
         to determine whether such circumstances confirm that the use of the mark during the relevant period was genuine or whether,
         conversely, they reflect an intention on the part of the proprietor to defeat that claim. 
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the United Kingdom and French Governments and by the Commission, which have submitted observations to
         the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings
         pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
 in answer to the questions referred to it by the High Court of Justice England and Wales, Chancery Division, by order of December 2001, hereby rules:
         
1.
 Articles 10(1) and 12(1) of First Council Directive 89/104/EEC of December to approximate the laws of the Member States
            relating to trade marks must be interpreted as meaning that there is  
            genuine use of a trade mark where it is used in accordance with its essential function, which is to guarantee the identity of the origin
            of the goods or services for which it is registered, in order to create or preserve an outlet for those goods or services;
            genuine use does not include token use for the sole purpose of preserving the rights conferred by that mark. When assessing
            whether use of the trade mark is genuine, regard must be had to all the facts and circumstances relevant to establishing whether
            the commercial use of the mark is real in the course of trade, particularly whether such use is viewed as warranted in the
            economic sector concerned to maintain or create a share in the market for the goods or services protected by the mark, the
            nature of those goods or services, the characteristics of the market and the scale and frequency of use of the mark. When
            it serves a real commercial purpose, in the circumstances cited above, even minimal use of the mark or use by only a single
            importer in the Member State concerned can be sufficient to establish genuine use within the meaning of the Directive. 
            
2.
 While First Directive 89/makes the classification of use of the trade mark as  
            genuine use consequential only on consideration of the circumstances which pertain in respect of the relevant period and which predate
            the filing of the application for revocation, it does not preclude, in assessing the genuineness of use during the relevant
            period, account being taken, where appropriate, of any circumstances subsequent to that filing. It is for the national court
            to determine whether such circumstances confirm that the use of the mark during the relevant period was genuine or whether,
            conversely, they reflect an intention on the part of the proprietor to defeat that claim.
            
 Luxembourg, January 2004. 
         
 R. Grass 
V. Skouris  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: English.
Top  
 