
Case C-430/Dionik Anonimi Etairia Emporias I/I, Logismikou & Parokhis Ipiresion Mikhanografisis
and
Ioannis Mikhail Pikoulas
v
Epitropi Kefalaiagoras
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Simvoulio tis Epikratias)
(Directive 2001/34/EC – Article – Admission of securities to official stock exchange listing – Listing particulars (prospectus) – Publication of inaccurate information – Persons responsible – Members of the board of directors)
Opinion of Advocate General Sharpston delivered on March Judgment of the Court (First Chamber), July Summary of the Judgment
Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Companies – Directive 2001/– Admission of securities to official
            stock exchange listing 
(European Parliament and Council Directive 2001/34, Art. 21)
Article of Directive 2001/on the admission of securities to official stock exchange listing and on information to be
         published on those securities is to be interpreted as not precluding a national legislature from laying down, for cases where
         the information recorded in listing particulars published with a view to admitting securities to official stock exchange listing
         proves to be inaccurate or misleading, administrative penalties imposable not only upon the persons expressly mentioned in
         those particulars as responsible but also upon the issuer of the securities and, indiscriminately, upon the members of the
         issuer’s board of directors, regardless of whether the board members have been identified as responsible in the listing particulars.
      
Since the directive does not expressly provide for a system of penalties applicable to the persons on whom responsibility
         for the listing particulars is incumbent, the Member States are empowered to choose the penalties which seem appropriate to
         them. They must, however, exercise that power in accordance with Community law and its general principles, and consequently
         with the principle of proportionality.
      
In that regard, a system of civil, criminal or administrative penalties established at national level in respect of the abovementioned
         persons does not run counter to the objective of that directive, which is to ensure, inter alia, adequate information of investors,
         where the system is proportionate to the gravity of the infringement consisting in the giving of inaccurate or misleading
         information in the listing particulars. 
      
(see paras 50, 52-53, 55-56, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Directive 2001/34/EC – Article – Admission of securities to official stock exchange listing – Listing particulars (prospectus) – Publication of inaccurate information – Persons responsible – Members of the board of directors)
In Case C-430/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, by the Simvoulio tis Epikratias (Greece), made by decision of August 2005, received at the Court on December 2005, in the proceedings
      
Dionik Anonimi Etairia Emporias I/I, Logismikou & Parokhis Ipiresion Mikhanografisis,
Ioannis Mikhail Pikoulas
v
Epitropi Kefalaiagoras,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann, President of the Chamber, R. Schintgen, A. Tizzano, A. Borg Barthet and M. Ilešič (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: B. Fülöp, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on January 2007,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Dionik Anonimi Etairia Emporias I/I, Logismikou & Parokhis Ipiresion Mikhanografisis, by G. Krimizis and M. Grigoriou, dikigoroi,
–       the Greek Government, by K. Georgiadis and M. Papida, acting as Agents,
–       the Italian Government, by I. M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and P. Gentili, avvocato dello Stato,
–       the Portuguese Government, by L. Fernandes and Â. Seiça Neves, acting as Agents,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by D. Maidani and G. Zavvos, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2007,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article of Directive 2001/34/EC of the European
         Parliament and of the Council of May on the admission of securities to official stock exchange listing and on information
         to be published on those securities (OJ L 184, p. 1). 
      
The reference was made in the context of proceedings before the Simvoulio tis Epikratias (Council of State) brought by Dionik
         Anonimi Etairia Emporias I/I, Logismikou & Parokhis Ipiresion Mikhanografisis (‘Dionik AE’), a company established under Greek
         law, and Mr Pikoulas, a member of the board of directors of that company, against the Epitropi Kefalaiagoras (Capital Market
         Commission, ‘the CMC’), regarding fines imposed on them by the CMC owing to the inaccuracy of certain information contained
         in listing particulars (a prospectus) published in connection with an increase in that company’s capital.
      
 Legal context
 Directive 2001/Directive 2001/codifies the following four directives:
–       Council Directive 79/279/EEC of March coordinating the conditions for the admission of securities to official stock
         exchange listing (OJ L 66, p. 21);
      
–       Council Directive 80/390/EEC of March coordinating the requirements for the drawing up, scrutiny and distribution
         of the listing particulars to be published for the admission of securities to official stock exchange listing (OJ L 100,
         p. 1);
      
–       Council Directive 82/121/EEC of February on information to be published on a regular basis by companies the shares
         of which have been admitted to official stock-exchange listing (OJ L 48, p. 26), and
      
–       Council Directive 88/627/EEC of December on the information to be published when a major holding in a listed company
         is acquired or disposed of (OJ L 348, p. 62).
      
Recitals (5), (11) and (31) in the preamble to Directive 2001/are worded as follows:
‘(5)      Initially, this coordination of the conditions for admission of securities to official listing should be sufficiently flexible
         to enable account to be taken of present differences in the structures of securities markets in the Member States and to enable
         the Member States to take account of any specific situations with which they may be confronted.
      
…
(11)      These differences [between the safeguards required by the majority of the Member States, both as regards the contents and
         the layout of the listing particulars and the efficacy, methods and timing of the check on the information given therein]
         should be eliminated by coordinating the rules and regulations without necessarily making them completely uniform, in order
         to achieve an adequate degree of equivalence in the safeguards required in each Member State to ensure the provision of information
         which is sufficient and as objective as possible for actual or potential security holders.
      
…
(31)      A policy of adequate information of investors in the field of transferable securities is likely to improve investor protection,
         to increase investors’ confidence in securities markets and thus to ensure that securities markets function correctly.’
      
Article of Directive 2001/states:
‘Member States shall ensure that the admission of securities to official listing on a stock exchange situated or operating
         within their territories is conditional upon the publication of an information sheet, hereinafter referred to as “listing
         particulars”, in accordance with Chapter I of Title V.’
      
Article of that directive provides:
‘1.      The listing particulars shall contain the information which, according to the particular nature of the issuer and of the securities
         for the admission of which application is being made, is necessary to enable investors and their investment advisers to make
         an informed assessment of the assets and liabilities, financial position, profits and losses, and prospects of the issuer
         and of the rights attaching to such securities.
      
2.       Member States shall ensure that the obligation referred to in paragraph is incumbent upon the persons responsible for the
         listing particulars as provided for in heading 1.of Schedules A and B of Annex I hereto.’
      
Article 22(1) of the Directive provides:
‘Without prejudice to the obligation referred to in Article 21, Member States shall ensure that, subject to the possibilities
         for exemptions provided for in Articles and 24, listing particulars contain, in as easily analysable and comprehensible
         a form as possible, at least the items of information provided for in Schedules A, B or C of Annex I, depending on whether
         shares, debt securities or certificates representing shares are involved.’
      
Article of Directive 2001/states:
‘Without prejudice to Article 39(1), Member States may allow the competent authorities responsible for checking the listing
         particulars within the meaning of this Directive, to provide for partial or complete exemption from the obligation to publish
         listing particulars in the following cases:
      
(1)      where the securities for which admission to official listing is applied for are:
(a) securities which have been the subject of a public issue …
...’
Article of that directive provides:
‘Without prejudice to Article 49(2), in the case of a new public issue of shares of the same class as those already officially
         listed, the company shall be required, where the new shares are not automatically admitted, to apply for their admission to
         the same listing, either not more than a financial year after their issue or when they become freely negotiable.’
      
Article of the Directive provides:
‘Every significant new factor capable of affecting assessment of the securities which arises between the time when the listing
         particulars are adopted and the time when stock exchange dealings begin shall be covered by a supplement to the listing particulars,
         scrutinised in the same way as the latter and published in accordance with procedures to be laid down by the competent authorities.’
      
Annex I to Directive 2001/comprises a group of provisions concerning the layout of listing particulars for the admission
         of securities to official stock exchange listing. Schedules A and B concern the admission of shares and the admission of debt
         securities respectively. Under Chapter of those Schedules A and B, entitled ‘Information concerning those responsible for
         listing particulars and the auditing of accounts’, heading 1.requires the inclusion of the following information:
      
‘[Name and function of natural persons and name and registered office of] legal persons responsible for the listing particulars
         or, as the case may be, for certain parts of them, with, in the latter case, an indication of those parts.’
      
 Directive 2003/71/EC
Article 5(1) of Directive 2003/71/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of November on the prospectus to
         be published when securities are offered to the public or admitted to trading and amending Directive 2001/(OJ L 345,
         p. 64) provides:
      
‘Without prejudice to Article 8(2), the prospectus shall contain all information which, according to the particular nature
         of the issuer and of the securities offered to the public or admitted to trading on a regulated market, is necessary to enable
         investors to make an informed assessment of the assets and liabilities, financial position, profit and losses, and prospects
         of the issuer and of any guarantor, and of the rights attaching to such securities. This information shall be presented in
         an easily analysable and comprehensible form.’
      
Article of that directive, entitled ‘Responsibility attaching to the prospectus’, provides:
‘1.      Member States shall ensure that responsibility for the information given in a prospectus attaches at least to the issuer or
         its administrative, management or supervisory bodies, the offeror, the person asking for the admission to trading on a regulated
         market or the guarantor, as the case may be. The persons responsible shall be clearly identified in the prospectus by their
         names and functions or, in the case of legal persons, their names and registered offices, as well as declarations by them
         that, to the best of their knowledge, the information contained in the prospectus is in accordance with the facts and that
         the prospectus makes no omission likely to affect its import.
      
2.      Member States shall ensure that their laws, regulation[s] and administrative provisions on civil liability apply to those
         persons responsible for the information given in a prospectus.
      
However, Member States shall ensure that no civil liability shall attach to any person solely on the basis of the summary,
         including any translation thereof, unless it is misleading, inaccurate or inconsistent when read together with the other parts
         of the prospectus.’
      
Article of Directive 2003/71, entitled ‘Sanctions’, states:
‘1.      Without prejudice to the right of Member States to impose criminal sanctions and without prejudice to their civil liability
         regime, Member States shall ensure, in conformity with their national law, that the appropriate administrative measures can
         be taken or administrative sanctions be imposed against the persons responsible, where the provisions adopted in the implementation
         of this Directive have not been complied with. Member States shall ensure that these measures are effective, proportionate
         and dissuasive.
      
2.      Member States shall provide that the competent authority may disclose to the public every measure or sanction that has been
         imposed for infringement of the provisions adopted pursuant to this Directive, unless the disclosure would seriously jeopardise
         the financial markets or cause disproportionate damage to the parties involved.’
      
 Greek national law
 Law No 1969/Article 72(2) of Law No 1969/(FEK A’ 167), as amended by Article 96(1) of Law No 2533/(FEK A’ 228, ‘Law No 1969/1991’),
         provides:
      
‘A fine of up to GRD five hundred million (000) shall be imposed by the [CMC] on natural or legal persons who publish
         or disseminate in any way inaccurate or misleading information regarding securities being admitted to listing or already listed
         on an official stock exchange that by its nature may affect the price of or dealings in those securities … This provision
         shall also apply to members of the board of directors of companies applying for admission of their shares to a recognised
         stock exchange, where the inaccurate or misleading information is contained in the listing particulars required for the purposes
         of the abovementioned admission or is published or disseminated in any way.’
      
Article 76(10) of Law No 1969/provides:
‘Without prejudice to application of the relevant provisions of criminal law, the [CMC] shall have the power to impose a fine
         of up to GRD one hundred million (000) and, in the event of a second or subsequent offence, up to GRD two hundred
         million (000) on natural or legal persons who infringe the legislation concerning the capital market, or orders of
         the Minister for Economic Affairs or decisions of the [CMC] with regulatory content’
      
 Presidential Decree No 348/It follows from Article of Presidential Decree No 348/(FEK A’ 125), as amended by Law No 2651/(FEK A’ 248, ‘Presidential
         Decree No 348/1985’), that the purpose of the Decree is to render the legislation on official stock exchange listing consistent
         with Directive 80/as amended by Directive 94/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of May (OJ L 135, p. 1).
      
According to Article 2(1) thereof, the Decree concerns securities which are the subject of an application for admission to
         official listing on the Athens Stock Exchange.
      
Article 3(a) of Presidential Decree No 348/states that the expression ‘securities’ covers, inter alia, shares.
Article 4(1) of that Decree provides that admission of securities to official listing on the Athens Stock Exchange is conditional
         upon publication of the listing particulars as previously approved by the Board of Administration of that stock exchange.
      
Article of Presidential Decree No 348/provides:
‘1.      The listing particulars shall contain the information which, according to the particular nature of the issuer and of the securities
         for the admission of which application is being made, is necessary to enable investors and their investment advisers to make
         an informed assessment of the assets and liabilities, financial position, profits and losses and prospects of the issuer and
         of the rights attaching to such securities.
      
2.      The obligation referred to in paragraph shall be incumbent upon the persons responsible for the listing particulars as provided
         for in heading 1.in Annexes A and B hereto.’
      
Article of that Decree provides:
‘Every significant new factor capable of affecting assessment of the securities which arises between the time when the listing
         particulars are adopted and the time when dealing on the Stock Exchange begins shall be covered by a supplement to the listing
         particulars, scrutinised in the same way as the latter and published in accordance with Article of this Presidential Decree.’
      
Under Article of the same Decree:
‘Appended to this Decree are three annexes (A, B and C) which constitute an integral part hereof and provide: Annex A – Model
         for listing particulars for the admission of shares to listing on the Athens Stock Exchange – Chapter 1. Information concerning
         those responsible for listing particulars and the auditing of accounts. 1.1. Name and function of natural persons and name
         and registered office of legal persons responsible for the listing particulars or, as the case may be, for certain parts of
         them, with, in the latter case, an indication of those parts …’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
During the period from February to March 2001, Dionik AE, the shares of which were listed on the parallel market
         of the Athens Stock Exchange, increased its share capital. To that end, on December 2000, Dionik AE submitted to the Board
         of Administration of the Athens Stock Exchange an application for approval of that increase in its share capital and of the
         listing particulars established for that purpose.
      
Those listing particulars included information regarding the recent development and prospects of Dionik AE for the then current
         financial year January to December and assessments concerning the development of the sales and profits and losses
         of the company during that financial year.
      
Chapter of those listing particulars, relating to information regarding their compilation and the auditors of the company’s
         accounts, identified the chairman of the board of directors and the managing director of Dionik AE as those responsible for
         the compilation and accuracy of the information contained therein.
      
The Board of Administration of the Athens Stock Exchange, by decision of February 2001, approved the increase in Dionik
         AE’s capital and the listing particulars established for that purpose.
      
Before those listing particulars were approved, Dionik AE had drawn up summary annual financial statements for the financial
         year January to December 2000, which were published in the press on February 2001.
      
On subsequently reviewing the forecasts set out in the listing particulars, the Supervision and Audit Directorate of the CMC
         found that the estimated figures on the profit‑and‑loss position for the financial year which were included in those
         listing particulars differed significantly from the profits and losses for that financial year as they appeared in the summary
         annual financial statements published on February 2001.
      
After obtaining certain explanations from Dionik AE, the CMC, considering it likely that that company had infringed the provisions
         of Law No 1969/and Article of Presidential Decree No 348/1985, called on it to submit observations. That request was
         also made to Mr Pikoulas, a member of the board of directors of Dionik AE, who was not, however, identified in the listing
         particulars at issue as responsible for the accuracy of the information contained therein.
      
By decisions of June 2002, the CMC imposed on Dionik AE a total fine of EUR for infringement of Article of Presidential
         Decree No 348/and of Article 72(2) of Law No 1969/1991, and on each member of the board of directors a fine of EUR for infringement of Article 72(2) of Law No 1969/1991.
      
In those decisions, the CMC held that the listing particulars at issue contained inaccurate and misleading information on
         the profits and losses for the financial year 2000, in particular as to pre‑tax profits, in respect of which it found that
         there was a difference of over 40%.
      
The CMC also found that, on publication of those listing particulars, Dionik AE and the members of its board of directors
         already knew that the estimated profits and losses for the financial year contained in the listing particulars differed
         significantly from those actually achieved.
      
The CMC also stated that the measures taken by Dionik AE, namely publishing the summary annual financial statements in February
         and giving information to potential investors, through the Panellinios Sillogos Ependiton Krimatistiriou Athinon (Panhellenic
         Association of Athens Stock Exchange Investors), and to its shareholders, were not in compliance with Article of Presidential
         Decree No 348/1985, which requires publication of a supplement to the listing particulars should a significant new event capable
         of affecting the assessment of securities occur.
      
Dionik AE and Mr Pikoulas brought actions before the Simvoulio tis Epikratias seeking annulment of the CMC’s decisions of
         June 2002.
      
Against that background, the Simvoulio tis Epikratias decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘In the light of Article of Directive 2001/…, can a national legislature lay down, for cases where the information recorded
         in listing particulars proves to be inaccurate or misleading, administrative penalties imposable not only upon the persons
         expressly mentioned in those particulars as responsible but also upon the issuer of the securities being admitted to listing
         on a stock exchange and, indiscriminately, upon the members of its board of directors, regardless of whether the board members
         have been identified as responsible in the abovementioned sense?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
 Admissibility
The Italian Government claims that the increase in Dionik AE’s capital was not subject to the preparation and presentation
         of listing particulars, and that, consequently, the facts of the main proceedings do not fall within the scope of Directive
         2001/34. 
      
Since the question whether the rules allegedly infringed are exclusively national or rather of Community origin is thus not
         clearly determined, the Italian Government considers that the question referred for a preliminary ruling is hypothetical and
         must therefore be dismissed as inadmissible.
      
According to Article of Directive 2001/34, Member States may allow the competent authorities responsible for checking listing
         particulars within the meaning of that directive to provide for partial or complete exemption from the obligation to publish
         listing particulars in certain specific cases. These include the situation covered by Article 23(1)(a), referred to at the
         hearing by the Commission. However, Article leaves the Member States discretion as to the application of such an exemption.
      
In that context, Article of Directive 2001/provides, however, that, where newly issued shares of the same class are
         not automatically admitted to listing, the issuer is to be required to apply for their admission to listing.
      
In the present case, it is, however, not clear from the circumstances of the main proceedings as set out by the national court
         that Dionik AE came within one of the exemptions from the requirement to publish listing particulars, provided for by Article
         of Directive 2001/34.
      
Moreover, Dionik AE confirmed at the hearing that the shares issued in connection with the increase in capital were not automatically
         admitted to listing within the meaning of Article of Directive 2001/34, that the purchase of those shares was open to the
         public, subject to the pre‑emption rights enjoyed by existing shareholders, and that heading 1.of Schedule A to that directive
         was therefore applicable.
      
Accordingly, the plea of inadmissibility raised by the Italian Government must be rejected.
 Substance
As a preliminary point it should be noted that it is clear from recitals (5), (11) and (31) in the preamble to Directive 2001/that the purpose of that directive is, inter alia, to ensure adequate information of investors in the field of transferable
         securities in order to improve investor protection, to increase investors’ confidence in securities markets and thus to ensure
         that those markets function correctly, without, however, national rules and regulations necessarily being the subject of complete
         harmonisation.
      
Therefore, as the Advocate General pointed out in point of her Opinion, Directive 2001/does not aim to achieve a high
         level of harmonisation of the national rules and regulations in the sector concerned.
      
Accordingly, the Member States are free to set additional or stricter conditions for admitting securities to listing, provided
         that the resulting system is consistent with the objectives of Directive 2001/34.
      
It follows that the national legislature may lay down rules imposing liability on the persons expressly mentioned in the listing
         particulars published for the purpose of admission to listing as well as other categories of person, even where the latter
         persons are not expressly mentioned in those listing particulars, provided that such rules are consistent with the objectives
         of Directive 2001/34. 
      
In that context, it is necessary to point out that Article 21(1) of the Directive provides that listing particulars are to
         contain the information which is necessary to enable investors to make an informed assessment of the assets and liabilities,
         financial position, profits and losses, and prospects of the issuer and of the rights attaching to the securities for the
         admission of which application is being made.
      
Article 21(2) of Directive 2001/states that Member States must ensure that that obligation is incumbent upon the persons
         as provided for in heading 1.of Schedules A and B of Annex I to that directive. Those schedules refer only to the natural
         or legal persons responsible for the listing particulars or for a part thereof.
      
In view of the objective of Directive 2001/34, which is to ensure, inter alia, adequate information of investors, the identification
         of persons responsible for the information in the listing particulars which is necessary to investors, as provided for by
         Article in conjunction with Schedules A and B of Annex to that directive, could not be regarded as exhaustive, in that
         responsibility for the accuracy of the information contained in those listing particulars could not be incumbent only upon
         the natural or legal persons mentioned therein, regardless of the true economic and organisational circumstances of the share
         issue.
      
It is conceivable that the listing particulars published with a view to admitting securities to official stock exchange listing
         will not mention the identity of certain persons, whether natural or legal, who are responsible for the management of the
         issuer or capable of producing and assessing information on the assets and liabilities, financial position, profits and losses,
         and prospects of that issuer and of determining the rights attaching to the securities. Accordingly, the competent national
         authorities cannot be prevented from providing for the liability of such persons in respect of inaccurate or misleading information
         contained in the listing particulars.
      
It must be added that Directive 2001/does not expressly provide for a system of penalties applicable to the persons on
         whom responsibility for the listing particulars is incumbent. The obligation of the Member States to provide for administrative
         penalties against issuers and other persons responsible for listing particulars was laid down only by Article of Directive
         2003/71, which postdates the events in the main proceedings and, consequently, does not apply to them.
      
In those circumstances, it is necessary to point out that, in the absence of harmonisation of the Community legislation in
         the field of penalties applicable where conditions laid down by arrangements under such legislation are not observed, the
         Member States are empowered to choose the penalties which seem appropriate to them. They must, however, exercise that power
         in accordance with Community law and its general principles, and consequently with the principle of proportionality (see,
         to that effect, Case 68/Commission v Greece [1989] ECR 2965, paragraph 23, Case C-210/Commission v Greece [1992] ECR I‑6735, paragraph 19, and Case C-36/Siesse [1995] ECR I-3573, paragraph 21).
      
In particular, the administrative or punitive measures must not go beyond what is necessary for the objectives pursued and
         a penalty must not be so disproportionate to the gravity of the infringement that it becomes an obstacle to the freedoms enshrined
         in the EC Treaty (see Case C-210/Commission v Greece, paragraph 20). It is, however, for the national court to determine, in the light of the foregoing considerations, whether
         the penalties provided for by the applicable national legislation are proportionate.
      
As to the obligation to give investors genuine and sufficient information, laid down by Directive 2001/34, the fact remains
         that a system of civil, criminal or administrative penalties established at national level in respect of the persons expressly
         mentioned in the listing particulars, the issuer and the members of its board of directors, regardless of whether the board
         members have been identified as responsible in those listing particulars, does not run counter to the objective of that directive
         where the system is proportionate to the gravity of the infringement which is to give inaccurate or misleading information
         in the listing particulars.
      
Having regard to all of the foregoing, the answer to the question referred for a preliminary ruling must be that Article of Directive 2001/is to be interpreted as meaning that it does not preclude a national legislature from laying down, for
         cases where the information recorded in listing particulars published with a view to admitting securities to official stock
         exchange listing proves to be inaccurate or misleading, administrative penalties imposable not only upon the persons expressly
         mentioned in those particulars as responsible for them but also upon the issuer of the securities and, indiscriminately, upon
         the members of the issuer’s board of directors, regardless of whether the board members have been identified as responsible
         in the listing particulars.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
Article of Directive 2001/34/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of May on the admission of securities
            to official stock exchange listing and on information to be published on those securities is to be interpreted as meaning
            that it does not preclude a national legislature from laying down, for cases where the information recorded in listing particulars
            published with a view to admitting securities to official stock exchange listing proves to be inaccurate or misleading, administrative
            penalties imposable not only upon the persons expressly mentioned in those particulars as responsible but also upon the issuer
            of the securities and, indiscriminately, upon the members of the issuer’s board of directors, regardless of whether the board
            members have been identified as responsible in the listing particulars.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Greek.
      
Top  
 