
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber) 
December Case C-443/P
Isabel Clara Centeno Mediavilla and Others
v
Commission of the European Communities 
(Appeal – Staff Regulations of officials – Plea of illegality of Article 12(3) of Annex XIII on the classification of officials recruited after May – Consulting of the Staff Regulations Committee – No infringement of acquired rights or of the principle of equal treatment)
Appeal: brought against the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities in Case T‑58/Centeno Mediavilla and Others v Commission [2007] ECR II-2523, seeking to have that judgment set aside
      
Held: The appeal is dismissed.
      
Summary
1.        Officials – Staff Regulations – Regulation amending the Staff Regulations – Procedure for adoption – Consultation of the Staff
            Regulations Committee
(Art. EC; Staff Regulations of Officials, Art. 10, second para; Annex XIII, Art. 12(3))
2.        Officials – Recruitment – Appointment in grade – Introduction of a new career structure by Regulation No 723/– Transitional
            provisions for classification in grade
(Staff Regulations of Officials, Arts and 31; Annex XIII, Art. 12(3); Council Regulation No 723/2004)
3.        Officials – Recruitment – Appointment in grade – Introduction of a new career structure by Regulation No 723/– Transitional
            provisions for classification in grade
(Staff Regulations of Officials, Annex XIII, Art. 12(3); Council Regulation No 723/2004)
4.        Officials – Recruitment – Appointment in grade – Introduction of a new career structure by Regulation No 723/– Transitional
            provisions for classification in grade
(Staff Regulations of Officials, Annex XIII, Art. 12(3); Council Regulation No 723/2004)
1.        The terms of Article of the Staff Regulations, which provides for the setting up of a Staff Committee which must be consulted
         on all proposals to revise the Staff Regulations and may put forward suggestions in connection with such revision, are manifestly
         irreconcilable with a restrictive interpretation. The Commission is obliged to consult that Committee afresh before the legislative
         provisions in question are adopted by the Council, when amendments to a proposal concerning the Staff Regulations substantially
         affect the general tenor of the proposal, such obligation being excluded in the case of specific amendments of limited effect.
         Whether or not an amendment is substantial must be determined from the point of view of its subject-matter and the place occupied
         by the amended provisions in the enacting terms overall, and not from the point of view of the individual consequences that
         it might have for the officials concerned.
      
In this regard, substitution of the grade A*for the grade A*7, arising from the reform of career brackets introduced by
         the Community legislature on May 2004, initially envisaged in Article 12(3) of Annex XIII to the Staff Regulations, is not
         substantial, for it constitutes an additional element of the reform, which fits into the broad logic and overall perspective
         of a progressive restructuring of careers. That amendment not departing substantially from the text put before that committee,
         which was therefore able to express an opinion as to whether it might be possible to envisage a difference in recruitment
         grades between officials, successful in competitions held before the reform entered into force, who were recruited before
         that date, and those recruited after that date, it did not call for fresh consultation of the committee.
      
2.        Candidates successful in competitions and included in lists of suitable candidates have, as such, no acquired right to be
         appointed, but are merely eligible to be so, and their classification in grade is dependent on their appointment, which is
         a matter falling within the power of the appointing authority. It follows that candidates successful in competitions and included
         in lists of suitable candidates before May 2004, the date of entry into force of Regulation No 723/amending the Staff
         Regulations and the Conditions of employment of other servants, but appointed as probationary officials after that date, cannot
         assert any acquired right to claim, instead of the application of the new classification criteria laid down by the regulation,
         observance of the classification in grade stated in the notices of competition, in so far as the situation creating their
         right to observance of certain recruitment conditions had not come to an end before that regulation entered into force. Those
         considerations hold good also for those recruited as probationary officials before May and appointed as officials after
         that date. 
      
Although candidates successful in a competition derive, in principle, the right from Article 31(1) of the Staff Regulations
         to be given the grade of the function group stated in the notice of competition if they are appointed, that provision can
         apply only where the law is unchanging, because it cannot compel the appointing authority to take a decision incompatible
         with the Staff Regulations as amended by the Community legislature and therefore unlawful. Article 12(3) of Annex XIII to
         the Staff Regulations, as a transitional provision of a special kind, may introduce a derogation from the general rule provided
         for by Article of the Staff Regulations applicable to a given category of officials.
      
3.        The legislature, in adopting Article 12(3) of Annex XIII to the Staff Regulations, which gives rise to a difference in the
         treatment of officials successful in the same competition, recruited respectively before and after May 2004, the date of
         entry into force of the reform introduced by Regulation No 723/amending the Staff Regulations and the Conditions of employment
         of other servants, has not infringed that principle, for the differentiated treatment affects officials who do not form part
         of a single category. In fact, officials recruited after May are not in the same legal situation as officials recruited
         before that date for, at the moment when the reform entered into force, they, unlike officials already recruited, were merely
         eligible to be appointed. Such a difference in treatment is, moreover, based on an objective factor independent of the will
         of the Community legislature, namely, the date of recruitment decided by the appointing authority. Furthermore, in balancing
         the interests of the different categories of officials in the gradual introduction of the new rules of the Staff Regulations,
         the Community legislature was able legitimately to decide that recruitment of officials successful in competitions that took
         place before May but who were recruited after that date would take place according to the terms of the new rules, affording
         them more advantageous treatment than that applied to officials successful in competitions held after May and recruited
         later. 
      
The classification criteria set out in Article 12(3) of Annex XIII to the Staff Regulations do not entail any discrimination
         on grounds of age either, for they are manifestly unconnected to any taking into account of the age of the successful candidates
         in the competitions concerned and, furthermore, having regard to Category A, they distinguish the basic Grade A*(formerly
         Grade A8) from the higher Grade A*(formerly Grade A7/A6). 
      
4.        Candidates successful in competitions and included in lists of suitable candidates before May 2004, the date of entry into
         force of Regulation No 723/amending the Staff Regulations and the Conditions of employment of other servants, but appointed
         as probationary officials after that date, may not rely on indications given by the administration before their appointment
         concerning their classification in accordance with the criteria set out in the notices of competition, accompanied by warnings
         that recruitment might be proposed on the basis of the new provisions of the Staff Regulations, in order to challenge the
         lawfulness of those provisions, on which the appointment decisions were ultimately based. Even if it should be considered
         that those statements made by the administration amounted to specific assurances such as to engender legitimate expectations
         in the addressees, the individuals concerned cannot rely on the principle of protection of legitimate expectations in order
         to oppose the application of a new legislative provision, especially in a sphere in which the legislature enjoys a considerable
         degree of latitude. Acts of the administration cannot restrict the legislature’s freedom of action, or yet constitute a criterion
         of lawfulness which the legislature must satisfy.
      
Top  
 