
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-161/Commission of the European CommunitiesvHellenic Republic
«(Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations – Non-transposition of Directive 91/271/EEC – Urban waste water treatment)»
Opinion of Advocate General Fennelly delivered on February Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber), March Summary of the Judgment
Member States – Obligations – Implementation of directives – Failure to fulfil obligations not disputed(EC Treaty, Art. 169)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)March (1)
((Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations – Non-transposition of Directive 91/271/EEC – Urban waste water treatment))
In Case C-161/95, 
 Commission of the European Communities,  represented by Maria Kontou-Durande, of its Legal Service, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at
            the office of Carlos Gómez de la Cruz, also of its Legal Service, Wagner Centre, Kirchberg,
            
applicant, 
v
 Hellenic Republic,  represented by Ioanna Galani-Maragkoudaki, Assistant Legal Adviser in the Special Department for Community Legal Affairs
            in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and Evi Skandalou, Legal Assistant in the same Department, acting as Agents, with an address
            for service in Luxembourg at the Greek Embassy, Val Sainte-Croix,
            
defendant, 
APPLICATION for a declaration that, by not adopting or by not communicating to the Commission within the prescribed period
            the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Council Directive 91/271/EEC of May concerning
            urban waste water treatment (OJ L 135, p. 40), the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EC
            Treaty and that directive,
            
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),,
composed of: D.A.O. Edward, President of the Chamber, J.-P. Puissochet, C. Gulmann, P. Jann and L. Sevón (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
Advocate General: N. Fennelly, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on February 1996, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on May 1995, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action under
         Article of the EC Treaty for a declaration that, by not adopting or by not communicating to the Commission within the
         prescribed period the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Council Directive 91/271/EEC
         of May concerning urban waste water treatment (OJ L 135, p. 40), the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its
         obligations under the EC Treaty and that directive. 
         
            
Article 19(1) of Directive 91/provides that the Member States are to bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions necessary to comply with that directive not later than June and immediately to inform the Commission thereof.
          Article 19(3) requires the Member States also to communicate to the Commission the texts of the main provisions adopted.
         
         
            
Since the Commission received no notification of implementing measures adopted by the Hellenic Republic and possessed no other
         information to support a conclusion that that Member State had fulfilled its obligations in that respect, it gave the Greek
         Government formal notice, by letter of August 1993, to submit its observations within two months, in accordance with the
         first paragraph of Article of the Treaty. 
         
            
Since it received no reply to its letter, the Commission sent a reasoned opinion to the Hellenic Republic on May calling
         upon it to adopt within two months the measures required to comply with that opinion.  In the absence of any response from
         the Greek authorities to the reasoned opinion, and forming the view that the Greek Government had failed to adopt within the
         period prescribed the measures necessary to comply with its obligations, the Commission brought the present proceedings. 
         
            
Referring to Article of Directive 91/and also to the first paragraph of Article and the third paragraph of Article
         of the Treaty, the Commission maintains in its application that the Hellenic Republic was under a duty to adopt the necessary
         measures to comply with the directive within the prescribed period and that, by failing to do so, it had failed to fulfil
         its obligations. 
         
            
Although the Hellenic Republic contends that the application should be dismissed, it does not deny that the directive has
         not been transposed into national law within the prescribed period.  It merely points out that a draft ministerial order,
         which  
          inter alia  transposes Directive 91/into Greek legislation, will shortly be signed by the ministers jointly responsible.  The reason
         for the delay, according to the Hellenic Republic, is the fact that transposition of the directive into Greek legislation
         is part of the comprehensive review of the existing laws governing the treatment of waste. 
         
            
Since the directive has not been transposed within the prescribed period, the action brought by the Commission in relation
         to that failure must be regarded as well founded. 
         
            
Consequently, it must be held that, by not adopting within the period prescribed the laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions necessary to comply with Directive 91/271, the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article
         of that directive. 
         
Costs
            
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party's pleadings.  The Commission has claimed that the Hellenic Republic should be ordered
         to pay the costs.  Since the Hellenic Republic has been unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
hereby:  
         
1.
 Declares that, by not adopting within the period prescribed the laws, regulations and administrative measures necessary to
            comply with Council Directive 91/271/EEC of May concerning urban waste water treatment, the Hellenic Republic has
            failed to fulfil its obligations under Article of that directive; 
            
2.
 Orders the Hellenic Republic to pay the costs. 
            
Edward 
Puissochet 
Gulmann 
Jann
Sevón 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on March 1996. 
         
R. Grass 
D.A.O. Edward  
Registrar
President of the Fifth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: Greek.
Top  
 