
Case C-355/J.A. van der Steen
v
Inspecteur van de Belastingdienst Utrecht-Gooi/kantoor Utrecht.
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Gerechtshof te Amsterdam)
(Sixth VAT Directive – Independent economic activity – Private limited company – Company’s activities carried out by a natural person as sole director, sole shareholder and sole member of staff)
Opinion of Advocate General Sharpston delivered on June Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), October Summary of the Judgment
Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax – Economic activities within the
            meaning of Article of the Sixth Directive 
(Council Directive 77/388, Art. 4(1) and (4))
For the purposes of applying the second paragraph of Article 4(4) of Sixth Council Directive 77/on the harmonisation of
         the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes, a natural person carrying out all work in the name and on behalf
         of a company that is a taxable person pursuant to a contract of employment binding him to that company of which he is also
         the sole shareholder, the sole manager and the sole member of staff, is not himself a taxable person within the meaning of
         Article 4(1) of the Sixth Directive. 
      
In such a situation, the natural person cannot be regarded as independently carrying out an economic activity within the meaning
         of that latter provision where there is a relationship of employer and employee, for the purposes of the first subparagraph
         of Article 4(4) of the Sixth Directive, between that person and the company as regards working conditions, remuneration and
         the employer’s liability.
      
(see paras 18-19, 21, 32, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Sixth VAT Directive – Independent economic activity – Private limited company – Company’s activities carried out by a natural person as sole director, sole shareholder and sole member of staff)
In Case C‑355/06,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, by the Gerechtshof te Amsterdam (Netherlands), made by decision of
         August 2006, received at the Court on August 2006, in the proceedings
      
J.A. van der Steen
v
Inspector van de Belastingdienst Utrecht-Gooi/kantoor Utrecht
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, L. Bay Larsen, K. Schiemann, P. Kūris (Rapporteur) and C. Toader,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster, acting as Agent,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by D. Triantafyllou and A. Weimar, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on June gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 4(1) of the Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC
         of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes – Common system of value added
         tax: uniform basis of assessment (OJ L 145, p. 1, the ‘Sixth Directive’).
      
The reference was made in proceedings between Mr van der Steen and the inspector van Belastingdienst Utrecht-Gooi/kantoor
         Utrecht (‘the inspector’) concerning the dismissal of an objection directed against a decision by the inspector to consider
         a company and the appellant himself – the only manager, shareholder and employee of that company – as a single fiscal entity
         for the levying of value-added tax (‘VAT’).
      
 Legal context
 Community rules
Article 2(1) of the Sixth Directive makes the supply of goods or services effected for consideration within the territory
         of the country by a taxable person acting as such subject to VAT.
      
According to Article of the Sixth Directive:
‘1.      “Taxable person” shall mean any person who independently carries out in any place any economic activity specified in paragraph
         2, whatever the purpose or results of that activity.
      
2.      The economic activities referred to in paragraph shall comprise all activities of producers, traders and persons supplying
         services including mining and agricultural activities and activities of the professions. The exploitation of tangible or intangible
         property for the purpose of obtaining income therefrom on a continuing basis shall also be considered an economic activity.
      
…
4.      The use of the word “independently” in paragraph shall exclude employed and other persons from the tax in so far as they
         are bound to an employer by a contract of employment or by any other legal ties creating the relationship of employer and
         employee as regards working conditions, remuneration and the employer's liability. 
      
Subject to the consultations provided for in Article 29, each Member State may treat as a single taxable person persons established
         in the territory of the country who, while legally independent, are closely bound to one another by financial, economic and
         organisational links.
      
…’.
 National rules
Article 7(1) of the Wet op de omzetbelasting of June (Staatsblad 1968, No 329, the ‘Turnover Tax Law’) provides:
      
‘A trader is any person who carries on a business independently’.
Under Article 7(2) of the Turnover Tax Law, a ‘business’ includes both the exercise of a trade or profession and the exploitation
         of property for the purpose of obtaining income on a continuing basis.
      
Under Article 7(4) of the Turnover Tax Law:
‘Natural persons and bodies within the meaning of the General Law on national taxation who are traders within the meaning
         of this Article, who are resident, established or have a fixed establishment in the Netherlands, if they are financially,
         economically and organisationally linked in such a way that they form an entity, are – upon application by one or several
         of them or in the absence of such an application, in the form of a decision by the inspector that is subject to appeal – to
         be treated as a single trader from the first day of the month following that during which the inspector adopted the decision.
         Rules for setting up, altering and terminating the fiscal entity may be laid down by ministerial order.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
Until March 1998, Mr van der Steen ran a one-man business providing cleaning services, in which capacity he was a trader
         within the meaning of the Turnover Tax Law.
      
From March 1998, the appellant became the director and sole shareholder of the private limited company established on July 1991, J.A. van der Steen Schoonmaakdiensten BV (‘the company’), which took over and continued the business previously
         carried on by the one-man business. The company was as such an undertaking within the meaning of the Turnover Tax Law.
      
Mr van der Steen had concluded a contract of employment with the company under which he received a fixed monthly salary and
         an annual holiday payment of 8% of his yearly salary. The company deducted income tax and compulsory social insurance premiums
         from his salary. The company did not employ anyone apart from him.
      
When the company became insolvent, bankruptcy proceedings were commenced during December and the company was declared
         bankrupt on January 2005.
      
It is apparent from the letter of December that Mr van der Steen asked the inspector for a separate VAT number from
         that of his company so that he and his company would not form a fiscal entity within the meaning of the Turnover Tax Law.
         
      
By decision of April 2004, the inspector decided that, with effect from May 2004, Mr van der Steen and the company would
         constitute a fiscal entity within the meaning of Article 7(4) of the Turnover Tax Law. In support of his decision, he referred
         to judgment No of the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden of April 2002. Ruling on an objection, the inspector confirmed his
         position on August 2004, citing a decision of the Staatssecretaris van Financiën (State Secretary for Finance) of July
         2002, based on that judgment.
      
Mr van der Steen brought an action against the inspector’s decisions before the Gerechtshof te Amsterdam, which points out
         that it is a prerequisite for those decisions that the appellant should qualify as a trader for the purposes of the Turnover
         Tax Law, but is uncertain whether such an assessment is compatible with Community law.
      
In the view of the Gerechtshof te Amsterdam it cannot be said that Mr van der Steen stands in the position of employee vis
         à vis the company. None the less, it asks whether, in applying the provisions of Article 7(4) of the Turnover Tax Law – which
         transpose the provisions of the second paragraph of Article 4(4) of the Sixth Directive into national law –, the appellant
         can be regarded as carrying out his work independently without however being regarded as independently carrying out economic
         activity within the meaning of Article 4(1) of the Sixth Directive.
      
In those circumstances, the Gerechtshof te Amsterdam decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following question to the
         Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Is Article 4(1) of the Sixth Directive to be interpreted as meaning that if a natural person has the sole activity of actually
         carrying out all work ensuing from the activities of a private limited company of which he is the sole manager, sole shareholder
         and sole “member of staff”, that work is not an economic activity because it is carried out in the course of the management
         and representation of the private limited company and thus not in economic dealings?’’
      
 The question
By its question, the Gerechtshof te Amsterdam essentially asks whether, for the purposes of the second paragraph of Article
         4(4) of the Sixth Directive, a natural person carrying out all work in the name and on behalf of a company that is a taxable
         person pursuant to a contract of employment binding him to that company of which he is also the sole shareholder, the sole
         manager and the sole member of staff, is himself a taxable person within the meaning of Article 4(1) of the Sixth Directive.
      
It must be recalled from the outset that under Article 4(1) of the Sixth Directive, a taxable person is any person who independently
         carries out any economic activity specified in paragraph of the same Article.
      
The first paragraph of Article 4(4) of the Sixth Directive states that the word ‘independently’ excludes employed and other
         persons from the tax in so far as they are bound to an employer by a contract of employment or by any other legal ties creating
         the relationship of employer and employee as regards working conditions, remuneration and the employer's liability.
      
The second paragraph of Article 4(4) states that Member States, subject to the consultations provided for in Article of
         the Sixth Directive, may treat as a single taxable person persons established in the territory of the country who, while legally
         independent, are closely bound to one another by financial, economic and organisational links.
      
In that regard, it must be found that, in a situation of the kind before the national court, the two persons concerned have
         a relationship of employer and employee.
      
First, while the company’s cleaning services were carried out exclusively by Mr van der Steen, contracts for the provision
         of cleaning services were entered into by the company, which paid the appellant a fixed monthly salary and annual holiday
         payment. The company deducted income tax and social security contributions from his salary. Therefore, Mr van der Steen depended
         on the company to determine his remuneration.
      
Secondly, Mr van der Steen, at the time of providing services in his capacity as employee, did not act in his own name, on
         his behalf and under his own responsibility, but on behalf and under the responsibility of the company.
      
Thirdly, the Court of Justice has held that with regard to remuneration, there is no relationship of employer and employee
         where the persons concerned bear the economic risk entailed in their activity (see Case C‑202/Ayuntamiento de Sevilla [1991] ECR I‑4247, paragraph 13).
      
In this connection, the Gerechtshof te Amsterdam makes clear that Mr van der Steen did not bear any economic business risk
         in acting as manager and performing the work in the course of the company’s dealings with third parties. 
      
It follows that an employee in the position of the appellant in the main proceedings could not be considered to be a taxable
         person within the meaning of Article 4(1) of the Sixth Directive.
      
The judgments in Case C‑107/Asscher [1996] ECR I‑and Case C‑23/Heerma [2000] ECR I‑cannot lead to a different interpretation of that provision.
      
In Heerma, having found that the letting of property by a person to the partnership of which he is a member and for which he receives
         rent constitutes a supply for consideration within the meaning of Article of the Sixth Directive, the Court held, in paragraph
         17, that a partner who lets immovable property to the partnership of which he is a member and which is itself a taxable person
         acts independently within the meaning of Article 4(1) of the Sixth Directive.
      
Similarly, in paragraph of that judgment, the Court explained that, in so far as the activity at issue is concerned, there
         is between the partnership and the partner no relationship of employer and employee similar to that mentioned in the first
         subparagraph of Article 4(4) of the Sixth Directive. On the contrary, in letting tangible property to the partnership, the
         partner acts in his own name, on his own behalf and under his own responsibility, even if he is at the same time manager of
         the lessee partnership. 
      
In the case at issue in the main proceedings, the parties agree that even though Mr Van der Steen was the only director and
         the sole shareholder of the company, he performed his work under a contract of employment. It follows that Mr van der Steen’s
         situation is not the same as that described in Heerma and that – as stated by the Advocate General in point of her Opinion – in so far as the work the appellant provided to
         the company fell within the scope of that contract of employment, it is in principle excluded from the scope of VAT by the
         clear terms of Article 4(4) of the Sixth Directive.
      
Moreover, the reasoning adopted by the Court – which held, in paragraph of Asscher, that a director of a company of which he is the sole shareholder does not carry out his activity in the context of a relationship
         of subordination, and so is to be treated not as a ‘worker’ within the meaning of Article of the EC Treaty (now, after
         amendment, Article EC) but as pursuing an activity as a self-employed person within the meaning of Article of the EC
         Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) – cannot be applied to the case at issue in the main proceedings, which is unrelated
         to the freedom of movement for persons and only concerns VAT and the definition of ‘taxable person’ in respect of VAT.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the question must be that for the purposes of the application of the second paragraph
         of Article 4(4) of the Sixth Directive, a natural person carrying out all work in the name and on behalf of a company that
         is a taxable person pursuant to a contract of employment binding him to that company of which he is also the sole shareholder,
         the sole manager and the sole member of staff, is not himself a taxable person within the meaning of Article 4(1) of that
         Directive. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
For the purposes of the application of the second paragraph of Article 4(4) of the Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax:
            uniform basis of assessment, a natural person carrying out all work in the name and on behalf of a company that is a taxable
            person pursuant to a contract of employment binding him to that company of which he is also the sole shareholder, the sole
            manager and the sole member of staff, is not himself a taxable person within the meaning of Article 4(1) of that Directive.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 