
Avis juridique important
|
61987JJudgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber) of September 1988.  -  Hauptzollamt Hamburg-St. Annen v Wilhelm Kiwall KG.  -  Reference for a preliminary ruling: Bundesfinanzhof - Germany.  -  Customs duty - Double taxation - Smuggling - Transit procedure.  -  Case 252/87.  
European Court reports Page Summary
Parties
Grounds
Decision on costs
Operative part
Keywords
++++Free movement of goods - Community transit - Offences or irregularities - Use of internal Community transit procedure to bring into and release for free circulation in a Member State goods originating in a non-member country and smuggled into another Member State - Only one customs debt incurred, in the Member State of importation .  ( Council Regulation No 222/77, Art . ( ) )  
Summary
Article ( ) of Council Regulation No 222/of December on Community transit must be interpreted as precluding the incurring of a customs debt on the release for free circulation in a Member State of goods from a non-member country which were first smuggled into another Member State and then transported under the internal Community transit procedure into the Member State where they were released for free circulation, since the offences or irregularities committed in the other Member State have already given rise to a customs debt in that State . 
Parties
In Case 252/REFERENCE to the Court under Article of the EEC Treaty by the Bundesfinanzhof ( Federal Finance Court ) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending before that court between  Hauptzollamt ( Principal Customs Office ) Hamburg-St Annen  and  Wilhelm Kiwall KG, Hamburg,  on the interpretation of Community law relating to the incurring and collection of a customs debt,  THE COURT ( Sixth Chamber )  composed of : O . Due, President of Chamber, T . Koopmans, K . Bahlmann, C . N . Kakouris, and T . F . O' Higgins, Judges,  Advocate General : M . Darmon  Registrar : D . Louterman, Administrator  after considering the observations submitted on behalf of  Wilhelm Kiwall KG, the plaintiff in the main proceedings, by H . Colombus, tax adviser,  the Commission of the European Communities, by J . Sack, acting as Agent,  having regard to the Report for the Hearing and further to the hearing on May 1988,  after hearing the opinion of the Advocate General delivered at the sitting on July 1988,  gives the following  Judgment  
Grounds
By order of July 1987, which was received at the Court Registry on August 1987, the Bundesfinanzhof referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article of the EEC Treaty a question on the interpretation of Community law relating to the incurring and collection of a customs debt .  The question was raised in proceedings between Wilhelm Kiwall KG, Hamburg ( hereinafter referred to as "Kiwall "), and the Hauptzollamt Hamburg-St Annen ( hereinafter referred to as "the Hauptzollamt ") relating to the post-clearance collection of a customs debt which arose, under the German legislation in force at the material time, on the release for free circulation in the Federal Republic of Germany of goods from a non-member country not already in free circulation in the Community .  It appears from the documents before the Court that between January and May Kiwall purchased hosiery in Denmark which was released for free circulation in the Federal Republic of Germany upon presentation by Kiwall of a TCommunity transit form, in accordance with the internal Community transit procedure provided for in Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 222/of December on Community transit ( Official Journal 1977, L 38, p . ). The Hauptzollamt therefore required payment only of import turnover tax .  It was subsequently discovered that those goods from a non-member country had been smuggled into Denmark by the seller and that consequently the Tform had been improperly obtained from the Danish authorities . For that reason the Hauptzollamt, by decision of February 1981, required Kiwall to pay customs duties of DM 676..  That decision was annulled by the Finanzgericht ( Finance Court ) Hamburg, before which Kiwall had brought an appeal; the Hauptzollamt then appealed on a point of law to the Bundesfinanzhof, which stayed the proceedings and referred the following question to the Court for a preliminary ruling :  "As the harmonization of customs law stood in May 1980, was a German customs provision to the effect that a customs debt was incurred in respect of goods originating in a non-member country which were smuggled into another Member State and then brought unlawfully into the Federal Republic of Germany without completion of customs formalities under the internal Community transit procedure compatible with Community law?"  Reference is made to the Report for the Hearing for a fuller account of the facts of the case before the national court, the course of the procedure and the observations submitted to the Court, which are mentioned or discussed hereinafter only in so far as is necessary for the reasoning of the Court .  The purpose of the national court' s question is essentially to determine whether the Community customs provisions applicable in May precluded the incurring of a customs debt on the release for free circulation in a Member State of goods from a non-member country which were first smuggled into another Member State and then transported under the internal Community transit rules into the Member State where they were released for free circulation .  It should be borne in mind that Article ( ) of Regulation No 222/on Community transit provides :  "When it is found that, in the course of a Community transit operation, an offence or irregularity has been committed in a particular Member State, the recovery of duties or other charges which may be chargeable shall be effected by that Member State in accordance with its provisions laid down by law, regulation or administrative action, without prejudice to the institution of criminal proceedings ."  In its judgment of November in Case 99/Fioravanti v Amministrazione delle Finanze dello Stato (( )) ECR 3939, the Court, interpreting an identical provision in the previous regulation, Regulation No 542/of the Council of March on Community transit ( Official Journal, English Special Edition ( I ), p . ), held that where, by reason of an offence or irregularity committed in connection with a Community transit operation, the duties and other charges payable are not collected, recovery of those duties and charges is to be effected by the Member State in which the offence or irregularity was committed, in accordance with the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of that State .  In the present case it is apparent from the documents before the Court that both the smuggling of the goods into the Community and the improper obtaining of form Twere offences or irregularities committed in Denmark . Because of the close connection between those two offences or irregularities, they must both be regarded as having been committed in connection with a Community transit operation . Under the abovementioned provision, as interpreted in the judgment in Case 99/83, it is therefore the responsibility of the Danish authorities to effect recovery of the customs duties payable in respect of the importation of the goods into the Community . The acts committed in Denmark have thus already given rise to a customs debt .  Where an offence or irregularity committed in a Member State has given rise to a customs debt in that State, Article of Regulation No 222/leaves no room for the incurring of a customs debt in another Member State where the Tform is then used with a view to having the goods in question released for free circulation . That result is in accordance with the very concept of a customs union, which precludes the double taxation of goods in connection with their entry into the Community customs territory as defined by Regulation No 1496/of the Council of September ( Official Journal, English Special Edition ( II ), p . ). It must, however, also be stated that Article of Regulation No 222/expressly leaves intact any possibility under national law of instituting criminal proceedings against any person using a Tform improperly obtained in another Member State .  It must therefore be stated in reply to the question submitted by the national court that Article ( ) of Council Regulation No 222/of December on Community transit must be interpreted as precluding the incurring of a customs debt on the release for free circulation in a Member State of goods from a non-member country which were first smuggled into another Member State and then transported under the internal Community transit procedure into the Member State where they were released for free circulation, since the offences or irregularities committed in the other Member State have already given rise to a customs debt in that State .  
Decision on costs
Costs  The costs incurred by the Commission of the European Communities, which has submitted observations to the Court, are not recoverable . As these proceedings are, in so far as the parties to the main proceedings are concerned, in the nature of a step in the action before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court .  
Operative part
On those grounds,  THE COURT ( Sixth Chamber ),  in reply to the question submitted to it by the Bundesfinanzhof by order of July 1987, hereby rules :  Article ( ) of Council Regulation No 222/of December on Community transit must be interpreted as precluding the incurring of a customs debt on the release for free circulation in a Member State of goods from a non-member country which were first smuggled into another Member State and then transported under the internal Community transit procedure into the Member State where they were released for free circulation, since the offences or irregularities committed in the other Member State have already given rise to a customs debt in that State .  
Top  
 