
         				Ordonnance de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-488/P Jean-Claude MartinezvEuropean Parliament
«(Appeal – Statement of formation of a group under Rule 29(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament – Lack of political affinities – Retroactive dissolution of the TDI Group – Appeal manifestly inadmissible in part and manifestly unfounded in part)»
Order of the Court (Full Court), November Summary of the Order
1..
Appeals – Pleas in law – Mere repetition of the pleas in law and arguments submitted to the Court of First Instance – Failure to identify the error of law relied on – Inadmissibility  (Art. EC; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.; Rules of Procedure of the Court, Art. 112(1)(c)) 
2..
Parliament – Competences – Application and interpretation of the Rules of Procedure  (Rules of Procedure of the Parliament, Rule 180) 
3..
Appeals – Pleas in law – Incorrect assessment of the facts – Inadmissible – Review by the Court of Justice of the assessment of facts and evidence by the Court of First Instance – Excluded unless the sense of evidence has been distorted  (Art. EC; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.) 
4..
Appeals – Pleas in law – Plea put forward for the first time in the appeal – Inadmissible  (Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58) 
1.
 Provided that an appellant challenges the interpretation or application of Community law by the Court of First Instance, the
         points of law examined at first instance may be discussed again in the course of an appeal. Indeed, if an appellant could
         not thus base his appeal on pleas in law and arguments already relied on before the Court of First Instance, an appeal would
         be deprived of part of its purpose. However, it is clear from the first paragraph of Article EC, from the first paragraph
         of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice and from Article 112(1)(c) of its Rules of Procedure that an appeal must
         indicate precisely the contested elements of the judgment which the appellant seeks to have set aside, and also the legal
         arguments specifically advanced in support of the appeal. Consequently, where the appellant puts forwards a plea in law without
         indicating the reasons for which he considers that the Court of First Instance had erred in law by rejecting the arguments
         which he put forward at first instance, but merely reproduces those arguments, such a plea must be rejected as manifestly
         inadmissible. see paras 39-2.
 It is clear from a reading of Rule that the Parliament has competence to ensure, if need be by referring a matter to the
         Committee on Constitutional Affairs, that its Rules of Procedure are being correctly applied and interpreted. see paras 45-3.
 It is clear from Article EC and Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice that an appeal is limited to points
         of law. The Court of First Instance thus has exclusive jurisdiction to establish and assess the relevant facts and to assess
         the value which should be attached to the items of evidence produced to it, unless there has been distortion of such facts
         or evidence. see para. 4.
 To allow a party to put forward for the first time before the Court of Justice a plea in law which he has not raised before
         the Court of First Instance would mean allowing that party to bring before the Court, whose jurisdiction in appeals is limited,
         a wider case than that heard by the Court of First Instance. In an appeal, the Court's jurisdiction is confined to examining
         the assessment by the Court of First Instance of the pleas argued before it. see para. ORDER OF THE COURT (Full Court)November (1)
((Appeal – Statement of formation of a group under Rule 29(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament – Lack of political affinities – Retroactive dissolution of the TDI Group – Appeal manifestly inadmissible in part and manifestly unfounded in part))
In Case C-488/P, 
 Jean-Claude Martinez,   a member of the European Parliament, residing in Montpellier (France), represented by F. Wagner and V. de Poulpiquet de Brescanvel,
         avocats,
         
appellant, 
 APPEAL against the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities (Third Chamber, Extended Composition)
         in Joined Cases T-222/99, T-327/and T-329/Martinez and Others  v  
          Parliament  [2001] ECR II-2823, seeking to have that judgment set aside,
         
 the other parties to the proceedings being: 
          European Parliament,   represented by G. Garzón Clariana, J. Schoo and H. Krück, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,defendant at first instance,  Charles de Gaulle,   a member of the European Parliament, residing in Paris (France),applicant at first instance, 
         
THE COURT (Full Court)
 composed of: V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans (Rapporteur), C. Gulmann, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues and A. Rosas, Presidents of Chambers, D.A.O. Edward, A. La Pergola, J.-P. Puissochet, R. Schintgen, F. Macken, N. Colneric and S. von Bahr, Judges, 
         
 Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer, Registrar: R. Grass, 
         
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General, makes the following 
Order
            
 By application lodged at the Court Registry on December Mr Martinez brought an appeal under Article EC and Article
         of the EC Statute of the Court of Justice against the judgment of the Court of First Instance of October in Joined
         Cases T-222/99, T-327/and T-329/Martinez and Others  v  
          Parliament  [2001] ECR II-(
         the contested judgment) by which the Court of First Instance had dismissed the action brought by him for annulment of the European Parliament's
         decision of September on the interpretation of Rule 29(1) of the European Parliament's Rules of Procedure and dissolving
         with retroactive effect the  
         Groupe technique des députés indépendants (TDI) ─ Groupe mixte (
         the contested decision). 
         
            
 By a separate document lodged at the Court Registry on the same date, Mr Martinez also applied, under Article EC, for
         suspension of the effects of the contested judgment. However, that application was dismissed by order of the President of
         the Court of Justice of February in Joined Cases C-486/P-R and C-488/P-R  
          Front national and Martinez   v  
          Parliament  [2002] ECR I-1843, on the ground, in particular, that such a suspension would not be capable of preventing the serious and
         irreparable damage invoked by the applicant. 
         
Legal background
            
 The Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament, as in force at the material time (OJ L 202, p. 1, hereinafter  
         the Rules of Procedure), provided as follows in Rule 29, entitled  
         Formation of political groups: 1. Members may form themselves into groups according to their political affinities.2. A political group must comprise Members from more than one Member State. The minimum number of Members required to form
         a political group shall be twenty-three if they come from two Member States, eighteen if they come from three Member States
         and fourteen if they come from four or more Member States.3. A Member may not belong to more than one group.4. The President shall be notified in a statement when a political group is set up. This statement shall specify the name
         of the group, its members and its bureau....
         
            
 Rule of the Rules of Procedure, relating to non-attached members, provided: 1. Members who do not belong to a political group shall be provided with a secretariat. The detailed arrangements shall be
         laid down by the Bureau on a proposal from the Secretary-General.2. The Bureau shall also determine the status and parliamentary rights of such Members.
         
            
 Rule 180, on the application of the Rules of Procedure, provides: 
         
1.
 Should doubt arise over the application or interpretation of these Rules of Procedure, the President may, without prejudice
         to any previous decisions in this field, refer the matter to the committee responsible for examination.
          Where a point of order is raised under Rule 142, the President may also refer the matter to the committee responsible.
         
2.
 The committee shall decide whether it is necessary to propose an amendment to the Rules of Procedure. In this case it shall
         proceed in accordance with Rule 181.
         
3.
 Should the committee decide that an interpretation of the existing Rules is sufficient, it shall forward its interpretation
         to the President who shall inform Parliament.
         
4.
 Should a political group or at least thirty-two Members contest the committee's interpretation, the matter shall be put to
         the vote in Parliament. Adoption of the text shall be by simple majority provided that at least one third of Parliament's
         component Members are present. In the event of rejection, the matter shall be referred back to the committee.
         
5.
 Uncontested interpretations and interpretations adopted by Parliament shall be appended in italic print as explanatory notes
         to the appropriate Rule or Rules, together with decisions on the application of the Rules of Procedure.
         
6.
 These explanatory notes shall constitute precedents for the future application and interpretation of the Rules concerned.
         ...
         Facts
            
 According to the contested judgment, following the notification of July to the President of the Parliament of the
         formation of a new political group entitled  
         Groupe technique des députés indépendants (TDI)─ Groupe Mixte (hereinafter  
         the TDI Group), the declared purpose of which was to ensure that all Members were able to exercise their parliamentary mandates in full,
         the Presidents of the other political groups raised objections concerning the formation of that group by reason of the lack
         of political affinities between the persons making it up. Consequently, the Parliament's Committee on Constitutional Affairs
         (hereinafter  
         the Committee on Constitutional Affairs) was called on, pursuant to Rule 180(1), to give an interpretation of Rule 29(1). 
         
            
 The President of that committee gave the requested interpretation to the President of the Parliament by letter of July
         1999. That letter stated in particular as follows: During its meeting on and July the Committee on Constitutional Affairs examined the request for an interpretation
         of Rule 29(1) of the Rules of Procedure referred to it by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of July 1999.Following a detailed exchange of views and by votes in favour and two against, with one abstention, the Committee on Constitutional
         Affairs interpreted Rule 29(1) of the Rules of Procedure as follows:The constitution of the [TDI Group] is not in conformity with Rule 29(1) of the Rules of Procedure.In fact, the constitution of this group, specifically Annex to the letter of constitution addressed to the President of
         the European Parliament, excludes any political affiliation. It permits the various signatory members total political [independence]
         within the group.I propose that the following wording be inserted by way of an interpretative note to Rule 29(1):The formation of a group which openly rejects any political character and all political affiliation between its Members is
         not acceptable within the meaning of this Rule....
         
            
 The content of that letter was communicated to the Parliament by its President at the plenary session of the Parliament on
         September 1999. The TDI Group had, under Rule 180(4) of the Rules of Procedure, contested the interpretative note proposed
         by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and at the plenary session of September that interpretative note was put
         to a vote of the Parliament. 
         
            
 Considering that in those circumstances the vote adversely affected them, by application lodged at the Registry of the Court
         of First Instance on October Mr Martinez and Mr De Gaulle brought an action for the annulment of the contested act.
         
         
            
 By a separate document, Mr Martinez and Mr de Gaulle also instituted proceedings under Article EC for suspension of the
         operation of the contested act. By order of November in Case T-222/R  
          Martinez and de Gaulle  v  
          Parliament  [1999] ECR II-3397, the President of the Court of First Instance granted that application, reserving the costs. 
         The contested judgment
            
 In the contested judgment the Court of First Instance declared the action brought by Mr Martinez and Mr de Gaulle admissible
         but dismissed it as unfounded. 
          Admissibility
         
            
 As regards, first, the admissibility of that action, the Court of First Instance rejected on the grounds set out below the
         objections of inadmissibility put forward by the Parliament to the effect that, first, the contested measure is not amenable
         to judicial review by the Community judicature and, second, that the said act was not of direct and individual concern to
         the applicants within the meaning of the fourth paragraph of Article EC. 
         
            
 As regards the objection of inadmissibility put forward by the Parliament to the effect that the contested act is not amenable
         to review, the Court of First Instance held, in paragraphs to of the contested judgment, that an act of that kind ─
         in so far as it affects the conditions under which the parliamentary functions of the Members concerned are exercised ─ cannot
         be deemed merely to be an act confined to the internal organisation of the work of the Parliament and must therefore be open
         to review by the Community judicature under the first paragraph of Article EC. 
         
            
 In response to the Parliament's objection raising doubts as to whether the conditions of admissibility laid down in the fourth
         paragraph of Article EC were fulfilled, the Court of First Instance held in paragraphs to of the contested judgment
         that the contested act was of direct and individual concern to the applicants. 
         
            
 As regards the first of those conditions, the Court of First Instance held more specifically, in paragraph of the contested
         judgment, as follows: As to whether the act of September is of direct concern to the applicants, the Court finds, in the light of the analysis
         at paragraphs and above, that, without the need for any supplementary measure, it prevents Messrs Martinez and De Gaulle
         ... from forming themselves by means of the TDI Group into a political group within the meaning of Rule 29, something which
         directly impinges on the performance by them of their functions. The abovementioned act must therefore be regarded as directly
         affecting those applicants.
         
            
 As regards the second of those conditions, the Court of First Instance stated in paragraph of the contested judgment that
         the contested act was of direct and individual concern to the applicants by reason of a factual situation which differentiated
         their situation from that of any other person. 
         
            
 Consequently, the Court of First Instance rejected the objection of inadmissibility raised by the Parliament and held, in
         paragraph of the contested judgment, that the action for annulment brought by Mr Martinez and Mr De Gaulle should be declared
         admissible. 
          Substance
         
            
 As regards, second, the substance of the action, the applicants' arguments were considered by the Court of First Instance
         to constitute six pleas in law.
         
            
 As regards the first plea, alleging that the contested act was based on a misreading of Rule 29(1) of the Rules of Procedure,
         the Court of First Instance held in paragraph of the contested judgment that  
         [s]uch a provision in a rule dealing with the  
         formation of political groups must necessarily be construed as meaning that Members who choose to form a group within the Parliament may do so only on
         the basis of political affinities. The applicants' argument as to the optional nature of the criterion of political affinities
         referred to in that provision is therefore negated by the very terms of Rule 29(1), in conjunction with the heading of that
         Rule.
         
            
 In paragraphs and of the contested judgment the Court of First Instance also stated that the attitude adopted by the
         Parliament in the past regarding statements of formation of political groups and the fact that the Parliament did not react
         to a lack of consistent conduct on the part of the members of the same political group in voting at plenary sessions cannot
         be viewed as evidencing the optional nature of the requirement as to political affinity laid down in Rule 29(1) of the Rules
         of Procedure. The Parliament's attitude regarding statements of formation of other political groups simply reflected  
         an assessment as to observance of the requirement of political affinities differing from that in the present case whereas the fact that members of one and the same political group may vote differently must be regarded  
         not as indicating a lack of political affinity amongst themselves but as illustrating the principle of a parliamentarian's
         independence as embodied in Article 4(1) of the Act concerning the election of the representatives of the Assembly by direct universal
         suffrage (OJ L 278, p. 5) and Rule of the Rules of Procedure. 
         
            
 As regards the second plea alleging breach of the principle of equal treatment and infringement of the Rules of Procedure,
         and also the lack of a legal basis for the contested act, in that the Parliament wrongly checked whether the TDI Group met
         the requirements of Rule 29(1) of the Rules of Procedure and considered that the members of that group did not share political
         affinities, the Court of First Instance observed first, in paragraph of the contested judgment, that, as was clear from
         Rule of the Rules of Procedure,  
         the Parliament has competence to ensure, if need be by referring a matter to the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, that
         its Rules of Procedure are being correctly applied and interpreted. In that respect it has competence specifically to monitor,
         as it did in the present case, compliance with the requirement of political affinity laid down in Rule 29(1) by a group declaring
         its formation to the President of the Parliament under Rule 29(4). To deny the Parliament that monitoring power would be tantamount
         to compelling it to deprive Rule 29(1) of all effectiveness.
         
            
 With regard, next, to the question of the extent of the discretionary power enjoyed by the Parliament under that supervisory
         competence, the Court of First Instance observed in paragraph of the contested judgment that neither Rule nor any other
         provision of the Rules of Procedure defines the concept of political affinity. In paragraph of the same judgment, it therefore
         considered that  
         Members declaring that they are organising themselves into a group under this provision [Rule 29] are presumed to share political
         affinities, however minimal. The Court of First Instance nevertheless held, in paragraph 104, that that presumption cannot be regarded as irrebuttable
         since the Parliament, by virtue of its supervisory competence, has  
         the power to examine whether the requirement laid down in Rule 29(1) has been observed where ... the Members declaring the
         formation of a group openly exclude any political affinity between themselves, in patent non-compliance with the abovementioned
         requirement.  
         
            
 Turning, finally, to the merits of the Parliament's assessment concerning non- compliance by the TDI Group with the requirement
         of political affinity, the Court of First Instance ─ following a detailed analysis of the content of the statement of formation
         of that group and of a letter sent by the Members of La Lista Emma Bonino to the other Members on September ─ concluded
         in paragraph of the contested judgment that  
         the Parliament was right to take the view that the statement of formation of the TDI Group evinced a total and manifest absence
         of political affinities between the members of that group. In taking that view, the Parliament did not, contrary to the applicants'
         assertions, arrogate to itself the right to pass judgment on the political affinities of the members of that group. It did
         no more than find, on the basis of the abovementioned statement, that those members were openly denying any such affinity,
         thus themselves rebutting the presumption in favour of political affinities ... That being the case, short of depriving Rule
         29(1) of any effect, the Parliament could not but find that the TDI Group had failed to comply with that provision.
         
            
 As regards the third plea, alleging breach of the principle of equal treatment with regard to the Members of the TDI Group,
         the Court of First Instance, after declaring admissible the objection of illegality put forward in respect of Rules 29(1)
         and of the Rules of Procedure, rejected it as unfounded. 
         
            
 The Court of First Instance observed in particular, in paragraph of the contested judgment, that those provisions  
         constitute measures of internal organisation which are warranted by the special characteristics of the Parliament, the constraints
         under which it operates and the responsibilities and objectives assigned to it by the [EC] Treaty. It added in paragraph of the same judgment that the distinction between two categories of Members drawn by Rules 29(1)
         and of the Rules of Procedure is justified by the fact that the Members in a political group, unlike those who sit as non-attached
         Members under the conditions laid down by the Bureau of the Parliament, satisfy a requirement under the Rules of Procedure
         dictated by the pursuit of legitimate objectives. The Court referred more particularly in that connection to the need for
         efficient organisation of the work and procedures of the institution in order to allow the joint expression of political wills
         and the emergence of compromises, the importance of the Parliament's responsibilities in performing the tasks conferred on
         the Community by the Treaty and in the procedure for adopting the Community acts necessary for the performance of those tasks,
         and also the need to transcend local political particularities and promote the European integration sought by that Treaty.
         
         
            
 In paragraphs and of the contested judgment the Court of First Instance went on to state that the differences in treatment
         between non-attached Members and Members in a political group stem not from the contested act or the combined provisions of
         Rules 29(1) and of the Rules of Procedure, but from a series of other internal provisions of the Parliament, listed in
         paragraph of the same judgment, against which no objection of illegality had been put forward. 
         
            
 As regards the argument that the contested act involves unjustified discrimination, in so far as it prohibited the formation
         of the TDI Group, whereas, in the present legislative period and earlier periods, the formation of a series of other technical
         groups was allowed, the Court of First Instance held, in paragraph of the contested judgment, that, since the Parliament
         had correctly determined that the TDI Group was non-existent for non-compliance of its statement of formation with Rule 29(1)
         on the ground that the members of that group had openly excluded any political affinity amongst themselves and denied that
         the group was in any way political, the applicants could not in any event successfully invoke the Parliament's different assessment
         of earlier statements of formation of political groups. It made it clear in paragraph of the same judgment that the applicants
         had not challenged the Parliament's argument that, unlike the Members who declared the formation of the TDI Group, those who
         declared the formation of those different groups in no case openly rejected the notion of shared political affinity. 
         
            
 In response to the arguments concerning the principle of the protection of legitimate expectations, the Court of First Instance
         considered, in paragraph of the contested judgment, that the absence of opposition by the Parliament to statements concerning
         the formation of groups not having the same characteristics as the TDI Group could not be regarded as a specific assurance
         giving rise in the minds of the Members who declared that they were forming that group to reasonable expectations as to its
         compliance with Rule 29(1). In paragraph of the same judgment, the Court of First Instance observed in that connection
         that, as soon as the statement concerning formation of the TDI Group was made, its compliance with Rule 29(1) was contested
         and that there was no evidence in the file to suggest that, between the time when the legality of their group was called in
         question and the adoption of the contested act, they received a specific assurance from any organ of the Parliament which
         could have led them reasonably to entertain any legitimate expectations. 
         
            
 Finally, as regards the applicants' argument that the existence of political affinities between the members of certain political
         groups appeared doubtful in recent votes on sensitive political questions, whereas the members of the TDI Group displayed
         considerable political cohesion on that occasion, the Court of First Instance found, in paragraph of the contested judgment,
         first, that the applicants had adduced no evidence to show that those groups openly abjured, as did the TDI Group, any political
         affinity and, second, that the fact that members of the same political group voted differently on specific questions could
         not be regarded, in that connection, as constituting evidence of that kind. 
         
            
 As regards the fourth plea in law, alleging breach of the principle of democracy, the Court of First Instance found in paragraph
         of the contested judgment that  
         whilst the principle of democracy is indeed a founding principle of the European Union ... it does not preclude the Parliament
         from adopting measures of internal organisation, such as Rule 29(1) in conjunction with Rule 30, which enable it to perform
         as well as possible, and in keeping with its special characteristics, the institutional role and the objectives assigned to
         it by the Treaties .... In that connection it stated that, whilst it is true that Members who are non-attached are deprived in exercising their
         functions of the benefit of a number of material, administrative, financial and parliamentary privileges which are accorded
         to the political groups, that situation stems not from the provisions of Rule 29(1) in conjunction with Rule 30, nor from
         the contested act, but from the Parliament's internal rules identified at paragraph of the contested judgment, the legality
         of which had not been challenged by the applicants. 
         
            
 As regards the fifth plea in law, alleging breach of the principle of freedom of association, the Court of First Instance
         observed, in paragraph of the contested judgment, that,even if that principle were intended to apply to the internal organisation
         of the Parliament, it is not absolute: restrictions may be imposed, for legitimate reasons, on the exercise of freedom of
         association, provided that those restrictions do not constitute, with regard to the aim pursued, disproportionate and unreasonable
         interference undermining the very substance of that right. In this case the Court of First Instance considered, in paragraph
         of the same judgment, that  the principle of freedom of association does not preclude the Parliament in the context of
         its power of internal organisation from making formation of a group of Members of the Parliament subject to a requirement
         of political affinity dictated by the pursuit of legitimate objectives or from prohibiting, as in the contested act, the formation
         of a group which, like the TDI Group, is in patent breach of that requirement. 
         
            
 Finally, as regards the sixth and final plea in law, alleging failure to respect Parliamentary traditions common to the Member
         States, the Court of First Instance considered in paragraph of the contested judgment that, even if the case-law to the
         effect that, in ensuring that fundamental rights are safeguarded, the Community judicature is obliged to draw inspiration
         from the constitutional traditions common to the Member States applies by analogy to the parliamentary traditions common to
         the latter, the contested act banning the formation of groups whose members abjure, as in the present case, any political
         affinity cannot be adjudged contrary to a parliamentary tradition common to the Member States. In that connection, it stated
         in paragraphs and of the same judgment that the information provided by the applicants in their pleadings indicated
         no more than that the formation of technical or mixed groups is permitted by some national parliaments but it does not on
         the other hand exclude the possibility that the national parliaments which, like the Parliament, make formation of a group
         within the parliament subject to a requirement of political affinity amongst its members might interpret a statement concerning
         the formation of a group similar to the TDI Group in the same way as the Parliament did in the contested act. According to
         the Court of First Instance, that information likewise did not warrant the conclusion that formation of a group such as the
         TDI Group, whose members expressly state that it is entirely unpolitical, would be possible in the majority of national parliaments.
         
         
            
 Consequently, the Court of First Instance dismissed the action for annulment. 
         The appeal
            
 In his appeal, Mr Martinez in essence asks the Court of Justice to annul the contested judgment, to grant the form of order
         sought at first instance or to refer the case back to the Court of First Instance and to order the Parliament to pay the costs
         at both instances. 
         
            
 Mr Martinez puts forward six pleas in law in support of his appeal. He alleges, first, that the contested act is based on
         a misreading of Rule 29(1) of the Rules of Procedure; second that there is no legal basis for the examination undertaken by
         the Parliament as to whether the statement of formation of the TDI Group was in conformity with that rule, and that the principle
         of equal treatment and of the provisions of the Rules of Procedure were infringed; third, breach of the principle of equal
         treatment as regards the members of the TDI Group; fourth, breach of the principle of democracy; fifth, breach of the principle
         of freedom of association and, last, failure to respect the parliamentary traditions common to the Member States. 
         
            
 The Parliament contends that the appeal should be dismissed as inadmissible in part and unfounded in part, and that Mr Martinez
         should be ordered to pay the costs. 
         
            
 As a preliminary point, it must be borne in mind that, under Article of its Rules of Procedure, where an appeal is clearly
         inadmissible or clearly unfounded, the Court may, at any time, dismiss it by reasoned order, without opening the oral procedure.
         
          The first plea in law
         
            
 By his first plea, Mr Martinez claims that the contested act is based on a misreading of Rule 29(1) of the Rules of Procedure.
         He submits that the concept of  
         political affinity mentioned in that provision must be construed as authorising re-grouping of Members beyond national frontiers and favours
         the formation of ideological solidarity or solidarity of other kinds rather than national affiliations. In this case, the
         solidarity sought is the will of the members of the TDI Group to enjoy the same rights and advantages as those granted to
         the members of the other political groups. According to Mr Martinez ─ who observes, in that connection, that in the present
         Parliament there is another strongly technical group to which no exception has been taken, namely the  
         Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities ─ the Parliament misused its powers by disallowing the formation of the TDI Group and the Court of First Instance misapplied
         that provision of the Rules of Procedure. 
         
            
 It must be borne in mind, in that connection, that provided that the appellant challenges the interpretation or application
         of Community law by the Court of First Instance, the points of law examined at first instance may be discussed again in the
         course of an appeal (see Case C-210/P  
          Salzgitter  v  
          Commission  [2000] ECR I-5843, paragraph 43). Indeed, if an appellant could not thus base his appeal on pleas in law and arguments already
         relied on before the Court of First Instance, an appeal would be deprived of part of its purpose (see, in particular, Case
         C-41/P  
          Interporc  v  
          Commission  [2003] ECR I-2125, paragraph 17). 
         
            
 However, it is clear from the first paragraph of Article EC, from the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of
         the Court of Justice and from Article 112(1)(c) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court that an appeal must indicate precisely
         the contested elements of the judgment which the appellant seeks to have set aside, and also the legal arguments specifically
         advanced in support of the appeal (see, in particular, Case C-352/P  
          Bergaderm and Goupil  v  
          Commission  [2000] ECR I-5291, paragraph 34; Case C-248/P  
          France  v  
          Monsanto and Commission  [2002] ECR I-1, paragraph 68, and  
          Interporc  v  
          Commission , cited above, paragraph 15). 
         
            
 In this case, Mr Martinez did not indicate in his first plea the reasons for which he considered that the Court of First Instance
         had erred in law by rejecting, in paragraphs to and to of the contested judgment, the arguments which he had
         put forward at first instance; he merely reproduced those arguments. 
         
            
 The first plea must therefore be rejected as manifestly inadmissible. 
          Second plea
         
            
 In his second plea, Mr Martinez contests in essence the legality of the review carried out by the Parliament as to whether
         the statement of formation of the TDI Group conformed with Rule 29(1) of the Rules of Procedure and the results of that review.
         
         
            
 In the first part of this plea, Mr Martinez alleges that the Court of First Instance misinterpreted Rule by holding, in
         the first sentence of paragraph of the contested judgment, that the Parliament has competence to ensure that its Rules
         of Procedure are being correctly applied and interpreted. According to the appellant, Rule merely allows the Parliament
         to bring matters before the Committee on Constitutional Affairs for an opinion but does not in any circumstances confer on
         the Parliament the power to review the correct application and interpretation of the Rules of Procedure. 
         
            
 It must be observed, first, that it is clear from the very terms of Rule 180(1) of the Rules of Procedure that the President
         of the Parliament may, in the event of doubt as to the application or interpretation of the Rules of Procedure or in the event
         of a reference to the Rules under Article thereof, to refer the matter for examination by the competent committee, and
         that wording supports the view that the Parliament is empowered to ensure the correct application and interpretation of the
         provisions of its Rules of Procedure. 
         
            
 It must be pointed out, second, that paragraphs to of Rule confer on the committee responsible the power to propose
         an amendment to the Rules of Procedure (paragraph 2) or interpretations thereof, which are deemed adopted if uncontested or,
         where contested by a political group or by at least members, may be adopted by the Parliament by a majority of the votes
         cast, provided that at least one third of its Members are present (paragraphs to 5). 
         
            
 It is clear from a reading of those provisions, in conjunction with Rule 180(6), under which such interpretations constitute
         precedents for the future application and interpretation of the rules concerned, that the Parliament does indeed possess the
         power of review which Mr Martinez alleges it lacks. 
         
            
 It follows that the Court of First Instance did not err in law by holding, in paragraph of the contested judgment, that
         the Parliament has competence, under the said Rule 180, to ensure, if need be by referring a matter to the Committee on Constitutional
         Affairs, that its Rules of Procedure are being correctly applied and interpreted. 
         
            
 The first part of the second plea must therefore be rejected as manifestly unfounded. 
         
            
 By the second part of his second plea, Mr Martinez alleges that the Court of First Instance committed a twofold error. First,
         in his view the Court was wrong to state, in paragraph of the contested judgment, that the presumption that there must
         be political affinities among Members who declare that they have formed a group is a rebuttable presumption since the mere
         fact of adopting a common position and forming a group with a view to ensuring that every Member is fully able to exercise
         his parliamentary mandate specifically reflects the existence of political affinities within the meaning of Rule 29(1). Second,
         the Court of First Instance, in his view, was wrong to state in paragraph of the same judgment that the fact that no matter
         initiated on behalf of the TDI Group was put forward by Members belonging to more than one component part of that group confirms
         the total absence of any political affinity between the components of the group. According to the appellant, different political
         components of the TDI Group took joint action on several occasions in order to submit a text. 
         
            
 As regards, first, the appellant's argument that the fact of adopting a common position and forming a group with a view to
         enabling all Members fully to exercise their parliamentary mandate reflects the existence of political affinities, it must
         be pointed out that, as is clear in particular from paragraphs to of the contested judgment, the presumption concerning
         the existence of political affinities was in this case overturned only as a result of the express exclusion, by the Members
         who declared that they were forming the TDI Group, of any political affinity between them, an exclusion which has not been
         refuted in the context of this appeal. 
         
            
 Accordingly, the Court of First Instance was right to hold in paragraph of the said judgment that the Parliament did not
         arrogate to itself the right to pass judgment on the political affinities of the members of the TDI Group but merely found,
         on the basis of the statement of formation of that group, that its members were openly denying any such affinity, thus themselves
         rebutting the presumption in favour of political affinities. 
         
            
 As regards, second, the argument that different political component parts of the TDI Group joined together on several occasions
         in order to submit a text, thereby confirming the existence of political affinities among those component parts, it must be
         borne in mind that, as is clear from Article EC and Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, an appeal is limited
         to points of law. The Court of First Instance thus has exclusive jurisdiction to establish and assess the relevant facts and
         to assess the value which should be attached to the items of evidence produced to it, unless there has been distortion of
         such facts or evidence (see, to that effect, Case C-136/P  
          Commission  v  
          Brazzelli Lualdi and Others  [1994] ECR I-1981, paragraphs and 66; Joined Cases C-238/P, C-244/P, C-245/P, C-247/P, C-250/P to C-252/P and C-254/P  
          Limburgse vinyl Maatschappij and Others  v  
          Commission  [2002] ECR I-8375, paragraph 194, and Joined Cases C-24/P and C-25/P  
          Glencore and Compagnie Continentale  v  
          Commission  [2002] ECR I-10119, paragraph 65). 
         
            
 In this case, Mr Martinez has adduced no evidence to show any distortion of the evidence produced to the Court of First Instance
         or any material inaccuracy of the latter's findings based on the documents in the file. The appellant confirms, on the contrary,
         in his appeal that the evidence relied on in support of his allegation that political affinities existed between the members
         of the TDI Group post-dated the contested act. 
         
            
 The second part of the second plea must therefore be rejected as being manifestly unfounded in part and manifestly inadmissible
         in part. 
         
            
 In view of the foregoing, the second plea must be rejected in its entirety. 
          The third plea
         
            
 By his third plea, which comprises three parts, Mr Martinez alleges breach of the principle of equal treatment in relation
         to the members of the TDI Group. 
         
            
 In the first part of this plea, Mr Martinez submits that, in paragraph of the contested judgment, the Court of First Instance
         appears to agree that there was discrimination between Members forming part of a political group and non-attached Members,
         but merely indicates that such differences of treatment stem not from the contested act but from provisions of the Rules of
         Procedure other than Rule 29(1) or from provisions of an administrative nature whose legality was not called in question before
         it. Even though the objection of illegality was not directed against those provisions, the Court of First Instance should,
         in his view, have drawn the relevant legal inferences from such discrimination, which it could not in any event uphold. 
         
            
 In that regard, it need merely be held that, contrary to Mr Martinez's contention, the Court of First Instance certainly did
         not uphold the differences of treatment as between Members of political groups and non-attached Members: on the contrary,
         it called on the Parliament, in paragraph of the contested judgment, to examine whether the differences in treatment as
         between those two categories of Members were all necessary and justified in the light of the legitimate objectives pursued
         by that institution and, if need be, to remedy any inequalities inherent in the Parliament's internal organisational provisions
         which did not satisfy that requirement of necessity and might consequently be held to be discriminatory in a review of legality
         requested of the Community judicature in relation to acts of the Parliament adopted pursuant to those provisions. 
         
            
 On numerous occasions, and particularly in paragraphs 155, and of the contested judgment, the Court of First Instance
         made it clear, however, that those differences of treatment, which are not disputed by the Parliament, stem not from the contested
         act or from the combined provisions of Rules 29(1) and but from a series of other internal provisions of the Parliament,
         identified in paragraph of the same judgment, the legality of which was not called in question by the applicant before
         the Court of First Instance. 
         
            
 Accordingly, since Mr Martinez does not deny that he did not allege before the Court of First Instance that those provisions
         were illegal, he cannot criticise that Court for not drawing any legal inferences from the differences in treatment which
         he alleges. 
         
            
 This first part of the third plea must therefore be rejected as manifestly unfounded. 
         
            
 By the second part of his third plea, Mr Martinez alleges, first, that he is the subject of discriminatory treatment in that,
         when other political groups have been formed, no prior examination has ever been made of their statement of formation presented
         in due form by the requisite number of Members and, second, that in those circumstances the TDI Group had a legitimate expectation
         based on the Parliament's consistent interpretation of Rule 29(1) of its Rules of Procedure. 
         
            
 It need merely be pointed out that, in this part of his third plea, Mr Martinez has not indicated the reasons for which he
         considers that the Court of First Instance erred in law by rejecting, in paragraphs to of the contested judgment,
         the arguments which he put forward at first instance, but has merely reproduced those arguments. 
         
            
 By virtue of the case-law cited in paragraph of this order, the second part of the third plea in law must therefore be
         rejected as manifestly inadmissible. 
         
            
 By the third part of his third plea, Mr Martinez alleges that the Court of First Instance wrongly rejected evidence showing
         consistent voting by the members of the TDI Group, on the ground that it concerned events post-dating the contested act, even
         though that evidence was capable of enlightening the Court as to the real political affinities existing between the members
         of the TDI Group. 
         
            
 It must be pointed out that this criticism is based on a manifestly incorrect reading of the contested judgment. 
         
            
 First, by holding in paragraph of the contested judgment that the correctness of the Parliament's assessment of the non-compliance
         of the statement of formation of the TDI Group with Rule 29(1) could not be invalidated by the fact that in recent sessions
         the members of that group had adhered to similar voting patterns, the Court of First Instance referred expressly to paragraphs
         and of the same judgment, in which it pointed out, among other things, that concordant voting patterns observed within
         the TDI Group may disguise wide discrepancies in the individual political motives informing the votes of each individual member
         and cannot therefore be regarded as evidence of the existence of political affinities between the members of that group. 
         
            
 Second, in paragraph of the contested judgment, the Court of First Instance also stated that, for the reasons set out
         in paragraph of the judgment, the fact that members of the same political group vote differently on specific questions
         cannot be regarded as constituting evidence such as to demonstrate the express negation of any political affinity among those
         members. Indeed, in paragraph the Court of First Instance held that the fact that the members of one and the same political
         group may vote differently must be regarded not as indicating a lack of political affinity among those members but as illustrating
         the principle of a parliamentarian's independence. 
         
            
 It follows that the Court of First Instance's rejection of evidence to show consistent voting by members of the TDI Group
         was not based on the mere fact that those votes post-dated the contested act. 
         
            
 Accordingly, the third part of the third plea must be rejected as manifestly unfounded and the third plea must be rejected
         in its entirety. 
          The fourth plea
         
            
 In his fourth plea, Mr Martinez alleges breach of the principle of democracy. According to the appellant, that principle means
         that the conditions for the exercise of a parliamentary mandate must not be affected by the fact that the person concerned
         is not a member of a political group and in that connection it is immaterial that the differences of treatment as between
         non-attached Members and Members of a political group stem not from the contested act but from provisions of the Rules of
         Procedure against which no objection of illegality has been put forward. 
         
            
 In that regard, it must be observed that the Court of First Instance held, in paragraph of the contested judgment, that
         the principle of democracy does not preclude the Parliament from adopting measures of internal organisation, such as the combined
         provisions of Rules 29(1) and 30, which enable it to perform as well as possible and in keeping with its special characteristics
         the institutional role and the objectives assigned to it by the Treaties. The Court of First Instance referred to paragraphs
         to of its judgment which give the reasons for that conclusion. 
         
            
 However, the appellant has not put forward any argument capable of showing that the reasoning of the Court of First Instance
         in that regard was vitiated by any error of law. 
         
            
 Furthermore, as regards the Court of First Instance's finding that the differences in treatment between non-attached Members
         and Members of a political group did not stem from the contested act but from internal provisions of the Parliament which
         had not been the subject of any objection of illegality, it must be pointed out that Mr Martinez cannot criticise the Court
         of First Instance for failing to draw the legal inferences in respect of such differences in treatment since, as indicated
         in paragraph of this order, he does not deny that he did not challenge the legality of those provisions. 
         
            
 Even if it is conceded that he wishes to challenge the legality of those provisions in this appeal, it must be pointed out
         that, according to settled case-law, to allow a party to put forward for the first time before the Court of Justice a plea
         in law which he has not raised before the Court of First Instance would mean allowing that party to bring before the Court,
         whose jurisdiction in appeals is limited, a wider case than that heard by the Court of First Instance. In an appeal, the Court's
         jurisdiction is confined to examining the assessment by the Court of First Instance of the pleas argued before it (see, in
         particular,  
          Commission   v  
          Brazzelli Lualdi and Others , cited above, paragraph 59; Case C-7/P  
          John Deere  v  
          Commission  [1998] ECR I-3111, paragraph 62, and  
          Glencore and Compagnie Continentale   v  
          Commission , cited above, paragraph 62). 
         
            
 It follows that the fourth plea must be rejected as manifestly unfounded and, to the extent to which the applicant seeks to
         put forward a new plea in law before the Court of Justice, as manifestly inadmissible. 
          The fifth plea
         
            
 By his fifth plea, Mr Martinez alleges breach of the principle of freedom of association by the Court of First Instance, which,
         he considers, gave no reason for which the restriction of freedom of association, based on the requirement of political affinity
         between the members of a group, constitutes a legitimate measure. 
         
            
 In that connection, it need merely be pointed out that the Court of First Instance explicitly referred, in paragraph of
         the contested judgment, to paragraphs to of that judgment, which set out in detail the reasons for which the formation
         within the Parliament of political groups based on political affinities is in conformity with legitimate objectives. 
         
            
 Accordingly, the fifth plea in law must be rejected as manifestly unfounded. 
          The sixth plea
         
            
 By his sixth plea, finally, Mr Martinez criticises the Court of First Instance for failing to respect the parliamentary traditions
         common to the Member States. He submits, more particularly, that the Court of First Instance was wrong to consider that the
         examples based on comparative law put forward by the applicant in support of his application were not significant. 
         
            
 It must be pointed out that, although in paragraph of the contested judgment the Court of First Instance stated that the
         information provided by the applicant showed that the formation of technical or mixed groups was permitted by some national
         parliaments, it added in the following paragraph of that judgment that it could not, on the other hand, be concluded that
         national parliaments which, like the European Parliament, make the formation of a group within the parliament subject to a
         requirement of political affinity, might not interpret a statement concerning the formation of a group such as the TDI in
         the same way as the Parliament did in the contested act. According to the Court of First Instance, that information likewise
         did not warrant the conclusion that formation of a group such as the TDI Group, whose members expressly stated that it was
         entirely unpolitical, is possible in the majority of national parliaments. 
         
            
 In this case, it need merely be pointed out that it is clear both from the actual wording of the sixth plea in law and from
         a reading of the passage of the contested judgment which is criticised in it that the appellant is seeking in this instance
         to challenge the assessment of evidence undertaken by the Court of First Instance. However, as pointed out in paragraph of this order, such an assessment cannot be requested of the Court of Justice in an appeal, except in the event of distortion
         of the evidence. 
         
            
 Since no such distortion has been alleged by the appellant, the sixth plea in law must be rejected as manifestly inadmissible.
         
         
            
 Since the pleas in law put forward by Mr Martinez in support of his appeal are manifestly inadmissible in part and manifestly
         unfounded in part, the appeal must be dismissed in its entirety. 
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, which is applicable to the appeal procedure by virtue of Article of those
         rules, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party's pleadings.
         Since the Parliament has applied for costs and Mr Martinez has been unsuccessful, he must be ordered to pay the costs of these
         proceedings. In addition to his own costs, Mr Martinez should also bear the costs incurred by the Parliament in connection
         with the application for the adoption of interim measures in Case C-488/P-R. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Full Court)
 hereby orders:
         
1.
 The appeal is dismissed.
2.
 Mr Martinez is ordered to pay the costs of the present proceedings. 
3.
 Mr Martinez is also ordered to pay the Parliament's costs in connection with the application for interim measures in Case
               C-488/P-R.
 Luxembourg, November 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
V. Skouris  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: French.
Top  
 