
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-12/Criminal proceedingsagainstMarco Grilli(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Bayerisches Oberstes Landesgericht)
         
«(Free movement of goods – Measures having equivalent effect – Transfer by road to one Member State of a motor vehicle purchased in another Member State – Temporary number plates – Criminal penalty for driving a vehicle without a valid registration)»
Opinion of Advocate General Léger delivered on May I - Judgment of the Court (First Chamber), October I - Summary of the Judgment
Free movement of goods – Quantitative restrictions on exports – Measures having equivalent effect – National rules prohibiting a national of another Member State from taking to that other State a vehicle purchased in the first
                     Member State bearing temporary number plates issued, for the purpose of exporting the vehicle to that other Member State,
                     by the competent authorities of the latter State – Incompatible with Article EC – Criteria – Justification – To be assessed by the national court – Penalties provided for in the rules inapplicable if necessary
                  (Arts EC and EC)Article EC precludes the rules of a Member State which prohibit a national of another Member State, on pain of criminal
         penalties such as imprisonment or a fine, from taking to that other State a vehicle purchased in the first Member State bearing
         temporary number plates issued, for the purpose of the export of the vehicle to that other Member State, by the competent
         authorities of the latter State, if those rules are of such a kind as to restrict export patterns, create a difference in
         treatment between a State's domestic trade and its external trade and give rise to an advantage for national trade at the
         expense of another Member State, provided that those rules cannot be justified under Article EC. It is for the national
         court to ascertain whether that is so in the main proceedings.If the rules at issue in the main proceedings are held to be contrary to Article EC, the penalties for which they make
         provision are inapplicable.see paras 48-49, operative part
      
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)October (1)
((Free movement of goods – Measures having equivalent effect – Transfer by road to one Member State of a motor vehicle purchased in another Member State – Temporary number plates – Criminal penalty for driving a vehicle without a valid registration))
In Case C-12/02, 
            REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Bayerisches Oberstes Landesgericht (Germany) for a preliminary ruling in
            the criminal proceedings pending before that court against 
            
 Marco Grilli
on the interpretation of Article EC,
THE COURT (First Chamber),,
composed of: M. Wathelet (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, P. Jann and A. Rosas, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: P. Léger, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
the Commission of the European Communities, by U. Wölker, acting as Agent, and by B. Wägenbaur, Rechtsanwalt, 
               
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2003, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By order of December 2001, received at the Court on January 2002, the Bayerisches Oberstes Landesgericht referred to
         the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC a question on the interpretation of Article EC. 
         
            
That question was raised in criminal proceedings brought by the Staatsanwaltschaft (Public Prosecutor's Office) against Mr
         Grilli, an Italian national, who was charged with having driven on the German motorways a vehicle purchased in Germany bearing
         temporary number plates issued by the authorities of another Member State. 
         
National legislation
            
Paragraph 22(1)and (2) of the Straßenverkehrsgesetz (Road Traffic Act;  
         the StVG) provides: 
         
(1)
Anyone who, for an unlawful purpose: 
         
1.
 attaches to a motor vehicle or trailer for which a number plate has not been issued or which has not been registered a number
         plate resembling an official number plate; 
         
2.
  ... 
         
3.
  ... shall, unless the offence is punishable by a heavier penalty under any other provision, be sentenced to up to one year's imprisonment
         or a fine. 
         
(2)
The same penalty shall be imposed on any person using on the public highway or in a public place a motor vehicle or trailer
         whose number plates he knows to be forged, falsified or cancelled as described in subparagraph (1)to 3.
         
            
Paragraph 18(1) of the Straßenverkehrs-Zulassungs-Ordnung (Motor Vehicle Registration Order;  
         the StVZO) provides: Compulsory registration
         
(1)
A motor vehicle designed to reach a maximum speed in excess of kilometres per hour and its trailer ... shall be used on
         the public highway only if authorised for such use by the grant of a vehicle authorisation or EC Type Approval and the issue
         of an official number plate for motor vehicles or trailers by the administrative authorities (registration authorities).
         
            
Paragraph 69(2)of the StVZO states: Anyone who intentionally or negligently......
         
3.
 uses on the public highway a motor vehicle or trailer contrary to Paragraph 18(1) without the necessary registration or contrary
         to Paragraph 18(3) without the necessary vehicle authorisation ... shall be guilty of an offence under Paragraph of the Straßenverkehrsgesetz.
         
Facts
            
Mr Grilli travelled to Germany in August in order to buy a private motor vehicle from a second-hand car dealer in Hamburg.
         
         
            
Mr Grilli attached to the vehicle Italian temporary number plates bearing the number  
         PT-(
         targa prova) which had been issued to him beforehand by the Italian administrative authorities.  He then set off in the vehicle on the
         German motorway towards Italy. 
         
            
The German police checked Mr Grilli's vehicle before the Austrian border and confiscated the Italian temporary number plates.
          On the same day, German  
         export plates were issued to Mr Grilli at his request and he continued his journey towards Italy. 
         
            
The public prosecutor's office commenced criminal proceedings against Mr Grilli for irregular use of number plates.  It claimed
         that, under Paragraph 22(1)and (2) of the StVG and the combined provisions of Paragraphs and 69(a)(2)of the StVZO it
         was an offence to attach Italian temporary number plates to a private motor vehicle purchased in Germany and to travel on
         the German highway displaying those plates. 
         
            
The Amtsgericht Ebersberg (Germany) first imposed a fine of DEM on Mr Grilli for wrongful use of number plates, in accordance
         with Paragraph 22(1)and (2) of the StVG. 
         
            
Mr Grilli appealed against the fine to the Amtsgericht. 
         
            
Initially, the Amtsgericht upheld the breach by Mr Grilli of Paragraph of the StVG in so far as, according to the Agreement
         on the mutual recognition of temporary number plates and road test plates concluded between Germany and Italy on December
         1993, which entered into force on January (
          Verkehrsblatt  1994, p. et seq.;  
         the Agreement), a motor vehicle acquired in one of those States can only be fitted with temporary number plates issued in the State in
         which it was acquired before being driven to the other signatory State.  However, the national court considered that the terms
         of the Agreement were ambiguous and that Mr Grilli might therefore have assumed that he was entitled to attach Italian temporary
         number plates to a private motor vehicle purchased in Germany.  
         
            
The Amstgericht therefore held that Mr Grilli could rely on an inevitable error in respect of the prohibition in issue and
         acquitted him. 
         
            
The prosecution appealed to the Bayerisches Oberstes Landesgericht on a point of law against the acquittal. 
         
            
That court considered that Mr Grilli had been wrongly acquitted and should have been convicted under Paragraph 22(1)and
         (2) of the StVG, since the conditions for the application of those provisions were fulfilled. 
         
            
According to the Bayerisches Oberstes Landesgericht, the Agreement applies only to movements of temporarily registered vehicles
         from Italy to Germany and does not authorise the situation, relevant in this case, of the movement to Italy of a vehicle purchased
         in Germany bearing Italian temporary number plates.  Furthermore, the Bayerisches Staatsministerium für Wirtschaft und Verkehr
         (Bavarian Ministry of the Economy and Transport) stated in a press release dated February that, even after the Agreement
         had entered into force, on January 1994, only vehicles purchased in Germany bearing German, and not Italian, temporary number
         plates could be taken to Italy. 
         
            
Last, unlike the Amtsgericht, the Bayerisches Oberstes Landesgericht considers that Mr Grilli could not be found not guilty
         on the ground of inevitable error, since the exacting requirements which according to case-law and legal writing must be satisfied
         in order to establish the inevitable nature of such an error are not fulfilled in this case. 
         
            
The national court none the less states that Article EC may preclude Mr Grilli's conviction since the purpose of the temporary
         number plates referred to in the Agreement is to facilitate exports or imports of motor vehicles between the two Member States
         and therefore, ultimately, trade in goods in the Community.  The prohibition on attaching an Italian temporary registration
         to a vehicle purchased in Germany and on taking that vehicle to Italy may therefore constitute a measure having equivalent
         effect to a restriction, since a German exporter may find it easier to put a vehicle into service than an Italian importer.
         
         
            
The doubts of that court as to the interpretation of Article EC are increased by the considerations expressed by the Court
         in Case C-193/Skanavi and Chryssanthakopoulos  [1996] ECR I-929.  That case concerned the obligation, where a person changed his place of residence from one Member State
         to another Member State, to exchange within a certain period the driving licence issued in the former Member State.  The Court
         was asked, more particularly, whether Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC) precludes the driving of a motor vehicle
         by a person who could have obtained a licence from the host State in exchange for the licence issued by another Member State
         but who did not make the exchange within the prescribed period from being treated as driving without a licence and thus rendered
         punishable by imprisonment or a fine. 
         
            
At paragraph of the judgment in  
          Skanavi and Chryssanthakopoulos  the Court observed, first of all, that, according to settled case-law concerning non-compliance with formalities for establishing
         the right of residence of an individual enjoying the protection of Community law, Member States may not impose a penalty so
         disproportionate to the gravity of the infringement that this becomes an obstacle to the free movement of persons.  It held
         that, in view of the effect which the right to drive a motor vehicle has on the actual exercise of the rights relating to
         the free movement of persons, the same considerations must apply with regard to breach of the obligation to exchange driving
         licences. 
         
            
In that judgment, the Court considered that treating a person who has failed to have a licence exchanged as if he were a person
         driving without a licence, thereby giving rise to criminal penalties, even if only financial in nature, such as those provided
         for in the national legislation in question, to be applied, would also be disproportionate to the gravity of that infringement
         in view of the ensuing consequences for freedom of movement of persons (
          Skanavi and Chryssanthakopoulos , paragraph 37). 
         
            
The Bayerisches Oberstes Landesgericht wonders whether the criminal penalty imposed on Mr Grilli must be regarded as disproportionate
         to the gravity of the infringement within the meaning of  
          Skanavi and Chryssanthakopoulos .  Should that be so, the Bayerisches Oberstes Landesgericht considers that, from the viewpoint of Community law, there can
         be no valid ground for the penalties provided for by the criminal law. 
         
            
Taking the view that the outcome of the proceedings therefore depended on the interpretation of Community law, the Bayerisches
         Oberstes Landesgericht decided to refer the following question to the Court for a preliminary ruling: Is Article EC to be interpreted as precluding a national rule that makes it a criminal offence for an Italian national
         who obtains a temporary registration number from the competent Italian authorities to attach number plates bearing that number
         to a vehicle offered for sale in Germany, and then drive that vehicle on the German public highway towards Italy?
         Substance
            
By its question, the national court is seeking essentially to ascertain whether Article EC precludes legislation of a Member
         State which prohibits a national of another Member State, on pain of criminal penalties such as imprisonment or a fine, from
         taking to that other State a vehicle purchased in the first Member State bearing temporary number plates issued, for the purpose
         of exporting the vehicle to that other Member State, by the competent authorities of the latter State. 
         
            
It follows from Part III of the order for reference, moreover, as described at paragraph of this judgment, that the national
         court is in doubt as to the proportionality of the criminal penalties laid down in the relevant regulations in the light of
         Article EC. 
         
            
In order to provide a useful reply to the national court, it is therefore necessary to consider, first, whether national rules
         such as those at issue before the national court constitute a measure having equivalent effect to a quantitative restriction
         prohibited by Article EC and, second, whether the criminal penalties they provide for are to be regarded as disproportionate
         to the gravity of the offence, within the meaning of  
          Skanavi and Chryssanthakopoulos . 
         Observations submitted to the Court
         
            
The Commission submits that, in spite of its wording, the question must be interpreted as seeking to ascertain, first, whether
         Article EC precludes the provisions of German law which require that, where a motor vehicle put into service in Germany
         is to be exported, it must bear the corresponding temporary number plates, issued beforehand by the competent German authorities,
         and only then whether Article EC precludes the provisions of German law which make a breach of the above provisions, namely
         the irregular use of number plates, a criminal offence. 
         
            
On the basis of that interpretation of the question, the Commission states that the national provisions governing the statutory
         conditions for putting a motor vehicle into service in Germany for export to another Member State are not cited and/or referred
         to in the order for reference.  It therefore wonders to what extent the Court has the necessary information on the applicable
         German provisions to be able to give a ruling. 
         
            
According to the Commission, provisions of Community law exist only as regards certain conditions concerning the putting into
         service of motor vehicles, which have no relevance to the main proceedings. 
         
            
The Commission infers that the determination of the statutory requirements governing the administrative procedure for putting
         a motor vehicle into service and/or taking it to another Member State therefore remains within the competence of the Member
         State concerned, which must none the less exercise that competence in compliance with Community law. 
         
            
As regards the interpretation of Article EC in the present case, the Commission observes that the Court has held that that
         provision is directly applicable and, as such, confers on individuals rights which the courts of the Member States are required
         to protect (see, for example, Case C-47/Delhaize and Le Lion  [1992] ECR I-3669). 
         
            
According to a consistent line of decisions, Article EC prohibits all national measures which have as their specific object
         or effect the restriction of patterns of exports and therefore the establishment of a difference in treatment between the
         domestic trade of a Member State and its export trade, in such a way as to provide a particular advantage for national production
         or for the domestic market of the State in question (see, for example, Case C-209/Sydhavnens Sten & Grus  [2000] ECR I-3743, paragraph 34). 
         
            
The Commission therefore proposes that a comparison should be made between the provisions of German law concerning the administrative
         procedure for putting motor vehicles into service in Germany and those governing the administrative procedure for putting
         motor vehicles into service in Germany for export to another Member State, in order to determine whether the general obligation
         governing the putting into service applies in the same way to the putting into service of a motor vehicle in Germany and for
         the export of a motor vehicle from Germany to another Member State, in which case the requirement for putting the vehicle
         into service does not in itself represent any specific restriction on export patterns. 
         
            
The Commission contends that those rules draw a distinction between, on the one hand, the putting into service of vehicles
         normally kept in Germany, whether with a view to being permanently registered in Germany or to being temporarily registered
         for the purposes of testing and/or transport within the confines of the national borders and, second, the putting into service
         of vehicles in Germany with a view to their being exported to another Member State.  Ultimately, however, in the national
         regulations in force in Germany, the conditions governing the putting into service of a vehicle intended for export to another
         Member State are no more restrictive than the conditions governing the putting into service of a vehicle intended to remain
         permanently in Germany. 
         
            
The Commission therefore proposes that the answer to the question should be that Article EC does not preclude rules such
         as those in issue in the main proceedings. 
         The Court's reply
         
            
It should be observed as a preliminary point that reference has been made in the main proceedings to the Agreement, which
         may have the consequence that a German national exporting to Germany a vehicle purchased in Italy and an Italian national
         exporting to Italy a vehicle purchased in Germany are not treated in the same way.  As no question as been raised in that
         regard and as the text of the Agreement has not been communicated, the Court draws the national court's attention to the possible
         impact of that Agreement on free movement of goods and persons.  Thus, it would be useful to consider whether the Agreement
         entails any discrimination in that it allows a vehicle bearing temporary number plates issued by the competent German authorities
         to be driven from Italy to Germany but does not allow a vehicle displaying temporary number plates issued by the competent
         Italian authorities to be driven from Germany to Italy. 
         
            
As regards, first, the question whether the fact that a Member State prohibits a national of another Member State from driving
         a used car purchased on its territory where the vehicle is bearing temporary number plates issued, for the purpose of export
         to the other Member State, by the competent authorities of that State is a measure having equivalent effect to a quantitative
         restriction on exports, it must be recalled that, as the Commission rightly maintains, there is no Community provision governing
         the putting into service of vehicles, whether generally or, more specifically, for export to another Member State. 
         
            
Nor is there any Community provision that determines the national authorities competent to register motor vehicles. 
         
            
In the absence of any Community rules on the matter, the Member States alone are competent to determine the statutory conditions
         governing the administrative procedure for the putting into service of motor vehicles, including for export to another Member
         State, and also the penalties applicable in the event of a breach of those conditions. 
         
            
As the Advocate General states at point of his Opinion, that competence must none the less be exercised in compliance with
         the fundamental freedoms provided for in the EC Treaty, in particular in Article EC. 
         
            
According to consistent case-law, that provision concerns national measures which have as their specific object or effect
         the restriction of patterns of exports and thereby the establishment of a difference in treatment between the domestic trade
         of a Member State and its export trade in such a way as to provide a particular advantage for national production or for the
         domestic market of the State in question at the expense of the production or of the trade of other Member States (Case 15/Groenveld  [1979] ECR 3409, paragraph 7). 
         
            
Unlike Article EC, which concerns quantitative restrictions on imports and measures having equivalent effect to such restrictions,
         Article EC prohibits only national measures which provide for a difference in treatment between products destined for export
         and those sold within the Member State concerned (
          Groenveld , cited above, paragraphs and 9). 
         
            
In the main proceedings, the German rules require that a used motor vehicle purchased on German territory and used on the
         German public highway display temporary number plates issued by the competent German authorities, even if the vehicle is to
         be exported to another Member State. 
         
            
In order to determine whether such rules constitute a quantitative restriction on exports or a measure having equivalent effect
         to such a restriction, the national court must consider whether the detailed provisions established by the rules at issue
         in the main proceedings for the issue of temporary number plates are compatible with Community law, in the light of the conditions
         identified in the case-law and set out at paragraphs and of this judgment. 
         
            
The national court will thus have to compare the detailed provisions established by the German rules for the administrative
         procedure for the putting into service of vehicles in Germany with those laid down for the administrative procedure for the
         putting into service in Germany of vehicles intended for export to another Member State.  In order to be able to conclude
         that there is a restriction on exports, it is necessary first of all to ascertain whether there is a difference in treatment
         between the administrative procedure for the putting into service of a vehicle intended for use in Germany and that for a
         vehicle intended for export, and whether that difference in treatment is of such a kind as to restrict export patterns.  Next,
         the national court must ascertain whether the German regulations in issue in the main proceedings give rise to a difference
         in treatment between trade within Germany and its external trade and, if appropriate, whether it follows that the regulations
         favour national trade at the expense of that of another Member State. 
         
            
As the Advocate General states at point of his Opinion, it is only if the national court concludes that the national rules
         constitute a measure having equivalent effect to a quantitative restriction on exports that it will have to consider whether
         the regulations may be justified under Article EC, which entails an assessment of the proportionality of the penalties.
         
         
            
For that purpose, the national court will be required, inter alia, to consider whether the national rules at issue in the
         main proceedings may be justified on grounds of public order or public security.  If so, it will have to establish whether
         they are necessary in order to achieve the object pursued and do not constitute arbitrary discrimination or a disguised restriction
         of trade between Member States. 
         
            
Accordingly, the answer to the first part of the question must be that Article EC precludes the rules of a Member State
         which prohibit a national of another Member State, on pain of criminal penalties such as imprisonment or a fine, from taking
         to that other State a vehicle purchased in the first Member State bearing temporary number plates issued, for the purpose
         of the export of the vehicle to the other Member State, by the competent authorities of the latter State, if those rules are
         of such a kind as to restrict export patterns, create a difference in treatment between a State's domestic trade and its external
         trade and give rise to an advantage for national trade at the expense of that of another Member State, provided that those
         rules cannot be justified under Article EC.  It is for the national court to ascertain whether that is so in the main proceedings.
         
         
            
As regards, second, the proportionality of the criminal penalties provided for in the national rules at issue in the main
         proceedings, it should be noted that, if those rules are not held to be contrary to Article EC, the question of proportionality
         does not arise.  If, on the other hand, rules such as those at issue in the main proceedings are held to be contrary to Article
         EC, the penalties for which they make provision are inapplicable, so that there is no need to consider the question of
         their proportionality to the gravity of the infringement. 
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the Commission, which has submitted observations to the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings
         are, for the parties to the main action, a step in the proceedings pending before the national court, the decision on costs
         is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (First Chamber),
in answer to the question referred to it by the Bayerisches Oberstes Landesgericht by order of December 2001, hereby rules:
         
         
Wathelet
Jann 
Rosas 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on October 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
M. Wathelet  
Registrar
President of the First Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: German.
Top  
 