
Joined Cases C-300/and C-301/Staatssecretaris van Justitie
v
F. Toprak and I. Oguz 
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Raad van State)
(EEC-Turkey Association Agreement – Freedom of movement for workers – Standstill rule in Article of Decision No 1/of the Association Council – Prohibition for Member States to introduce new restrictions on access to the labour market)
Summary of the Judgment
International agreements – EEC-Turkey Association Agreement – Freedom of movement for persons – Workers – Standstill rule
            in Article of Decision No 1/of the Association Council – Scope – New restriction – Concept
(Decision No 1/of the EEC-Turkey Association Agreement, Art. 13)
As regards Turkish workers who have worked in a Member State in which, on December 1980, Decision No 1/on the development
         of the Association adopted by the Association Council established by the Agreement establishing an Association between the
         European Economic Community and Turkey entered into force, Article of that decision must be interpreted in the following
         manner: a tightening of a provision of that Member State relating to the obtaining of a residence permit by Turkish workers,
         introduced after December 1980, which provided for a relaxation of the provision applicable on December 1980, constitutes
         a ‘new restriction’ within the meaning of that article, even if that tightening does not make the conditions governing the
         acquisition of that permit more stringent than those resulting from the provision in force on December 1980, which it is
         for the national court to determine.
      
In that regard, it should be observed that, since the wording of Article of Decision No 1/does not stipulate any particular
         date from which the standstill rule is to apply, the existence of new restrictions, within the meaning of that article, can
         be assessed in relation to the date of entry into force of the text in which it appears, this being, in the present cases,
         the date on which Decision No 1/entered into force.
      
It does not follow, however, that that is the only relevant date. Thus, in order to determine the significance of the term
         ‘new restrictions’ for the purpose of Article of Decision 1/80, it is necessary to refer to the objective pursued by that
         provision.  Article is designed to create conditions conducive to the gradual establishment of freedom of movement for
         workers by prohibiting national authorities from creating new obstacles to that freedom so as not to make its gradual achievement
         more difficult between the Member States and the Republic of Turkey. It must be held that the scope of the standstill obligation
         in Article extends by analogy to any new obstacle to the exercise of free movement by workers which makes more stringent
         the conditions existing at a given time. 
      
It is thus necessary to ensure that the Member States do not depart from the objective pursued by reversing measures which
         they have adopted in favour of the free movement of Turkish workers after Decision No 1/entered into force within their
         territory. It follows that the relevant date from which it is appropriate to assess whether the introduction of the new rules
         gives rise to ‘new restrictions’ is the date on which those provisions were adopted. 
      
(see paras 49-52, 54-56, 62, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
December (*)
      
(EEC-Turkey Association Agreement – Freedom of movement for workers – Standstill rule in Article of Decision No 1/of the Association Council – Prohibition for Member States to introduce new restrictions on access to the labour market)
In Joined Cases C‑300/and C‑301/09,
REFERENCES for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Raad van State (Netherlands), made by decisions of July
         2009, received at the Court on July 2009, in the proceedings
      
Staatssecretaris van Justitie
v
F. Toprak (C-300/09),
      
I. Oguz (C-301/09),
      
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, President of the Chamber, A. Rosas, U. Lõhmus, A. Ó Caoimh and P. Lindh (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        the Netherlands Government, by C.M. Wissels and B. Koopman, acting as Agents,
–        the Danish Government, by V. Pasternak Jørgensen and R. Holdgaard, acting as Agents,
–        the German Government, by M. Lumma and N. Graf Vitzthum, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by G. Rozet and M. van Beek, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
The present references for a preliminary ruling concern the interpretation of Article of Decision No 1/of the Association
         Council of September on the development of the Association (‘Decision No 1/80’). The Association Council was set up
         by the Agreement establishing an Association between the European Economic Community and Turkey, signed at Ankara on September
         by the Republic of Turkey and by the Member States of the EEC and the Community and concluded, approved and confirmed
         on behalf of the Community by Council Decision 64/732/EEC of December (OJ C 113; the ‘Association Agreement’).
      
The references have been made in the course of proceedings between, on the one hand, Mr Toprak (Case C‑300/09) and Mr Oguz
         (Case C‑301/09) and, on the other, the Staatssecretaris van Justitie (State Secretary for Justice) concerning the latter’s
         refusal to vary their temporary residence permits.
      
 Legal context
 European Union legislation
 The Association Agreement
According to Article 2(1) of the Association Agreement, the aim of that agreement is to promote the continuous and balanced
         strengthening of trade and economic relations between the Contracting Parties, which includes, in relation to the workforce,
         the progressive securing of freedom of movement for workers and the abolition of restrictions on freedom of establishment
         and on freedom to provide services, with a view to improving the standard of living of the Turkish people and facilitating
         the accession of Turkey to the Community at a later date.
      
 Decision No 1/Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/is drafted as follows:
      
‘Subject to Article on free access to employment for members of his family, a Turkish worker duly registered as belonging
         to the labour force of a Member State:
      
–        shall be entitled in that Member State, after one year’s legal employment, to the renewal of his permit to work for the same
         employer, if a job is available;
      
–        shall be entitled in that Member State, after three years of legal employment and subject to the priority to be given to workers
         of Member States of the Community, to respond to another offer of employment, with an employer of his choice, made under normal
         conditions and registered with the employment services of that State, for the same occupation;
      
–        shall enjoy free access in that Member State to any paid employment of his choice, after four years of legal employment.’
Article of Decision No 1/provides:
      
‘The Member States of the Community and Turkey may not introduce new restrictions on the conditions of access to employment
         applicable to workers and members of their families legally resident and employed in their respective territories.’
      
 The Additional Protocol
As is clear from Article thereof, the Additional Protocol, signed on November at Brussels and concluded, approved
         and confirmed on behalf of the Community by Council Regulation (EEC) No 2760/of December (JO L 293, p. 1)
         (‘the Additional Protocol’), forms an integral part of the Association Agreement.
      
Article 41(1) of the Additional Protocol states:
      
‘The Contracting Parties shall refrain from introducing between themselves any new restrictions on the freedom of establishment
         and the freedom to provide services.’
      
 National legislation
On December 1980, the admission and residence of foreign nationals in the Netherlands were regulated by the Law on Foreign
         Nationals (Vreemdelingenwet) (Staatsblad 1965, No 40), which entered into force on January 1967, and the Foreign Nationals Decree (Vreemdelingenbesluit) and the
         Foreign Nationals Circular (Vreemdelingencirculaire) 1966.
      
It is apparent from the orders for reference that the regime applicable on December was the following. 
      
A foreign national whose marriage to a person with a right of permanent residence has lasted at least three years and who
         has also resided in the Netherlands for a three-year period, holding a residence permit with the condition attached that that
         permit is for purposes of ‘residing with spouse’, could, in principle, despite the breakdown of the marriage, apply for an
         independent residence permit. However, the grant of such a permit could be refused if the foreign national did not have sufficient
         means of subsistence. Furthermore, such a permit could exceptionally be granted on compelling humanitarian grounds or where
         the work undertaken by the foreign national served an essential interest of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
      
This regime was revised with effect from February in two respects by the Foreign Nationals Circular adopted in (‘the circular’). First, the period of residence in the Netherlands prior to the breakdown or dissolution of the marriage,
         which had been three years, was reduced to one year. Second, the lack of means of subsistence could be relied on against a
         foreign national only if the competent authorities could require him to make himself available for work.
      
On April 2001, the Law of November revising in its entirety the Law on Foreign Nationals (Wet van november tot algehele herziening van de Vreemdelingenwet) (Staatsblad 2000, No 495) entered into force. That law was accompanied by a decree on foreign nationals adopted in (Vreemdelingenbesluit
         2000) (Staatsblad 2000, No 497) (‘the Vb 2000’), and a circular on foreign nationals also adopted in (Vreemdelingencirculaire 2000) (‘the
         circular’).
      
The entry into force of the Vb and the circular on April had the effect of rendering the amendments introduced
         in null and void and of reintroducing the conditions for obtaining an independent residence permit which had been in
         force on December 1980.
      
However, transitional rules, based on Article 9.of the Vb 2000, were laid down for foreign nationals who were entitled,
         prior to December 2000, to a residence permit by reason of their marriage. Under those rules, where a foreign national
         has held, for at least one year, a residence permit based on a marriage which lasted three years before it broke down or was
         dissolved, a residence permit for the purposes of ‘seeking and undertaking paid or unpaid employment’ may be issued to that
         foreign national.
      
 The disputes in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
 Case C-300/Toprak
Mr Toprak, a Turkish national, married a Netherlands national on June 2001. On May he entered the Netherlands with
         a provisional residence permit, which was replaced by a temporary residence permit bearing the words ‘for purposes of residing
         with spouse’, the period of validity of which was extended to September 2006.
      
The marriage between Mr Toprak and his spouse effectively broke down on April 2004, that is to say, less than three years
         after it had taken place, and their divorce was pronounced on December 2004, more than three years after the marriage.
         It follows that, between the date of his entry into the Netherlands and the date on which his marriage effectively broke down,
         Mr Toprak had resided with his spouse in the Netherlands for less than three years. 
      
Following his divorce, Mr Toprak made a number of applications to have the words ‘for purposes of residing with spouse’ substituted
         by ‘for purposes of engaging in paid employment’ and for an extension of the temporary residence permit. 
      
Mr Toprak’s applications were rejected by the Minister responsible on the ground that, as from the date of the effective breakdown
         of his marriage, he no longer satisfied the condition of residence with his spouse. Furthermore, although he had worked in
         the Netherlands, Mr Toprak had also not sufficiently demonstrated that, at that date, he satisfied the conditions for obtaining
         a residence permit in order to engage in paid employment on the basis of Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80. In particular,
         he had not shown that he had worked for one year with the same employer or that the latter was prepared to continue to offer
         him work. Nor did his paid employment serve any essential interest of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
      
Mr Toprak lodged an appeal with the Staatssecretaris van Justitie. However, that appeal was dismissed as unfounded.
      
Mr Toprak thereupon brought an action before the Rechtbank ’s‑Gravenhage (District Court, The Hague). That court took the
         view that the tightening of the policy pursued with respect to persons such as Mr Toprak, which followed an earlier relaxation
         of that policy, amounted to a ‘new restriction’ within the meaning of Article of Decision No 1/80. Accordingly, it upheld
         the action, annulled the Staatssecretaris van Justitie’s rejection decision and ordered the latter to take a new decision.
         The Staatssecretaris van Justitie appealed against that ruling to the Raad van State (Council of State).
      
 Case C-301/Oguz
Mr Oguz is a Turkish national who was married to a Turkish national with a permanent right of residence in the Netherlands.
         Their marriage was celebrated on August 2002. Mr Oguz entered the Netherlands one year later and obtained a temporary residence
         permit subject to a condition of ‘residence with spouse’, the period of validity of which was extended up to August 2009.
      
The marriage between Mr Oguz and his spouse effectively broke down on October and their divorce was pronounced on
         July 2006, each of those events occurring more than three years after their marriage. However, between the date of his
         entry into the Netherlands in and the date on which his marriage effectively broke down, Mr Oguz had resided with his
         spouse in the Netherlands for less than three years.
      
On April 2006, Mr Oguz requested that the condition of issue of his residence permit, which bore the words ‘for purposes
         of residing with spouse’, be changed to ‘for purposes of engaging in paid employment’. It is apparent from the order for reference
         that Mr Oguz concluded an employment contract with an employer from April to October 2004, that he had worked for another
         employer from October and that he was hired by a third employer with effect from February 2006.
      
The application for variation of the temporary residence permit was rejected by a number of decisions of the Minister responsible
         on the ground that, from the breakdown of his marriage, MrOguz no longer fulfilled the condition of ‘residence with spouse’
         to which the grant of his residence permit had been made subject. Furthermore, Mr Oguz had failed sufficiently to demonstrate
         that he was entitled to a residence permit for the purposes of engaging in paid employment on the basis of Article 6(1) of
         Decision No 1/80. In particular, he had not shown that he had worked for one year with the same employer or that the latter
         was prepared to continue the employment relationship. Nor did his paid employment serve any essential interest of the Kingdom
         of the Netherlands.
      
Mr Oguz lodged an appeal with the Staatssecretaris van Justitie, who held his appeal to be unfounded. 
      
The Staatssecretaris van Justitie stated, in particular, that Mr Oguz was not entitled to a residence permit under the transitional
         provisions based on Article 9.of the Vb because his residence permit had not been issued to him prior to December
         2000.
      
Mr Oguz brought an action before the Rechtbank ’s-Gravenhage. That court took the view that the Staatssecretaris van Justitie
         had been wrong to base his decision on Article 9.of the Vb 2000, and should instead have applied the policy followed from
         1983. The Rechtbank upheld Mr Oguz’s action, taking the view that the stricter regime applied to him by the Staatssecretaris
         van Justitie, which followed an earlier less restrictive regime for Turkish nationals, constituted a ‘new restriction’ contrary
         to Article of Decision No 1/80. Consequently, it annulled the decisions of the Staatssecretaris van Justitie and ordered
         the latter to take a new decision. The Staatssecretaris has appealed against that ruling to the Raad van State.
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
It was in those circumstances that the Raad van State decided to stay the respective proceedings and to refer the following
         question to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Must Article of Decision No 1/be interpreted as meaning that a new restriction, within the terms of that provision,
         includes a tightening in respect of a provision which entered into force after December 1980, and which constituted a relaxation
         of the provision which had been in force on December 1980, if that tightening does not amount to a deterioration vis-à-vis
         the provision which was in force on December 1980?’
      
By order of the President of the Court of Justice of October 2009, Cases C‑300/and C‑301/were joined for the purposes
         of the written and oral procedure and also of the judgment.
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
 Preliminary observation
It should be noted, as a preliminary point, that Article of Decision No 1/may apply to provisions which appear not only
         in laws or regulations but also in a circular which specifies the manner in which the government concerned intends to apply
         the law.
      
Article applies to restrictions introduced by the Member States, without specifying the nature of the act introducing such
         restrictions.
      
In its judgment of April in Case C-398/Commission v Netherlands, the Court examined the lawfulness of a circular on foreign nationals, similar to those at issue in the main proceedings
         in the present cases, in the light of European Union secondary legislation on the freedom of movement of persons. It held
         that the circular was contrary to that law.
      
It is common ground that the and circulars, like the circular at issue in the case which gave rise to the judgment
         in Case C‑398/Commission v Netherlands, produce effects with respect to the foreign nationals concerned, including Turkish nationals.
      
It follows that Article of Decision No 1/is capable of applying to the provisions of such circulars. 
      
 The Court’s reply
By its question, the national court asks essentially, with regard to a national provision relating to the acquisition of a
         residence permit by Turkish workers such as Mr Toprak and Mr Oguz, whether Article of Decision No 1/must be interpreted
         as meaning that a tightening of a provision introduced after December 1980, which provided for a relaxation of the provision
         applicable on December 1980, constitutes a ‘new restriction’ within the meaning of that article, even where that tightening
         does not make the conditions for acquiring that permit more stringent than those resulting from the provision which was in
         force on December 1980.
      
The question referred by the Raad van State thus essentially relates to the determination of the relevant date for the purposes
         of examining whether there is a new restriction within the meaning of Article of Decision No 1/80.
      
Although the Netherlands Government does not deny that Mr Toprak and Mr Oguz have worked in the Netherlands, it none the less
         submits that there is no need to answer that question, as Article of Decision No 1/is not applicable in the present
         cases on the ground that the regime at issue in the main proceedings relates, not to the conditions of access to employment
         for Turkish workers covered by that article, but to the right of foreign spouses in respect of family reunification.
      
It is necessary to examine that objection before, if necessary, answering the question referred by the national court.
      
The Netherlands Government states that, after three years of marriage and residence of the same period in the Netherlands
         granted on account of that marriage, a foreign national is entitled, in principle, to a right to an independent residence
         permit without any condition that he is to reside with his spouse. However, where the need for family reunification disappears
         before the expiry of those three years because the marriage has broken down, that fact, in principle, puts an end to any right
         of residence. That regime does not concern workers and Article of Decision No 1/is therefore not applicable. As regards
         foreigners with Turkish nationality, since the marriage broke down within that three-year period, they are not entitled to
         any right of residence under the regime at issue and may derive such a right from Article of Decision No 1/only if they
         satisfy the condition of legal employment with the same employer laid down in that article. 
      
In that connection, it is true that that regime does not directly refer to foreign workers but concerns foreign nationals
         married to persons entitled to a right of permanent residence in the Netherlands.
      
However, such a regime may affect foreign workers, in particular Turkish workers, by setting the conditions for the grant
         of independent residence permits, not connected to residence with a spouse. 
      
It is apparent from the files that the situation of Turkish workers married to persons who have a right of permanent residence
         in the Netherlands, in particular Netherlands nationals, changed with effect from April as regards the grant of such
         a permit. Since that date, and in contrast to the situation existing from February 1983, those workers have once again been
         subject to the condition of residence with their spouse in that Member State for a period of three years.
      
The Court has already ruled on changes to the conditions for the grant of a residence permit to Turkish nationals in the light
         of the standstill rules in Article 41(1) of the Additional Protocol and Article of Decision No 1/80. It has held that the
         introduction of an obligation which did not exist when the Additional Protocol entered into force, namely the obligation to
         be in possession of a visa in order to provide certain services in Germany, constitutes a ‘new restriction’ within the meaning
         of Article 41(1) of the Additional Protocol (Case C‑228/Soysal and Savatli [2009] ECR I‑1031, paragraph 57). The Court has also held that the introduction of administrative charges, for the grant
         of a residence permit, in an amount which is disproportionate in comparison with those applied to nationals of the Member
         States constitutes a restriction prohibited by Article of Decision No 1/(Case C-242/Sahin [2009] ECR I‑8465, paragraph 74).
      
In the present cases, the Netherlands regime at issue in the main proceedings also involves changes in the conditions governing
         the granting of certain residence permits. In so far as those changes affect the situation of Turkish workers, such as Mr
         Toprak and Mr Oguz, the view must be taken that such a regime comes within the scope of Article of Decision No 1/80.
      
The fact that the workers concerned are not already integrated into the labour force of the Netherlands, in the sense that
         they do not meet the conditions laid down in Article 6(1) of Decision No 1/80, does not in any way constitute an obstacle
         to the application of Article thereof. The Court has previously held that the standstill rule in Article of Decision
         No 1/is not intended to protect Turkish nationals who are already integrated into a Member State’s labour force, but is
         intended to apply precisely to Turkish nationals who do not yet qualify for the rights in relation to employment and, accordingly,
         residence under Article 6(1) of that decision (see Joined Cases C-317/and C-369/Abatay and Others [2003] ECR I-12301, paragraph 83, and Case C-92/Commission v Netherlands [2010] ECR I-0000, paragraph 45).
      
The Netherlands Government’s argument that Article of Decision No 1/is not applicable to the regime at issue in the
         main proceedings must therefore be rejected, as that article does not deal with the conditions of access to employment for
         the Turkish workers covered by that article, but with the right of foreign spouses in respect of family reunification.
      
It is thus appropriate to examine the date to be taken into account for the purpose of examining whether there is a ‘new restriction’
         within the meaning of Article of Decision No 1/80.
      
The Netherlands, Danish and German Governments take the view that December is the only date which is relevant for ascertaining
         whether a particular law or policy worsens the situation of Turkish workers. Any subsequent amendment which is more favourable
         to those workers should not, they argue, be taken into account.
      
It should be observed that, since the wording of Article of Decision No 1/does not stipulate any particular date from
         which the standstill rule is to apply, the existence of ‘new restrictions’, within the meaning of that article, may be assessed
         in relation to the date of entry into force of the text in which it appears, this being, in the present cases, the date on
         which Decision No 1/entered into force. Furthermore, the Court has referred to that starting point on several occasions.
         Thus, in paragraph of the judgment in Case C‑92/Commission v Netherlands, the Court held that Article of Decision No 1/precludes the introduction into Netherlands law, as from the date on
         which that decision entered into force in the Netherlands, of any new restrictions on the exercise of the free movement of
         workers (see also, inter alia, Abatay and Others, paragraph 74, and Sahin, paragraph 63; see, by way of analogy, as regards the standstill rule laid down in Article 41(1) of the Additional Protocol,
         Abatay and Others, paragraph 66, and Soysal and Savatli, paragraph 47).
      
It does not follow, however, that that is the only relevant date.
      
In order to determine the scope of the term ‘new restrictions’, it is necessary to refer to the objective pursued by Article
         of Decision No 1/80.
      
In paragraph of its judgment in Abatay and Others, the Court held that the standstill rules in Article of Decision No 1/and in Article 41(1) of the Additional Protocol
         pursue the same objective, which is to create conditions conducive to the gradual establishment of freedom of movement for
         workers, of the right of establishment and of freedom to provide services by prohibiting national authorities from creating
         new obstacles to those freedoms so as not to make the gradual achievement of those freedoms more difficult between the Member
         States and the Republic of Turkey.
      
In its judgment in Case C-16/Tum and Dari [2007] ECR I-7415, at paragraph 61, the Court added, with respect to Article 41(1) of the Additional Protocol, that that
         provision is intended to create conditions conducive to the progressive establishment of freedom of establishment by way of
         an absolute prohibition on national authorities from creating any new obstacle to the exercise of that freedom by making more
         stringent the conditions which exist at a given time.
      
Having regard to the convergence in the interpretation of both Article of the Additional Protocol and Article of Decision
         No 1/as regards the objective pursued, it must be held that the scope of the standstill obligation in Article extends
         by analogy to any new obstacle to the exercise of free movement by workers which makes more stringent the conditions which
         exist at a given time.
      
It is thus necessary to ensure that the Member States do not depart from the objective pursued by reversing measures which
         they have adopted in favour of the free movement of Turkish workers subsequent to the entry into force of Decision No 1/within their territory.
      
It follows that, in cases such as those in the main proceedings, the relevant date from which it is appropriate to assess
         whether the introduction of the new rules gives rise to ‘new restrictions’ is the date on which those provisions were adopted.
      
This interpretation follows the direction taken by the Court in its interpretation of standstill rules in other areas of European
         Union law, including that of the right to deduct value added tax as laid down in Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC of May
         on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes – Common system of value added tax:
         uniform basis of assessment (OJ L 145, p. 1; ‘the Sixth Directive’), and that of the free movement of capital.
      
With regard to value added tax, the Court has held that national rules infringe the standstill rule in Article 17(6) of the
         Sixth Directive if their effect is to increase, after the entry into force of that directive, the extent of existing exclusions,
         thus diverging from the objective of that directive. The Court stated that the same is true of any amendment subsequent to
         the entry into force of that directive which increases the extent of exclusions applicable immediately prior to that amendment.
         It is of little importance, in this regard, that the amendment does not extend the scope of the exclusions which applied when
         the directive came into force (see Case C-40/Commission v France [2001] ECR I-4539, paragraphs to 19).
      
The Court has ruled along the same lines with regard to the exception laid down in Article 57(1) EC concerning free movement
         of capital, which allows measures on the movement of capital to or from non-member countries which existed in national law
         on December to be maintained in force. It held that the notion of a restriction existing on the date indicated in
         that article, namely December 1993, presupposed that the legal provision relating to the restriction in question formed
         part of the legal order of the Member State concerned continuously since that date. It added that, if that were not the case,
         a Member State could, at any time, reintroduce restrictions on the movement of capital to or from non-member countries which
         existed as part of the national legal order on December but had not been maintained. The Court accordingly concluded
         that the exception did not cover a provision which reintroduced an obstacle which, following the repeal of earlier legislation,
         no longer existed (Case C‑101/A [2007] ECR I‑11531, paragraphs and 49). 
      
Therefore, it must be held that, by adopting provisions which make the conditions applicable to Turkish workers for the acquisition
         of a residence permit more stringent than the conditions which were previously applicable to them, under provisions adopted
         since the entry into force of Decision No 1/within the territory concerned, a Member State introduces ‘new restrictions’
         within the meaning of Article of that decision. 
      
In situations such as those of the cases in the main proceedings, it is for the national court to determine whether, in the
         light of the circular, the circular makes it more difficult for Turkish workers to obtain an independent residence
         permit and whether Mr Toprak and Mr Oguz met the conditions laid down in the circular. If such a permit is more difficult
         to acquire pursuant to the circular, the latter will constitute a ‘new restriction’, within the meaning of Article of Decision No 1/80, even if that circular did no more than reintroduce provisions which existed in Netherlands law on December
         1980.
      
In the light of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the question referred is that, in circumstances such as those
         of the cases in the main proceedings, concerning a national provision on the acquisition of a residence permit by Turkish
         workers, Article of Decision No 1/must be interpreted as meaning that a tightening of a provision introduced after December
         1980, which provided for a relaxation of the provision applicable on December 1980, constitutes a ‘new restriction’ within
         the meaning of that article, even where that tightening does not make the conditions governing the acquisition of that permit
         more stringent than those which resulted from the provision in force on December 1980, this being a matter for the national
         court to determine.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the actions pending before the national court,
         the decisions on costs are a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the
         costs of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
In circumstances such as those of the cases in the main proceedings, concerning a national provision on the acquisition of
            a residence permit by Turkish workers, Article of Decision No 1/of September on the development of the Association,
            adopted by the Association Council established by the Agreement establishing an Association between the European Economic
            Community and Turkey, must be interpreted as meaning that a tightening of a provision introduced after December 1980, which
            provided for a relaxation of the provision applicable on December 1980, constitutes a ‘new restriction’ within the meaning
            of that article, even where that tightening does not make the conditions governing the acquisition of that permit more stringent
            than those which resulted from the provision in force on December 1980, this being a matter for the national court to determine.
[Signatures]
* Language of the cases: Dutch.
      
Top  
 