
Case C-102/Camar Srl
v
Presidenza del Consiglio dei Ministri
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Tribunale di Firenze)
(International agreements – Yaoundé Convention – Fourth ACP-EEC Lomé Convention – Standstill clause – Internal taxation – Bananas)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        International agreements – First Yaoundé Convention – General trade arrangements
(Art. EC; First Yaoundé Convention of July 1963, Art. 14)
2.        International agreements – Fourth ACP-EEC Lomé Convention – General trade arrangements
(Fourth ACP-EEC Lomé Convention of December 1989, Protocol No 5, Art. 1)
1.        Article of the Convention of Association between the European Economic Community and the African States and Madagascar
         associated with the Community, signed at Yaoundé on July 1963, did not preclude a tax on bananas originating in Somalia.
         According to its wording, that provision simply imposes a prohibition on discriminatory taxation of like products, using terms
         resembling those in the first paragraph of Article EC, and does not therefore relate to unlike products that are in competition
         with each other. 
      
If the Community and the African States and Madagascar associated with the Community had intended to address the problem of
         the internal taxation of unlike products in competition with each other, instead of adopting a provision similar only to the
         first paragraph of Article EC, they would have adopted a provision that was also modelled on the second paragraph of Article
         EC.
      
(see paras 24-25, 37-38, operative part 1)
2.        A national court is not required to examine the specific effects of increases of a tax on imports of bananas originating in
         Somalia by comparison with the situation before April 1976, the date when the First ACP‑EEC Lomé Convention entered into
         force, in order to determine whether such increases are compatible with the standstill clause in Article of Protocol No
         on bananas annexed to the Fourth ACP‑EEC Lomé Convention.
      
Such increases lead to increases in the price of the bananas concerned and, accordingly, make it more difficult to sell them
         on the market in question. Accordingly, in order to examine such an increase from the perspective of the standstill clause,
         it is not normally necessary to examine the specific effects of the increase on imports.
      
However, increases of such a tax which simply adjust it to take account of inflation are not incompatible with that Article
         of Protocol No 5.
      
(see paras 43, 45, 47, 48, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
April (*)
      
(International agreements – Yaoundé Convention – Fourth ACP-EEC Lomé Convention – Standstill clause – Internal taxation – Bananas)
In Case C‑102/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Tribunale di Firenze (Italy), made by decision of February
         2009, received at the Court on March 2009, in the proceedings
      
Camar Srl
v
Presidenza del Consiglio dei Ministri,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, R. Silva de Lapuerta, J. Malenovský, T. von Danwitz (Rapporteur) and D.
         Šváby, Judges,
      
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: R. Şereş, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on February 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Camar Srl, by W. Viscardini and G. Donà, avvocati,
–        the Italian Government, by G. Palmieri, acting as Agent, and P. Gentili, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the European Commission, by L. Prete and A. Bordes, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article of the Convention of Association between
         the European Economic Community and the African States and Madagascar associated with the Community, signed at Yaoundé on
         July (JO 93, p. 1431) (‘the First Yaoundé Convention’), and Article of Protocol No on bananas annexed to
         the Fourth ACP-EEC Convention, signed at Lomé on December (OJ L 229, p. 3) (‘the Fourth Lomé Convention’).
      
The reference was made in an action for damages brought by Camar Srl (‘Camar’) against the Presidenza del Consiglio dei Ministri
         (Office of the Prime Minister) on account of the damage which that company claims to have suffered as a result of an alleged
         infringement of Community law on the part of the Cortre suprema di Cassazione (Court of Cassation).
      
 Legal context
 The international conventions
Article of the First Yaoundé Convention, which forms part of Title thereof, entitled ‘Trade’, provides as follows:
      
‘In order to promote an increase in trade between Associate States and Member States, to strengthen their economic relations
         and the economic independence of the Associate States and thus contribute to the development of international trade, the High
         Contracting Parties have agreed on the following provisions governing their trade with each other.’
      
Article of the First Yaoundé Convention is worded as follows:
      
‘Without prejudice to the special provisions laid down in this Convention, in particular the provisions in Article 3, each
         Contracting Party shall refrain from any internal fiscal measure or practice that directly or indirectly leads to discrimination
         between its own products and like products originating in the territory of the other Contracting Parties.’
      
The First Yaoundé Convention was replaced by the Convention of Association between the European Economic Community and the
         African States and Madagascar associated with the Community, signed at Yaoundé on July (OJ English Special Edition
         1970(II), p. 7) (‘the Second Yaoundè Convention’). Article of that convention provides, in terms which are almost identical
         to Article of the First Yaoundé Convention, as follows:
      
‘Without prejudice to the special provisions laid down in this Convention, each party shall refrain from any internal fiscal
         measure or practice that directly or indirectly leads to discrimination between its own products and like products originating
         in the territory of the other Contracting Parties.’
      
The ACP-EEC Convention signed at Lomé on February (OJ L 25, p. 2) (‘the First Lomé Convention’) replaced the
         Second Yaoundé Convention. Paragraph of Protocol No on bananas, annexed to the First Lomé Convention, provides as follows:
      
‘1.      As regards its exports of bananas to the Community, no [African, Caribbean or Pacific (ACP)] State will be placed, as regards
         access to markets and advantages on the market, in a less favourable situation than in the past or at present.’
      
Formulated in virtually the same terms, Article of Protocol No on bananas, annexed to the Fourth Lomé Convention, provides
         as follows:
      
‘As regards its exports of bananas to the markets of the Community, no ACP State will be placed, as regards access to its
         traditional markets and its advantages on those markets, in a less favourable situation than in the past or at present.’
      
Article of Protocol No on bananas, annexed to the Second ACP-EEC Convention, signed at Lomé on October (OJ L 347, p. 140), and to the Third ACP-EEC Convention, signed at Lomé on December (OJ L 86, p. 3), is also worded
         in virtually the same terms.
      
In accordance with Article 2(1)(f) of Decision No 2/of the ACP-EEC Council of Ministers of February on transitional
         measures to be applied from March (OJ L 84, p. 2) and Article and the second paragraph of Article of Council
         Regulation (EEC) No 714/of March concerning the application of Decision No 2/(OJ L 84, p. 1), Protocol No on bananas annexed to the Fourth Lomé Convention was to apply with effect from March 1990.
      
 National legislation
Law No 986/of October (GURI No of October 1964) introduced a domestic tax on the consumption of fresh bananas.
         That law was repealed by Law No 428/of December (GURI No of January 1991). Over the years, the amount of
         that tax gradually increased and, by the time it was abolished, had reached the rate of ITL per kilogram. At that time
         there was no tax on the consumption of fruit traditionally produced in Italy.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Camar challenged, in two sets of proceedings, the tax claimed from it under Law No 986/in connection with imports of
         bananas originating in Somalia. Those proceedings concluded with two judgments of the Corte suprema di cassazione.
      
In its subsequent action before the Tribunale di Firenze (District Court, Florence), Camar submitted that the Corte suprema
         di cassazione disregarded Community law, in particular the obligation under Article EC, by dismissing the actions brought
         before it without referring certain questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling.
      
It is apparent from the information provided by Camar at the hearing that the importations with which the main proceedings
         are concerned took place after March 1990. At that time, there was very little, if any, production of bananas in Italy.
      
The Tribunale di Firenze states that it is necessary to examine whether Law No 986/is compatible with the obligations
         arising under the international conventions referred to at paragraphs to above as a preliminary issue for the purpose
         of assessing the merits of Camar’s action for damages. It considers that that examination raises complex questions of law
         which have yet to be fully settled by the Court’s case-law in this field.
      
Against that background, the Tribunale di Firenze stayed proceedings and referred the following questions to the Court of
         Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Did Article of the First Yaoundé Convention preclude the introduction by a Member State of an internal tax on bananas originating
         in Somalia, which was not in practice applied to domestically produced bananas (the production of which was totally non-existent
         or insignificant) and was not applicable to any other type of domestically produced fruit?
      
If the answer to Question is yes:
(2)      Did the Protocol on Bananas annexed to the Lomé Convention then in force preclude collection of a tax that was incompatible
         with Article of the First Yaoundé Convention in respect of imports into Italy of Somali bananas effected in 1990, having
         regard to the combined provisions of that protocol and of the analogous protocols annexed to the earlier Lomé Conventions,
         and also Article of the Second Yaoundé Convention?
      
If the answer to Question is no:
(3)      Must it be concluded that the Protocols on Bananas annexed to the Lomé Conventions precluded increases of a tax such as the
         Italian consumption tax on bananas originating in Somalia after April 1976, regardless of the specific effect of such increases
         on the export of such bananas?’
      
 The questions 
 Questions 1and By its first question, the Tribunale di Firenze seeks to ascertain, in essence, whether Article of the First Yaoundé Convention
         precluded the introduction of a tax such as that imposed in Law No 986/1964, so that, even after the Yaoundé Conventions ceased
         to be applicable, a Member State could not levy a tax in respect of imports of bananas originating in an Associate State under
         that law.
      
In order to answer that question, it is necessary to consider, first, whether, at the time when it was introduced, Article
         of the First Yaoundé Convention precluded a Member State from levying under a law such as Law No 986/a tax on the
         consumption of bananas originating in Somalia. For that purpose, it is necessary to analyse the scope of Article 14, without
         there being any need to determine whether that provision has direct effect. As is apparent from the wording of Question 1,
         the Tribunale di Firenze is uncertain as to the scope of Article 14, regardless of whether it may have direct effect.
      
Article of the First Yaoundé Convention provides that each contracting party is to refrain from any internal fiscal measure
         or practice that directly or indirectly leads to discrimination between its own products and like products originating in
         the territory of the other contracting parties.
      
It is apparent from the order for reference that, at the time of the facts in the main proceedings, the production of bananas
         in Italy was negligible or non-existent and must therefore be disregarded. The criterion of similarity on which, according
         to its wording, the prohibition in Article of the First Yaoundé Convention is based must be assessed in relation to table
         fruit typically produced in the Member State concerned (see, by analogy, Case 184/Commission v Italy [1987] ECR 2013, paragraph 8).
      
In that connection, it should be recalled that the Court has had to rule on whether bananas and other table fruits produced
         in Italy were similar in disputes relating to the interpretation of the first paragraph of Article of the EEC Treaty (subsequently
         the first paragraph of Article of the EC Treaty and now the first paragraph of Article EC). It held that those two categories
         of products were not similar for the purposes of the first paragraph of Article EEC, since they have different characteristics
         and do not satisfy the same consumer needs (see Commission v Italy, paragraphs and 10, and Case 193/Cooperative Co-Frutta [1987] ECR 2085, paragraphs and 18).
      
The Court held that the organoleptic characteristics and the water content of those categories of product differ and that
         the banana is regarded, at least on the Italian market, as a foodstuff which is particularly nutritious, of a high energy
         content and well suited for infants (see Commission v Italy, paragraph 10).
      
Camar does not call into question that assessment of the facts. On the other hand, it has put forward arguments weighing in
         favour of a broader interpretation of Article of the First Yaoundé Convention than that which must be applied, according
         to the judgments cited above, to the first paragraph of Article EC.
      
Camar considers that Article of the First Yaoundé Convention must be interpreted as prohibiting not only discriminatory
         taxation of like products but also, bringing together the provisions in the first and second paragraphs of Article EC,
         any form of indirect fiscal protectionism benefiting national products which are in competition with imported products. It
         argues that any interpretation of Article which is based on the premiss that imported products have the same characteristics
         as national products would deprive that provision of any practical effect, since the products from African countries covered
         by the First Yaoundé Convention are all tropical products whose characteristics differ from those of products from the Member
         States.
      
However, it should be noted that no support is to be found in the wording of Article of the First Yaoundé Convention for
         the interpretation proposed by Camar. That provision simply imposes a prohibition on discriminatory taxation of like products,
         using terms resembling those in the first paragraph of Article EC. According to the case-law on that provision, it is accepted
         that the like products to which that prohibition applies are products with similar characteristics which satisfy the same
         consumer needs (see, to that effect, Commission v Italy, paragraphs and 10).
      
It follows that, if the Community and the African States and Madagascar associated with the Community had intended to address
         the problem of the internal taxation of unlike products which are in competition with each other, instead of adopting a provision
         which was similar only to the first paragraph of Article EC, they would have adopted a provision which was also modelled
         on the second paragraph of Article EC (see, by analogy, Case C‑469/Chiquita Italia [1995] ECR I‑4533, paragraph 43).
      
It is clear, therefore, that the interpretation of Article of the First Yaoundé Convention proposed by Camar is irreconcilable
         with the wording of that article.
      
It remains to be considered whether it is necessary, in order to satisfy the objective of the First Yaoundé Convention, to
         interpret Article 14, in spite of the terse wording of that provision, as also being directed at internal fiscal measures
         similar to those prohibited by the second paragraph of Article EC.
      
It should be noted, first of all, that it is unnecessary, contrary to Camar’s submissions, to interpret Article of the
         First Yaoundé Convention in a manner that is broader than its wording strictly permits, in order to ensure that it is fully
         effective.
      
First, the words ‘like products’ must be interpreted not as meaning that the products must be identical but simply as excluding
         products with different characteristics which do not satisfy the same consumer needs, as pointed out at paragraph above.
         It follows that even characteristically tropical products cannot, in general, be regarded as dissimilar by comparison with
         products originating in the Member States.
      
Second, according to its wording, Article of the First Yaoundé Convention relates to products originating in the territories
         of the contracting parties in general and is not confined to tropical products.
      
Secondly, in a wider context, any interpretation of Article of the First Yaoundé Convention according to which the scope
         of that provision extends to a prohibition of internal fiscal measures, such as those referred to in the second paragraph
         of Article EC, cannot be accepted. Those two provisions have different underlying objectives, so that they cannot be treated
         as equivalent through their interpretation.
      
According to the Court’s case-law, the purpose of Article EC is to guarantee the free movement of goods between the Member
         States in normal conditions of competition, prohibiting any form of protection which may result from the application to goods
         originating in other Member States of internal taxes of a discriminatory nature and to guarantee the complete neutrality of
         internal taxation as regards competition between domestic products and imported products (see, to that effect, Commission v Italy, paragraph 7)
      
Similarly, the interpretation of that provision must take account of the objectives of the Treaty as laid down in Articles
         EC, EC and EC, which include, in the first place, the establishment of an internal market in which the free movement
         of goods, persons, services and capital is guaranteed (see, to that effect, Case 299/Drexl [1988] ECR 1213, paragraph 24).
      
Clearly, those objectives underlying Article EC are absent from the First Yaoundé Convention. According to Article of
         the convention, which, like Article 14, forms part of Title I, entitled ‘Trade’, the objective of the convention is to promote
         an increase in trade between the Associate States and the Member States, to strengthen their economic relations and the economic
         independence of the Associate States and thus contribute to the development of international trade.
      
The conclusion that, in order to satisfy the objective of the First Yaoundé Convention, it is unnecessary to interpret Article
         in a manner that is broader than its wording strictly permits, so as to confer on that provision a scope that is comparable
         to that of the second paragraph of Article EC, is also supported by the Court’s interpretation of provisions that are virtually
         identical to Article in disputes relating to agreements aimed at establishing a system of free trade. The Court has held
         that those provisions imposed on the contracting parties a rule against discrimination in matters of taxation, which is dependent
         only on a finding that the products affected by a particular system of taxation are of like nature (see Case 104/Kupferberg [1982] ECR 3641, paragraph 26, and Joined Cases C‑114/and C‑115/Texaco and Olieselskabet Danmark [1997] ECR I‑4263, paragraph 31).
      
Moreover, the Court has expressly held that the scope of a provision in a free trade agreement similar to Article of the
         First Yaoundé Convention does not extend beyond the prohibition of discriminatory taxation of like products. As regards the
         first paragraph of Article of the agreement between the European Economic Community and the Portuguese Republic signed
         in Brussels on July 1972, concluded and approved on behalf of the Community by Council Regulation  (EEC) No 2844/of
         December (OJ English Special Edition 1972(I), p. 166), the Court decided, at paragraph of Kupferberg, that there is no discrimination within the meaning of Article where a Member State does not apply to products originating
         in the non-Member country concerned a tax reduction provided for certain classes of producers or kinds of products if there
         is no like product on the market of the Member State concerned which has in fact benefited from such reduction.
      
Accordingly, it must be concluded that the prohibition laid down in Article of the First Yaoundé Convention is confined,
         in accordance with its wording, to discriminatory taxation of like products and does not therefore relate to unlike products
         which are in competition with each other.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to Question is that Article of the First Yaoundé Convention did not preclude
         a tax on bananas originating in Somalia such as that introduced by Law No 986/1964.
      
Given the answer to Question 1, it is unnecessary to answer Question 2.
      
 Question By its third question, the Tribunale di Firenze seeks to ascertain, in essence, whether, in order for the national court to
         apply the standstill clause in the protocols on bananas annexed to the Lomé Conventions, it is necessary to examine the specific
         effects of increases of a tax such as that introduced by Law No 986/in order to determine whether such increases are
         compatible with that clause.
      
Since the Tribunale di Firenze has failed to specify the Lomé Convention to which it intends to refer, it is necessary to
         determine, first, which of the four Lomé Conventions must be taken into account in the light of the circumstances in the main
         proceedings. It is apparent from the information provided by Camar at the hearing that the imports which gave rise to the
         levying of the tax at issue in this case took place after March 1990. Since Protocol No on bananas annexed to the Fourth
         Lomé Convention was applicable from March 1990, in accordance with Article 2(1)(f) of Decision No 2/and Article and
         the second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 714/90, reference must be made to that convention.
      
Article of that protocol takes the form of a standstill clause. In other words, that provision aims to ensure that bananas
         from ACP States have access to their traditional markets upon conditions and according to rules which are no less favourable
         than those which existed when it entered into force. However, that guarantee of access benefits bananas from ACP States only
         up to the quantities imported when that provision entered into force (Chiquita Italia, paragraph 59).
      
The first three Lomé Conventions all contained a standstill clause worded in terms similar to those in Article of Protocol
         No on bananas annexed to the Fourth Lomé Convention (Chiquita Italia, paragraph 62). Since the First Lomé Convention entered into force on April 1976, that date is the reference point for
         the application of the standstill clause (see, to that effect, Chiquita Italia, paragraph 63).
      
It is therefore for the referring court to establish whether the imports at issue in the main proceedings involved quantities
         of bananas of the order of those imported when the First Lomé Convention entered into force on April 1976.
      
More specifically, with regard to the referring court’s question concerning the examination to be carried out to determine
         whether increases of a tax such as that at issue in the main proceedings are compatible with the standstill clause in Article
         of Protocol No on bananas annexed to the Fourth Lomé Convention, such increases lead to increases in the price of the
         bananas concerned and, accordingly, make it more difficult to sell them on the market in question (Chiquita Italia, paragraph 60). Accordingly, in order to examine such an increase from the perspective of the standstill clause, it is not
         normally necessary to examine the specific effects of the increase on imports.
      
However, in the case presented in the parties’ arguments in which such increases are aimed solely at bringing a tax such as
         that introduced by Law No 986/in line with inflation, the purpose of that standstill clause is to prevent banana exports
         being placed in a situation less favourable than before as regards access to their traditional markets and the advantages
         they enjoy on those markets (see, to that effect, Chiquita Italia, paragraph 63) so that the clause relates to the actual situation in those markets.
      
Accordingly, in so far as increases of a tax such as that at issue in the main proceedings are confined to adjusting the tax
         to take account of inflation in order to maintain the actual taxation of the goods at a consistent level, such increases are
         not contrary to Article of Protocol No on bananas annexed to the Fourth Lomé Convention.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to Question is that the national court is not required to examine the specific
         effects of increases of a tax on imports of bananas originating in Somalia, such as the tax introduced by the legislation
         at issue in the main proceedings, by comparison with the situation before April 1976, in order to determine whether such
         increases are compatible with the standstill clause in Article of Protocol No on bananas annexed to the Fourth Lomé Convention.
         However, increases of such a tax which simply adjust it to take account of inflation are not incompatible with that clause.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article of the Convention of Association between the European Economic Community and the African States and Madagascar
            associated with the Community, signed at Yaoundé on July 1963, did not preclude a tax on bananas originating in Somalia
            such as that introduced by Law No 986/of October 1964.
2.      The national court is not required to examine the specific effects of increases of a tax on imports of bananas originating
            in Somalia, such as the tax introduced by the legislation at issue in the main proceedings, by comparison with the situation
            before April 1976, in order to determine whether such increases are compatible with the standstill clause in Article of
            Protocol No on bananas annexed to the Fourth Lomé Convention. However, increases of such a tax which simply adjust it to
            take account of inflation are not incompatible with that clause.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 