
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-396/Commission of the European Communities
v
Ireland
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 91/676/EEC – Protection of waters against pollution caused by nitrates from agricultural sources – Identification of waters affected by pollution and waters which could be affected by pollution – Designation of vulnerable zones which contribute to pollution – Establishment of action programmes in respect of designated vulnerable zones – Monitoring and review)
Summary of the Judgment
Environment – Protection of waters against pollution caused by nitrates from agricultural sources – Directive 91/– Identification
            of waters affected by pollution or waters which could be affected by pollution – Member States’ obligations – Scope
(Council Directive 91/676, Arts 3(1), and 5, paras A(1), (2) and (3) of Annex I)
Pursuant to Article 3(1) of Directive 91/concerning the protection of waters against pollution caused by nitrates from
         agricultural sources, read in conjunction with paragraphs A(1) and A(2) of Annex I thereto, the Member States are obliged
         to identify as waters affected by pollution, or as waters which could be affected by pollution, not only waters intended for
         human consumption but also all surface freshwaters and groundwaters which have or could have a nitrate concentration in excess
         of mg/l. 
      
Moreover, pursuant to the same article, in conjunction with paragraph A(3) of Annex I to Directive 91/676, Member States are
         required to identify eutrophic freshwaters or freshwaters at risk of eutrophication in the near future if action pursuant
         to Article of the directive is not taken. 
      
(see paras 25, 43)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)March 2004(1)
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations  –  Directive 91/676/EEC  –  Protection of waters against pollution caused by nitrates from agricultural sources  –  Identification of waters affected by pollution and waters which could be affected by pollution  –  Designation of vulnerable zones which contribute to pollution  –  Establishment of action programmes in respect of designated vulnerable zones  –  Monitoring and review)
 In Case C-396/01, 
            
Commission of the European Communities,  represented by R.B. Wainwright, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, 
v
Ireland,  represented by D.J. O'Hagan, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
defendant, 
 APPLICATION for a declaration that:by failing, within the time-limits provided for in Council Directive 91/676/EEC of December concerning the protection
            of waters against pollution caused by nitrates from agricultural sources (OJ L 375, p. 1), 
            
–
 to identify completely waters pursuant to Article 3(1) in accordance with the criteria set out in Annex I and to notify these
            to the Commission, 
            
–
 to designate vulnerable zones pursuant to Article 3(2) and/or Article 3(4) thereof, 
            
–
 to establish action programmes in accordance with Article of the Directive, and 
            
–
 to carry out correctly and completely monitoring and review of waters in accordance with Article 6(1)(a), (b) and (c) of the
            Directive,
            
 Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations thereunder.
            
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),,
 composed of: P. Jann, acting for the President of the Chamber, C.W.A. Timmermans and S. von Bahr (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By application lodged at the Court Registry on October 2001, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         under Article EC seeking a declaration that:
          by failing, within the time-limits provided for in Council Directive 91/676/EEC of December concerning the protection
         of waters against pollution caused by nitrates from agricultural sources (OJ L 375, p. 1, ‘the Directive’), 
         
–
to identify completely waters pursuant to Article 3(1) in accordance with the criteria set out in Annex I and to notify these
               to the Commission, 
            
–
by failing to designate vulnerable zones pursuant to Article 3(2) and/or Article 3(4) thereof, 
–
by failing to establish action programmes in accordance with Article of the Directive, and 
–
by failing to correctly and completely carry out monitoring and review of waters in accordance with Article 6(1)(a), (b) and
               (c) of the Directive,
            
 Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations thereunder.
         
Legal background
            
 Article of the Directive states that the objective of the Directive is to reduce water pollution caused or induced by nitrates
         from agricultural sources and to prevent further such pollution.
         
            
 Under Article 2(j) of the Directive, ‘pollution’ means ‘the discharge, directly or indirectly, of nitrogen compounds from
         agricultural sources into the aquatic environment, the results of which are such as to cause hazards to human health, harm
         to living resources and to aquatic ecosystems, damage to amenities or interference with other legitimate uses of water’.
         
            
 Article of the Directive provides:
         ‘1. Waters affected by pollution and waters which could be affected by pollution if action pursuant Article is not taken
         shall be identified by the Member States in accordance with the criteria set out in Annex I. 
          2. Member States shall, within a two-year period following the notification of this Directive, designate as vulnerable zones
         all known areas of land in their territories which drain into the waters identified according to paragraph and which contribute
         to pollution. They shall notify the Commission of this initial designation within six months.
          3. When any waters identified by a Member State in accordance with paragraph are affected by pollution from waters from
         another Member State draining directly or indirectly in to them, the Member States whose waters are affected may notify the
         other Member States and the Commission of the relevant facts.
          The Member States concerned shall organise, where appropriate with the Commission, the concertation necessary to identify
         the sources in question and the measures to be taken to protect the waters that are affected in order to ensure conformity
         with this Directive.
          4. Member States shall review and if necessary revise or add to the designation of vulnerable zones as appropriate, and at
         least every four years, to take into account changes and factors unforeseen at the time of the previous designation. They
         shall notify the Commission of any revision or addition to the designations within six months.
          5. Member States shall be exempt from the obligation to identify specific vulnerable zones, if they establish and apply action
         programmes referred to in Article in accordance with this Directive throughout their national territory.’ 
         
            
 Article 5(1) to (4) provides as follows:
         ‘1. Within a two-year period following the initial designation referred to in Article 3(2) or within one year of each additional
         designation referred to in Article 3(4), Member States shall, for the purpose of realising the objectives specified in Article
         1, establish action programmes in respect of designated vulnerable zones. 
          2. An action programme may relate to all vulnerable zones in the territory of a Member State or, where the Member State considers
         it appropriate, different programmes may be established for different vulnerable zones or parts of zones.
          3. Action programmes shall take into account:
         
(a) 
available scientific and technical data, mainly with reference to respective nitrogen contributions originating from agricultural
               and other sources;
            
(b) 
environmental conditions in the relevant regions of the Member State concerned.
 4. Action programmes shall be implemented within four years of their establishment and shall consist of the following mandatory
         measures:
         
(a)
the measures in Annex III;
(b)
those measures which Member States have prescribed in the code(s) of good agricultural practice established in accordance
               with Article 4, except those which have been superseded by the measures in Annex III.’
            
            
 Article of the Directive provides:
         ‘1. For the purpose of designating and revising the designation of vulnerable zones, Member States shall: 
         
(a)
within two years of notification of the Directive, monitor the nitrate concentration in freshwaters over a period of one year:
(i)
at surface water sampling stations, laid down in Article 5(4) of [Council] Directive 75/440/EEC [of June concerning
                     the quality required of surface water intended for the abstraction of drinking water in the Member States (OJ L 194,
                     p. 26)] and/or at other sampling stations which are representative of surface waters of Member States, at least monthly and
                     more frequently during flood periods;
                  
(ii)
at sampling stations which are representative of the groundwater aquifers of Member States, at regular intervals and taking
                     into account the provisions of Directive 80/778/EEC;
                  
(b)
repeat the monitoring programme outlined in (a) at least every four years, except for those sampling stations where the nitrate
               concentration in all previous samples has been below mg/l and no new factor likely to increase the nitrate content has
               appeared, in which case the monitoring programme need be repeated only every eight years;
            
(c)
review the eutrophic state of their fresh surface waters, estuarial and coastal waters every four years.
 2. The reference methods of measurement set out in Annex IV shall be used.’
         
            
 Annex I of the Directive, entitled ‘Criteria for identifying waters referred to in Article 3(1)’, provides:
         ‘A.     Waters referred to in Article 3(1) shall be identified making use, inter alia, of the following criteria:
         
1.
whether surface freshwaters, in particular those used or intended for the abstraction of drinking water, contain or could
               contain, if action pursuant to Article is not taken, more than the concentration of nitrates laid down in accordance with
               [Council] Directive 75/440/EEC [of June concerning the quality required of surface water intended for the abstraction
               of drinking water in the Member States (OJ L 194, p. 26)]; 
            
2.
whether groundwaters contain more than mg/l nitrates or could contain more than mg/l nitrates if action pursuant to
               Article is not taken; 
            
3.
whether natural freshwater lakes, other freshwater bodies, estuaries, coastal waters and marine waters are found to be eutrophic
               or in the near future may become euthropic if action pursuant to Article is not taken.
            
 B.       In applying these criteria, Member States shall also take account of:
         
1.
the pyhsical and environmental characteristics of the waters and land; 
2.
the current understanding of the behaviour of nitrogen compounds in the environment (water and soil); 
3.
the current understanding of the impact of the action taken pursuant to Article 5.’
            
 Under Article 12(1) of the Directive, the Member States are to bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions
         necessary to comply with it within two years of its notification. According to a footnote to that article, the Directive was
         notified to the Member States on December 1991. 
         
The pre-litigation procedure
            
 On May 1995, the Commission sent a letter of formal notice to Ireland concerning its failure to notify the laws, regulations
         and administrative provisions it had adopted to comply with the Directive.
         
            
 By letter of July the Irish authorities informed the Commission of the measures they had taken to comply with the
         Directive. In that letter they stated that they were satisfied that, further to monitoring and assessment of water quality
         data, no waters coming within Article 3(1) of the Directive had been identified and that, in those circumstances, there was
         no need to designate vulnerable zones under Article 3(2). They contended that, in the absence of any designated vulnerable
         zones, Article of the Directive was not applicable.
         
            
 On October and July 1999, the Commission sent two supplementary letters of formal notice to Ireland.
         
            
 The Irish authorities replied by letter of November 1999, confirming that an expert panel had identified waters in several
         counties for the purposes of Article of the Directive, that the exercise of identifying waters was continuing, and that
         work was in progress to make designations for the purposes of Article 3(2) of the Directive.
         
            
 Between and 2000, the Commission drew up a study in relation to Ireland entitled: ‘Verification of the vulnerable zones
         identified under the Nitrates Directive’ (‘the Verification Study’). 
         
            
 On July 2000, in the light of the Verification Study and other considerations, the Commission sent a third supplementary
         letter of formal notice to Ireland.
         
            
 As no reply was received with regard to the substance of that letter the Commission sent a reasoned opinion to the Republic
         of Ireland on February 2001, in which the claims made were the same as those made in the application and the Member State
         was called upon to take the measures necessary to comply with it within two months of its notification.
         
            
 On March 2001, the Irish authorities submitted a report on the period from to pursuant to Article of the Directive.
         
            
 By letter of April 2001, the Irish Government replied to that reasoned opinion, making reference to the publication, in
         March 2001, of a report prepared by Ireland’s Environmental Protection Agency (‘the EPA’) under the title ‘An Assessment of
         the Trophic Status of Estuaries and Bays in Ireland’. That report confirmed that named tidal waters were eutrophic within
         the meaning of the Directive and assessed four named tidal waters as being potentially eutrophic. The Irish authorities stated
         that all eutrophic and potentially eutrophic estuarine waters were being considered for possible designation as affected waters,
         and for possible designation of their relevant drainage areas as nitrate vulnerable zones.
         
            
 By letter dated July 2001, Ireland notified the Commission of four bye-laws relating to agricultural activities adopted
         by the authorities of the counties of Cavan, Westmeath, Cork and Tipperary (North Riding).
         
            
 Taking the view that, notwithstanding the information provided by the Irish authorities, the situation remained unsatisfactory,
         the Commission decided to bring the present action before the Court.
         
The actionThe first head of claim: breach of Article 3(1) of the Directive Surface waters coming within the scope of paragraph A(1) of Annex I to the Directive 
         
            
 In the first part of this first head of claim, the Commission explains that paragraph A(1) of Annex I to the Directive refers
         to two main categories of surface waters used or intended for the abstraction of drinking water: first, waters containing
         a concentration of nitrates of more than mg/l and, second, waters which could contain a concentration of more than mg/l
         if action pursuant to Article of the Directive is not taken.
         
            
 As regards the first category, the Commission notes that, in their letter of July replying to the letter of formal
         notice of May 1995, the Irish authorities confirmed that 2% of all the samples from water courses in the period from to showed concentrations greater than mg/l. However, none of the waters concerned was identified by Ireland for the
         purposes of Article 3(1) of the Directive. The Commission argues that the Member State is seeking to justify its failure to
         identify such waters by the fact that the nitrate concentrations were linked to miscellaneous point sources of pollution.
         
            
 As regard waters in the second category, the Commission states that, according to a study by the Irish authorities, there
         are surface waters in Ireland that should be identified for the purposes of Article 3(1) of the Directive. The Commission
         also refers to evidence of upward trends in nitrate levels linked to agriculture in several Irish river catchments. In that
         regard, it refers to the report of the EPA concerning the period from to 1999. 
         
            
 Further, the Commission points out that, as regards the criteria in paragraph A(1) of Annex I to the Directive, the Verification
         Study, carried out by the Commission and finalised in March 2000, identified a number of rivers that should have been identified
         for the purposes of Article 3(1) of the Directive.
         
            
 In its defence, the Republic of Ireland accepts that point agricultural sources come within the ambit of the Directive. However
         it submits that pollution emanating from defective farm effluent or waste storage facilities can be effectively remedied by
         elimination of the pollution source. It is only where it is not possible to remedy the pollution in that way, that it is necessary
         to undertake designation of those waters.
         
            
 In the present case, it is clear from the wording of Article 3(1) and (2) and Article of the Directive, read in conjunction
         with paragraphs A(1) and A(2) of Annex I, that the Member States are obliged to identify as waters affected by pollution,
         or as waters which could be affected by pollution, not only waters intended for human consumption but also all surface freshwaters
         and groundwaters which have or could have a nitrate concentration in excess of mg/l (Case C-69/Commission v United Kingdom [2000] ECR I-10979, paragraph 23).
         
            
 According to the detailed evidence adduced by the Commission, which is not disputed by Ireland, it has failed to identify
         the waters referred to in Article 3(1) of the Directive in accordance with the criteria listed in paragraph A(1) of Annex
         I thereto.
         
            
 It follows that the first part of the first head of claim is well founded.
         
 Groundwaters coming within the scope of paragraph A(2) of Annex I to the Directive
         
            
 In the second part of its first head of claim, the Commission argues that, just as paragraph A(1) of Annex I to the Directive
         refers to two main categories of surface water, paragraph A(2) of Annex I refers to two categories of groundwater: first,
         groundwater containing a concentration of nitrates of more than mg/l; second, groundwater which could contain more than
         this concentration if action pursuant to Article of the Directive is not taken.
         
            
 As regards the first category, the Commission points out that official Irish drinking water reports covering the period from
         onwards confirm the existence of certain groundwaters containing nitrate levels in excess of mg/l. According to the
         Commission, it appears that Ireland is seeking to justify its failure to identify groundwaters with high nitrate levels on
         the ground that they have been linked to miscellaneous point sources of pollution and not to diffuse agricultural pollution.
         
         
            
 As regards the groundwaters in the second category mentioned in paragraph of this judgment, the Commission makes clear
         that official reports by the Irish authorities confirm that there are groundwaters in Ireland that should be identified for
         the purposes of Article 3(1) of the Directive. In addition, it states that the Verification Study identified a number of specific
         groundwaters that should have been identified for such purposes.
         
            
 In that connection, the Commission states that, in their letter of April replying to the reasoned opinion, the Irish
         authorities identified groundwaters as polluted for the purposes of Article 3(1) although the names of these waters were
         not formally communicated to it. It submits that the groundwaters, which are situated in counties, are geographically
         more restricted that the groundwaters referred to in the Verification Study, which covers counties.
         
            
 In its defence, Ireland contends that monitoring results from larger abstractions are a better indicator of true groundwater
         status than results from smaller schemes. It states that it none the less intends to ensure that future monitoring regimes
         will take full account of small drinking water supplies and nitrate contamination from point agricultural sources.
         
            
 As is clear from paragraph of this judgment, all surface freshwaters and groundwaters which have or could have a nitrate
         concentration in excess of mg/l must be identified for the purposes of Article 3(1) and (2) and Article of the Directive,
         read in conjunction with paragraphs A(1) and A(2) of Annex I thereto.
         
            
 According to the detailed evidence adduced by the Commission, which is not disputed by Ireland, it has failed to identify
         the waters referred to in Article 3(1) of the Directive in accordance with the criteria listed in paragraph A(1) of Annex
         I thereto.
         
            
 Under the circumstances, the second part of the first head of claim is well founded.
         
 Eutrophic natural freshwater lakes, other freshwater bodies, estuaries, coastal waters and marine waters or those at risk
         of becoming eutrophic coming within the scope of paragraph A(3) of Annex I to the Directive
         
– Estuaries, coastal waters and marine waters
         
            
 In the third part of its first head of claim, the Commission points out that, in its Verification Study, it listed a number
         of rivers that should have been identified for the purposes of Article 3(1) of the Directive in conjunction with paragraph
         A(1) of Annex I thereto.
         
            
 According to the Commission, the EPA report confirms the eutrophication of most of the zones mentioned in the Verification
         Study. It points out that Ireland has not, however, formally identified the estuaries or coastal and marine waters affected
         by pollution.
         
            
 In its defence, Ireland states that it has taken account of the EPA’s Assessment of the trophic status of estuaries and bays
         in Ireland. Although it accepts that it has not as yet formally identified the affected estuaries, coastal waters and marine
         waters identified in that report as affected waters and vulnerable zones under the Directive, it intends to address that situation
         in the near future.
         
            
 In that regard, suffice it to note that Ireland accepts that it has failed to identify the estuaries and coastal and marine
         waters which are eutrophic or which may become eutrophic in the near future for the purposes of Article 3(1) of the Directive
         in conjunction with paragraph A(3) of Annex I thereto.
         
            
 It follows that the third part of the first head of claim is well founded in so far as it concerns estuaries and coastal and
         marine waters.
         
– Natural freshwater lakes and other freshwater bodies
         
            
 As regards natural freshwater lakes and other freshwater bodies, the Commission submits that it is evident from the many official
         reports published to date that there is a widespread and worsening problem of eutrophication in Ireland. It nevertheless makes
         clear that the Irish authorities have failed to identify eutrophic freshwaters or freshwaters at risk of eutrophication in
         accordance with Article 3(1) and paragraph A(3) of Annex I to the Directive. This reflects the view of the Irish authorities
         that the nutrient phosphorous is the principal factor in such eutrophication and that the role of nitrates does not warrant
         action pursuant to the Directive. The Commission indicates that it does not concur with this view. According to the Commission,
         it is evident from paragraph A(3) of Annex I to the Directive that the Community legislature contemplated the identification
         of such waters for the purposes of Article 3(1) of the Directive.
         
            
 In its defence, Ireland points out that, in the light of the scientific data available to it, phosphate input is the chief
         cause of eutrophication of inland freshwaters in Ireland. It contends that the reports drawn up by the EPA attributed the
         eutrophication of inland surface waters in Ireland to the enrichment of rivers and lakes by phosphates, although there was
         an upward trend in nitrate levels in a number of rivers and streams. In response to those reports, Ireland has promoted a
         comprehensive national strategy for monitoring the quality of all waters in each river basin district, to combat eutrophication
         in rivers and lakes caused by excessive inputs of phosphorus. 
         
            
 In that regard, it must be observed that, under Article 3(1) of the Directive, in conjunction with paragraph A(1) of Annex
         I thereto, Member States are required to identify eutrophic freshwaters or freshwaters at risk of eutrophication in the near
         future if action pursuant to Article of the Directive is not taken.
         
            
 Ireland does not dispute that it has failed to identify freshwaters at risk of eutrophication in breach of the requirements
         of the Directive.
         
            
 It follows that the third part of the first head of claim is well founded in so far as it concerns natural freshwater lakes
         and other bodies of freshwater
         
            
 Accordingly, it must be held that the first head of claim is well founded in its entirety in so far as it concerns the identification
         of waters pursuant to Article 3(1) of the Directive in conjunction with paragraph A of Annex I thereto.
         
The second head of claim: breach of Article 3(2) and/or Article 3(4) of the Directive
            
 According to the Commission, in breach of the requirements of Article 3(2) and/or Article 3(4) of the Directive, Ireland has
         not designated vulnerable zones. It submits that, since it has been established that there are waters in Ireland affected
         by pollution within the meaning of the Directive or likely to be so affected, that Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under that Directive.
         
            
 In that regard, suffice it to note that Ireland accepts that it did not designate vulnerable zones in accordance with Article
         3(2) and/or Article 3(4) of the Directive within the prescribed periods.
         
            
 It follows that the second head of claim is well founded.
         
The third head of claim: breach of Article of the Directive
            
 The Commission submits that Ireland has failed to establish action programmes in respect of designated vulnerable zones to
         prevent and reduce pollution of waters caused or induced by nitrates from agricultural sources in accordance with Article
         of the Directive.
         
            
 Ireland contends that it has taken measures at both local and national level to prevent and reduce pollution of waters caused
         or induced by nitrates from agricultural sources. The measures taken at national level might be considered constituent elements
         of an action programme within the meaning of Article of the Directive. It points out that, where they establish and apply
         throughout their national territory the action programmes referred to in Article 5, under Article 3(5), Member States are
         not required to designate specific vulnerable zones under Article 3(2) and/or Article 3(4) of the Directive. According to
         Ireland, the identification of waters within the meaning of Article 3(1) of the Directive is no longer necessary because those
         action programmes have been established and applied throughout the territory of a Member State.
         
            
 As regards the national action programmes, Ireland submits that all farmers claiming aid under direct payment schemes, that
         is to say, most of the agricultural sector, must comply with an information booklet on good farming practice. It also points
         out that the Rural Environment Protection Scheme is one of the measures adopted to improve and maintain satisfactory water
         quality conditions in the less intensively farmed areas. It adds that local authorities have the power to compel farmers to
         prepare nutrient management plans and to carry out farm surveys to pinpoint pollution sources.
         
            
 Ireland points out, further, that there are also local action programmes. It refers to four bye-laws adopted by Westmeath,
         Cavan and Tipperary (North Riding) County Councils. It adds that other counties have adopted similar bye-laws or intend to
         do so shortly.
         
            
 However, Ireland accepts that all those measures were not in place on the date when the reasoned opinion was issued by the
         Commission and that they have not fully complied with the requirements of Article of the Directive.
         
            
 The Commission disputes Ireland’s claim that it has already fulfilled most of the obligations imposed by Article of the
         Directive.
         
            
 In that connection, it must be observed that, under Article of the Directive, the Member States must adopt action programmes
         to prevent and reduce pollution of waters caused or induced by nitrates from agricultural sources in the zones designated
         vulnerable pursuant to Article 3(2) and Article 3(4) of the Directive.
         
            
 A Member State may establish an action programme in respect of all the vulnerable zones on its territory or different programmes
         for different vulnerable zones or parts of zones in that territory.
         
            
 The action programmes are to be implemented within four years of their being drawn up and must include inter alia the mandatory
         measures referred to in Annex III to the Directive. Those measures must include the rules set out in detail in that Annex
         concerning periods when the land application of certain types of fertilizer is prohibited, the capacity of storage vessels
         for livestock manure and the limitation of the land application of fertilizers, taking into account the characteristics of
         the vulnerable zone concerned, in order to ensure that, for each farm or livestock unit, the amount of livestock manure applied
         to the land each year does not exceed a specified amount per hectare.
         
            
 It is clear that the measures cited by the Irish Government do not, viewed overall, meet the requirements of Article of
         the Directive.
         
            
 Such a series of measures, varying in scale and applicability from region to region and not constituting an organised and
         coherent system intended to meet a specific objective cannot be described as an ‘action programme’ within the meaning of Article
         of the Directive.
         
            
 Nor do the measures cited by the Irish Government, viewed individually, appear to be of a nature to constitute such action
         programmes.
         
            
 First, as regards the powers granted to local authorities to carry out surveys on farms in order to pinpoint sources of pollution
         and to compel farmers to prepare nutrient management plans, suffice it to note that, by definition, such surveys cannot be
         considered to be action programmes within the meaning of Article of the Directive.
         
            
 Next, as regards the information booklet on good agricultural practice and the Rural Environment Protection Scheme, suffice
         it to note that, according to statements by the Commission, which are not disputed by Ireland, they do not comprise mandatory
         measures as required by Article of the Directive.
         
            
 Finally, as regards the bye-laws adopted by four Irish counties, it must be observed that, although those bye-laws contain
         some of the measures listed in Annex III to the Directive, they do not appear to meet all the conditions laid down by Article
         thereof in order to be considered action programmes within the meaning of that provision. According to the file, the bye-laws
         of Counties Cavan, Westmeath and Tipperary do not apply to all farmers in a given zone. In any event, it is common ground
         that those bye-laws do not cover all the zones which should have been designated as vulnerable zones pursuant to Article of the Directive.
         
            
 Accordingly, it must be held that the third head of claim, alleging breach of Article of the Directive, is well founded.
         
The fourth head of claim: breach of Article 6(1)(a) to (c) of the Directive
            
 The Commission points out that, for the purpose of designating and revising the designation of vulnerable zones, Article of the Directive requires Member States to monitor the nitrate concentration in freshwaters and, in accordance with a precise
         timetable, review the eutrophic state of their fresh surface waters, estuarial and coastal waters.
         
            
 As regards the initial monitoring provided for by Article 6(1)(a) of the Directive, the Commission observes that the legislation
         relied on by Ireland, that is to say Article of the Local Government (Water Pollution) Act 1977, in no way requires the
         Irish Minister for the Environment to observe the time-limits and reference methods laid down by the Directive. In particular,
         the instructions given by that Minister to the local authorities, according to which pollution from point agricultural sources
         was not covered by that monitoring and drinking water supplies should be considered to have low priority for monitoring purposes,
         were in breach of the Directive.
         
            
 Given the absence of information concerning the transposition of Article 6(1)(b) and (c) of the Directive, the Commission
         submits that Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under those provisions. It adds that, since Ireland’s initial monitoring
         programme was defective, any repetition of that programme would also be defective.
         
            
 In that regard, suffice it to note that Ireland accepts that it has not fulfilled its obligations under that provision within
         the period prescribed in Article of the Directive.
         
            
 It follows that the fourth and last head of claim of the Commission is well founded.
         
            
 In the light of all the foregoing considerations, it must be held that:
          by failing, within the time-limits provided for in the Directive,
         
–
to identify completely waters affected by pollution and waters which could be affected by pollution pursuant to Article 3(1)
               in accordance with the criteria set out in Annex I to the Directive,
            
–
to designate vulnerable zones pursuant to Article 3(2) and/or Article 3(4) thereof, 
–
to establish action programmes in accordance with Article of the Directive, and 
–
to carry out correctly and completely monitoring and review of waters in accordance with Article 6(1)(a), (b) and (c) of the
               Directive,
            
 Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations thereunder.
         
Costs
            
 Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for Ireland to be ordered to pay the costs
         and the latter has been unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
 hereby: 
         
 
1.
declares that by failing, within the time-limits provided for in Council Directive 91/676/EEC of December concerning
                     the protection of waters against pollution caused by nitrates from agricultural sources,
                  
 
–
to identify completely waters pursuant to Article 3(1) in accordance with the criteria set out in Annex I, 
 
–
to designate vulnerable zones pursuant to Article 3(2) and/or Article 3(4) thereof, 
 
–
to establish action programmes in accordance with Article of the Directive, and 
 
–
to carry out correctly and completely monitoring and review of waters in accordance with Article 6(1)(a), (b) and (c) of the
                           Directive,
                        
Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations thereunder.
 
2.
Orders Ireland to bear the costs.
Jann
Timmermans 
von Bahr 
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on March 2004.
         
R. Grass
V. Skouris
Registrar
President 
 –
            
Language of the case: English.
Top  
 