
Case C-411/X BV
v
Staatssecretaris van Financiën
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden)
(Common Customs Tariff – Combined Nomenclature – Tariff classification – Headings 8541, and – Optocouplers)
Summary of the Judgment
Common Customs Tariff – Tariff headings – Optocouplers
(Council Regulation No 2658/87, Annex I, Headings 8541, and 8543; Commission Regulation No 1832/2002)
The Combined Nomenclature in Annex I to Regulation No 2658/on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common
         Customs Tariff, as amended by Regulation No 1832/2002, must be interpreted as meaning that an optocoupler, regardless of whether
         or not it contains an amplifying circuit, falls within heading 8541. The tariff classification of optocouplers cannot vary
         according to the presence or absence of an integrated amplifying circuit since the latter serves only to ensure good transmission
         of signals and does not fundamentally alter the characteristics and properties of the optocoupler as a photosensitive semiconductor.
         That classification is therefore specific and appropriate.
      
(see paras 23-25, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Common Customs Tariff – Combined Nomenclature – Tariff classification – Headings 8541, and – Optocouplers)
In Case C‑411/07,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, by the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden (Netherlands), made by decision
         of August 2007, received at the Court on September 2007, in the proceedings
      
X BV
v
Staatssecretaris van Financiën,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
composed of A. Tizzano, President of the Chamber, M. Ilešič (Rapporteur) and J.-J. Kasel, Judges,
Advocate General: Y. Bot,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on June 2008,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        X BV, by H. de Bie and E. Zietse, advocaten,
–        the Netherlands Government, by C. Wissels and C. ten Dam, acting as Agents,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by G. Wilms, acting as Agent, and by R. de Bree, advocaat,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of headings 8541, and of the Combined Nomenclature
         set out in Annex I to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on
         the Common Customs Tariff (OJ L 256, p. 1), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1832/of August (OJ
         L 290, p. 1) (‘the CN’).
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between a company incorporated under Netherlands law, called ‘X BV’ (‘X’)
         by the referring court, and the Staatssecretaris van Financiën (Secretary of State for Finance) concerning the tariff classification
         of optocouplers.
      
 Legal background
The CN, established by Regulation No 2658/87, is based on the International Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System
         (‘HS’) drawn up by the Customs Cooperation Council, now the World Customs Organisation, and established by the International
         Convention concluded at Brussels on June and approved on behalf of the Community by Council Decision 87/369/EEC of
         April (OJ L 198, p. 1). The CN takes six-digit headings and subheadings from the HS, only the seventh and eighth
         digits forming subdivisions that are specific to it.
      
The version of the CN applicable at the material time is that in Annex I to Regulation No 1832/2002.
      
Section XVI of the CN consists of two parts, including Chapter which is entitled ‘Electrical machinery and equipment and
         parts thereof; sound recorders and reproducers, television image and sound recorders and reproducers, and parts and accessories
         of such articles’. Chapter contains, inter alia, the following headings and subheadings:
      
‘Diodes, transistors and similar semiconductor devices; photosensitive semiconductor devices, including photovoltaic
         cells whether or not assembled in modules or made-up into panels; mounted piezo-electric crystals:
      
…
– Photosensitive semiconductor devices, including photovoltaic cells whether or not assembled in modules or made-up into panels,
         light-emitting diodes:
      
– – Light-emitting diodes, including laser diodes
– – Other
…
Electronic integrated circuits and microassemblies:
– – Cards incorporating an electronic integrated circuit (‘smart cards’)
                            – Monolithic integrated circuits:
– – Digital:
…
– – Other:
…
– – – – Control circuits
– – – – Interface circuits; interface circuits capable of performing control functions
…
Electrical machines and apparatus, having individual functions, not specified or included elsewhere in this chapter:
…
– – Other:
…
– – – – Other
…’
Notes and of Section XVI of the CN state:
      
‘2.      Subject to note to this section, note to Chapter and note to Chapter 85, parts of machines (not being parts of the
         articles of heading 8484, 8544, 8545, or 8547) are to be classified according to the following rules:
      
(a)      Parts which are goods included in any of the headings of Chapter or (other than headings 8409, 8431, 8448, 8466, 8473,
         8485, 8503, 8522, 8529, and 8548) are in all cases to be classified in their respective headings.
      
(b)      Other parts, if suitable for use solely or principally with a particular kind of machine, or with a number of machines of
         the same heading (including a machine of heading or 8543) are to be classified with the machines of that kind or in heading
         8409, 8431, 8448, 8466, 8473, 8503, 8522, or as appropriate. However, parts which are equally suitable for use principally
         with the goods of headings and to are to be classified in heading 8517.
      
(c)      All other parts are to be classified in heading 8409, 8431, 8448, 8466, 8473, 8503, 8522, or as appropriate or,
         failing that, in heading or 8548.
      
5.      For the purposes of these notes, the expression “machine” means any machine, plant, equipment, apparatus or appliance cited
         in the headings of Chapter or 85.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
In 2003, the Inspecteur van de Douane (‘the inspector’) issued binding tariff informations to X for optocouplers. 
      
As is apparent from the file, optocouplers are devices designed to ensure galvanic separation. Galvanic separation is insulation
         which prevents direct circulation of an electric current between neighbouring electronic circuits. An optocoupler permits
         such isolation between the emitter circuit and the collector circuit by first converting the electric signals from the emitter
         circuit into light signals with the aid of a light emitting diode (‘LED’) and then reconverting the light signals into electric
         signals in the collector circuit using a photodetector (consisting of a photodiode or a phototransistor). In addition to a
         photodiode and a photodetector, an optocoupler always contains a plastic film which is highly resistant to electricity but
         which allows light signals to pass. The incoming electric signals are thereby transferred from one electric circuit to the
         other without those circuits being electrically connected with each other.
      
Some optocouplers, including those marketed by X, also contain an integrated circuit with which outgoing electrical signals
         are stabilised and amplified. 
      
The various components described above are enclosed in a plastic case. 
      
Optocouplers are widely used in the manufacture of many types of apparatus and equipment, in particular communication apparatus,
         computer equipment and industrial machines. 
      
In the binding tariff informations issued, types of optocouplers were classified under subheading 90, one under
         subheading and two under subheading of the CN. 
      
By decision of November 2004, the inspector withdrew the binding tariff informations because he had formed the view that
         all of the products in question were to be classified under subheading CN. Following the complaint made by X the
         inspector maintained that decision. 
      
By judgment of December 2005, the Rechtbank te Haarlem (District Court, Haarlem) dismissed the action brought against that
         decision. It held that optocouplers are apparatuses with individual functions and that they must be classed under subheading
         of the CN.
      
Taking the view that optocouplers could not in any case fall within heading 8543, X brought an appeal in cassation before
         the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden.
      
The Hoge Raad der Nederlanden (Supreme Court of the Netherlands) observes that optocouplers contain the components mentioned
         in heading 8541. According to that court, the question is whether classification under heading is also possible where
         the optocoupler contains a circuit through which outgoing electric signals are stabilised and amplified.
      
In those circumstances, the Hoge Raad der Nederlanden decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Must an optical-electrical circuit contained in a plastic case which, together with a light emitting diode (“LED”), a plastic
         film and a photodetector, contains an amplifying circuit and is intended for incorporation in, inter alia, communication and
         computer equipment, consumer electronics and industrial machines, be regarded as an electrical machine or apparatus within
         the meaning of heading of the CN?
      
2.      If it is a part of a machine, is “photosensitive semiconductor device, including photovoltaic cells, whether or not assembled
         in modules or made up into panels” referred to in heading of the CN to be interpreted as including an optical-electrical
         circuit as described above, or is such a product to be regarded as an electronic integrated circuit within the meaning of
         heading of the CN owing to the presence of the amplifying circuit?’
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
By its questions, which should be examined together, the referring court asks essentially whether an optocoupler containing
         an amplifying circuit falls under heading of the CN as a photosensitive semiconductor device, under heading of the
         CN as an electronic integrated circuit or heading of the CN as an electrical machine or apparatus with an individual
         function.
      
X submits that optocouplers, including those containing an amplifying circuit, must be classified under heading 8541. The
         Commission of the European Communities shares that view. The Netherlands Government, on the other hand, takes the view that
         an optocoupler which is composed not only of an LED and photodiodes but also an integrated amplifying circuit must be classified
         under heading 8543.
      
It should be noted that, in the interests of legal certainty and ease of verification, the decisive criterion for the classification
         of goods for customs purposes is in general to be found in their objective characteristics and properties as defined in the
         wording of the relevant heading of the Combined Nomenclature and of the notes to the sections or chapters (Case C-382/Techex [1997] ECR I-7363, paragraph 11; Joined Cases C‑208/and C‑209/Medion and Canon Deutschland [2007] ECR I‑7963, paragraph 34; and Case C-165/Ecco Sko [2008] ECR I-0000, paragraph 27).
      
Heading of the CN concerns in particular photosensitive semiconductor devices. As is apparent from the order for reference
         and the observations lodged at the Court, it is common ground that optocouplers are such devices.
      
The Netherlands Government also acknowledged in its written observations that optocouplers without added circuits must be
         classified under heading 8541. It argues that it is only where an optocoupler contains an integrated circuit that classification
         under that heading is no longer possible. It submits that optocouplers containing an integrated circuit which stabilises and
         amplifies outgoing electrical signals cannot be regarded as simple photosensitive semiconductor devices.
      
In that connection, it must be observed that the tariff classification of optocouplers cannot vary according to the presence
         or absence of an integrated amplifying circuit. It is not disputed that the incorporation of such a circuit in optocouplers
         is a very widespread technique which serves only to ensure good transmission of signals. The presence of the circuit does
         not therefore fundamentally alter the characteristics and properties of the optocoupler as a photosensitive semiconductor.
      
It is clear from the foregoing considerations that optocouplers are also covered by heading of the CN when they contain
         an amplifying circuit.
      
Moreover, since it is not disputed that optocouplers are photosensitive semiconductor devices, their classification under
         heading of the CN appears, having regard to their characteristics summarised in paragraph of this judgment, more specific
         and appropriate than classification under heading of the CN.
      
Finally, contrary to the Netherlands Government’s assertions, optocouplers, whatever their exact composition, cannot be classified
         under heading of the CN.
      
Heading is applicable only if the other headings of Chapter of the CN are not applicable. It is clear from paragraph
         of this judgment that optocouplers fall within heading of the CN, including where they contain an amplifying circuit.
      
In any event, optocouplers may be classified under heading of the CN only if they have an individual function. It must
         be observed that optocouplers must be regarded as machine components rather than ‘[e]lectrical machines and apparatus, having
         individual functions’ within the meaning of heading of the CN. As the referring court explained and X pointed out, optocouplers
         in themselves cannot function effectively, independently of the electrical device for which they are designed.
      
Furthermore, it is clear from Note 2(a) to Section XVI of the CN that machine parts which are goods included in any of the
         headings of Chapter or 85, as in this case heading 8541, are in all cases to be classified in their respective headings.
         It is true that Note 2(b) to Section XVI states that, where machine parts are suitable for use solely or principally with
         a particular kind of machine, or with a number of machines of the same heading, they are to be classified with machines of
         that kind. It must be stated, however, that that rule does not apply to optocouplers, since they are suitable for use with
         many types of machines or apparatus referred to in heading of the CN (‘Electrical machines and apparatus, having individual
         functions, not specified or included elsewhere in this chapter’).
      
Having regard to all of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the reference for a preliminary ruling must be that the
         Combined Nomenclature in Annex I to Regulation No 2658/87, as amended by Regulation No 1832/2002, must be interpreted as meaning
         that an optocoupler, regardless of whether or not it contains an amplifying circuit, falls within heading 8541.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fifth Chamber) hereby rules:
The Combined Nomenclature in Annex I to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July on the tariff and statistical
            nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff, as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1832/of August 2002, must
            be interpreted as meaning that an optocoupler, regardless of whether or not it contains an amplifying circuit, falls within
            heading 8541.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 