
         				Ordonnance de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-369/P Forum des migrants de l'Union européennevCommission of the European Communities
«(Appeal – Time-limit – Whether inadmissible)»
Order of the Court (First Chamber), February Summary of the Order
Procedure – Period for bringing proceedings – Time-barred – Unforeseeable circumstances or force majeure – Appeal – Notification of the contested judgment – Appellant lacking an address for service in Luxembourg(Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 45, second para.; Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, Art. 37(6); Rules of
                  Procedure of the Court of First Instance, Art. 44(2)) No derogation from the application of the Community rules on procedural time-limits may be made save where the circumstances
         are quite exceptional, in the sense of being unforeseeable or amounting to  
         force majeure, in accordance with the second paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, since the strict application
         of those rules serves the requirements of legal certainty and the need to avoid any discrimination or arbitrary treatment
         in the administration of justice.In particular, if time-limits for bringing proceedings are to serve any purpose, the fact that one  party takes the view that
         it does not have all the relevant information to assess whether or not it is appropriate to bring an appeal cannot by itself
         justify bringing an appeal out of time.In order to calculate the time-limit within which an appeal may be brought, where the applicant does not have an address for
         service in Luxembourg for the purposes of the proceedings before the Court of First Instance, proper service of the contested
         judgment, under Article 44(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance, must be deemed to have been effected
         by the lodging of the registered letter at the post office in Luxembourg. In any event, in accordance with Article 37(6) of
         the Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, the date on which a copy of the signed original of a pleading arrives at the
         Registry by any technical means of communication available to the Court will be taken into account for the purposes of compliance
         with the time-limits for taking steps in proceedings only on condition that the signed original of the pleading, accompanied
         by the annexes and copies requested, is lodged at the Registry no later than days thereafter.see paras 10, 13, 16-ORDER OF THE COURT (First Chamber)February (1)
((Appeal – Period within which an appeal must be lodged – Inadmissibility))
 In Case C-369/P, 
         
Forum des migrants de l'Union européenne, represented by N. Crama, lawyer,
         
appellant, 
 APPEAL against the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities (Fourth Chamber) of April in
         Case T-217/Forum des migrants v  
         Commission [2003] ECR II-0000, seeking to have that judgment set aside,
         
 the other party to the proceedings being: 
         Commission of the European Communities, defendant at first instance 
         
THE COURT (First Chamber),
 composed of: P. Jann (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, A. Rosas, A. La Pergola, R. Silva de Lapuerta and K. Schiemann, Judges, 
         
 Advocate General: J. Kokott, Registrar: R. Grass, 
         
after hearing the views of the Advocate General, makes the following 
Order
            
 By electronic mail received at the Registry of the Court on July 2003, the Forum des migrants de l'Union européenne sent
         a copy of the application by which it sought to bring an appeal, pursuant to Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice,
         against the judgment of the Court of First Instance of April in Case T-217/Forum des migrants v  
         Commission [2003] ECR II-('the contested judgment'). The signed original of the appeal application was lodged at the Court Registry
         on July 2003.  
         
            
 By the contested judgment, the Court of First Instance dismissed the annulment action brought by the present appellant against
         the Commission decision of July to terminate the financial support granted to it under Article A0-of the Community
         budget. 
         
            
 The appeal states that the contested judgment was served on April on the appellant's legal representative. 
         
            
 It is clear from the file sent by the Registry of the Court of First Instance to the Registry of the Court of Justice that
         the appellant did not have an address for service in Luxembourg. According to the receipt notification in the file, the contested
         judgment was served on the appellant's legal representative by registered letter, posted in Luxembourg on April 2003. That
         notification does not indicate the date on which it was received. 
         
            
 By letter of July 2003, the Court Registry drew the appellant's attention to the fact that the appeal had been lodged outside
         the prescribed period and requested it to indicate whether it could prove the existence of unforeseeable circumstances or
          
         force majeure, which would justify extending the time-limit. 
         
            
 By letter of August 2003, the appellant's legal representative replied that the appropriateness of bringing an appeal depended,
         essentially, on the action to be taken by the Commission pursuant to paragraph of the contested judgment, in which the
         Court of First Instance held that the decision at issue concerned only the year 2000. By letter of April 2003, the appellant
         requested the Commission to state its intentions regarding the grant of financial aid for the years and 2002. The Commission,
         which only responded by letter of June 2003, stated that retrospective financing was impossible. That letter was conclusive
         for the decision to lodge an appeal. Since the appellant's directors are dispersed geographically, drafting an authority for
         the lawyer could not have been undertaken more rapidly. 
         
            
 Under Article of the Court's Rules of Procedure, where an appeal is, in whole or in part, clearly inadmissible or clearly
         unfounded, the Court may at any time, acting on a report from the Judge-Rapporteur and after hearing the Advocate General,
         dismiss the appeal in whole or in part by way of reasoned order. 
         
            
 In accordance with Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, the time-limit within which an appeal may be brought
         is two months from the date of notification of the decision appealed against. 
         
            
 Under Article 81(2) of the Court's Rules of Procedure, that time-limit may be extended on account of distance by a single
         period of days. 
         
            
 As the appellant did not have an address for service in Luxembourg for the purposes of the proceedings before the Court of
         First Instance, proper service of the contested judgment, under Article 44(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First
         Instance, must be deemed to have been effected by the lodging of the registered letter at the post office in Luxembourg on
         April 2003. 
         
            
 It follows that the period for bringing an appeal against the contested judgment expired months and days after that date,
         that is, on Friday, June 2003. 
         
            
 A copy of the appeal was sent to the Court Registry by electronic mail on July 2003, and thus after that date. 
         
            
 Moreover, in accordance with Article 37(6) of the Court's Rules of Procedure, the date on which a copy of the signed original
         of a pleading arrives at the Registry by any technical means of communication available to the Court will be taken into account
         for the purposes of compliance with the time-limits for taking steps in proceedings only on condition that the signed original
         of the pleading, accompanied by the annexes and copies requested, is lodged at the Registry no later than days thereafter.
         
         
            
 In the present case, the signed original of the appeal application arrived at the Court Registry only on July 2003, more
         than days after the electronic mail. In those circumstances, even assuming that the electronic mail had arrived at the
         Court within the prescribed time-limit, it is irrelevant, since it is the date on which the original was lodged, that is,
         July 2003, which must be regarded as being the date on which the appeal was lodged. 
         
            
 The appeal was therefore clearly lodged out of time. 
         
            
 According to settled case-law, no derogation from the application of the Community rules on procedural time-limits may be
         made save where the circumstances are quite exceptional, in the sense of being unforeseeable or amounting to  
         force majeure, in accordance with the second paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, since the strict application
         of those rules serves the requirements of legal certainty and the need to avoid any discrimination or arbitrary treatment
         in the administration of justice (see, in particular, the order in Case C-239/Ireland v  
         Commission [1998] ECR I-2655, paragraph 7). 
         
            
 The fact relied on in the present case by the appellant that the appropriateness, or otherwise, of bringing an appeal depended
         on the action to be taken by the Commission in subsequent years in response to the finding, made in paragraph of the contested
         judgment, that the decision challenged only concerned the year 2000, cannot constitute unforeseeable circumstances or  
         force majeure. 
         
            
 If time-limits for bringing proceedings are to serve any purpose, the fact that one party takes the view that it does not
         have all the relevant information to assess whether or not it is appropriate to bring an appeal cannot by itself justify bringing
         an appeal out of time. 
         
            
 Therefore, whatever the clarifications that the appellant wished to have available regarding the grant of financial aid for
         years other than the year concerned in the contested judgment, that fact could not justify the disregard of the mandatory
         nature of the time-limits for bringing proceedings and the level of diligence and prudence required in that regard. 
         
            
 It follows that the appeal must be declared to be clearly inadmissible. 
         
Costs
            
 Pursuant to Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court, the appellant must bear its own costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (First Chamber),
 hereby orders:
         
1)
 The appeal is dismissed. 
            
2)
 The Forum des migrants de l'Union européenne shall bear its own costs. 
            
 Luxembourg, February R. Grass 
P. Jann  
Registrar
President of the First Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: French.
Top  
 