
Case C-163/Repertoire Culinaire Ltd
v
The Commissioners for Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
First-tier Tribunal (Tax Chamber))
(Directive 92/83/EEC – Harmonisation of the structures of excise duties on alcohol and alcoholic beverages – Article 20, first indent, and Article 27(1)(e) and (f) – Cooking wine, cooking port and cooking cognac)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Excise duties – Directive 92/– Alcohol and alcoholic beverages – Ethyl alcohol
            – Definition – Cooking wine and cooking port – Included
(Council Directive 92/83, Art. 20, first indent)
2.        Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Excise duties – Directive 92/– Alcohol and alcoholic beverages – Exemptions from
            harmonised excise duty – Cooking wine, cooking port and cooking cognac used for the production of foodstuffs
(Council Directive 92/83, Art. 27(1)(e) and (f))
3.        Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Excise duties – Directive 92/– Alcohol and alcoholic beverages – Exemptions from
            harmonised excise duty – Cooking wine, cooking port and cooking cognac used for the production of foodstuffs
(Council Directive 92/83, Art. 27(1))
4.        Tax provisions – Harmonisation of laws – Excise duties – Directive 92/– Alcohol and alcoholic beverages – Exemptions from
            harmonised excise duty – Exemptions provided for in Article 27(1) of the directive
(Council Directive 92/83, Art. 27(1))
1.        Article 20, first indent, of Directive 92/on the harmonisation of the structures of excise duties on alcohol and alcoholic
         beverages must be interpreted as meaning that the definition of ethyl alcohol in that provision applies to cooking wine and
         cooking port.
      
The fact that cooking wine and cooking port are, as such, regarded as edible preparations falling within chapter of the
         Combined Nomenclature annexed to Regulation No 2658/on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs
         Tariff, as amended by Regulation No 2587/91, and that they are unsuitable for consumption as beverages does not affect the
         fact that Article of Directive 92/is applicable to the ethyl alcohol contained in them.
      
(see paras 26-27, 30, operative part 1)
2.        An exemption from the harmonised excise duty for cooking wine, cooking port and cooking cognac used for the production of
         foodstuffs falls under Article 27(1)(f) of Directive 92/on the harmonisation of the structures of excise duties on alcohol
         and alcoholic beverages.
      
Such products could come within the provision in Article 27(1)(e) of Directive 92/only if they were used for the production
         of flavours for the preparation of foodstuffs and non‑alcoholic beverages.
      
(see paras 33-34, 36, operative part 2)
3.        The uniform application of the provisions of Directive 92/on the harmonisation of the structures of excise duties on alcohol
         and alcoholic beverages requires the imposition or not of excise duty on a product and the exemption from duty of a product
         in a Member State, as a rule, to be recognised by all the other Member States. Any other interpretation would compromise the
         attainment of the objective of Directive 92/and would be likely to hinder the free movement of goods.
      
Thus, if products such as cooking wine, cooking port and cooking cognac, which have been treated as not being subject to excise
         duty or as being exempted from that duty under Directive 92/and released for consumption in the Member State of manufacture,
         are intended to be put on the market in another Member State, the latter must treat those products in the same way in its
         territory, unless there is concrete, objective and verifiable evidence that the first Member State has failed to apply the
         provisions of that directive correctly or that, in accordance with Article 27(1) thereof, it is justifiable to adopt measures
         to combat any evasion, avoidance or abuse which may arise in the field of exemptions and to ensure the correct and straightforward
         application of such exemptions.
      
(see paras 41-42, 45, operative part 3)
4.        Article 27(1)(f) of Directive 92/on the harmonisation of the structures of excise duties on alcohol and alcoholic beverages
         must be interpreted as meaning that the exemption contained in that provision may not be made conditional on satisfaction
         of conditions laid down by national legislation, that is to say, the restriction of the persons authorised to make a claim
         for recovery, a four-month period for bringing such a claim and the establishment of a minimum amount of repayment, unless
         it is apparent from concrete, objective and verifiable evidence that those conditions are necessary to ensure the correct
         and straightforward application of the exemption in question and to prevent any evasion, avoidance or abuse. It is for the
         national court to ascertain whether that is true of the conditions laid down by that legislation.
      
First, the exemption of products covered by Article 27(1) of Directive 92/is the rule and refusal is the exception, and,
         second, the power granted to Member States by that provision to lay down conditions for the purpose of ensuring the correct
         and straightforward application of such exemptions and of preventing any evasion, avoidance or abuse cannot detract from the
         unconditional nature of the obligation imposed by that provision to grant exemption.
      
(see paras 51, 56, operative part 4)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
December (*)
      
(Directive 92/83/EEC – Harmonisation of the structures of excise duties on alcohol and alcoholic beverages – Article 20, first indent, and Article 27(1)(e) and (f) – Cooking wine, cooking port and cooking cognac)
In Case C‑163/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the First-tier Tribunal (Tax Chamber) (United Kingdom), made
         by decision of April 2009, received at the Court on May 2009, in the proceedings
      
Repertoire Culinaire Ltd
v
The Commissioners for Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, D. Šváby, R. Silva de Lapuerta (Rapporteur), E. Juhász and J Malenovský,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: N. Nanchev, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on June 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Repertoire Culinaire Ltd, by P. Dewast, avocat, and H. Mercer, Barrister,
–        the French Government, by B. Cabouat, acting as Agent,
–        the Polish Government, by M. Dowgielewicz, acting as Agent,
–        the Portuguese Government, by L. Inez Fernandes, acting as Agent,
–        the European Commission, by R. Lyal and A. Sauka, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on July 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 20, first indent, and Article 27(1)(e) and
         (f) of Council Directive 92/83/EEC of October on the harmonisation of the structures of excise duties on alcohol and
         alcoholic beverages (OJ L 316, p. 21).
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between Repertoire Culinaire Ltd (‘Repertoire Culinaire’) and the Commissioners
         for Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs (‘the Commissioners’) concerning the tax arrangements applicable to the alcohol contained
         in cooking wine, cooking port and cooking cognac.
      
 Legal context
 European Union legislation
The third, fourth, eighteenth to twentieth, twenty-second and twenty‑third recitals in the preamble to Directive 92/state:
      
‘Whereas it is important to the proper functioning of the internal market to determine common definitions for all the products
         concerned;
      
Whereas it is useful to base such definitions on those set out in the combined nomenclature in force at the date of the adoption
         of this Directive;
      
…
Whereas Member States should be permitted to refund the excise duty on alcoholic drinks which have become unfit for consumption;
Whereas it is necessary to lay down at Community level the exemptions which apply to goods which are transported between Member
         States;
      
Whereas, however, it is possible to permit Member States an option to apply exemptions tied to end-uses within their territory;
…
Whereas Member States should not be deprived of the means of combating any evasion, avoidance or abuse which may arise in
         the field of exemptions;
      
Whereas Member States should be permitted to give effect to the exemptions required by this Directive by way of refund’.
Article 19(1) of that directive provides:
      
‘Member States shall apply an excise duty to ethyl alcohol in accordance with this Directive.’
Article of the directive provides:
      
‘For the purposes of this Directive the term ‘ethyl alcohol’ covers:
–        all products with an actual alcoholic strength by volume exceeding 1.2% volume which fall within CN [combined nomenclature]
         codes and 2208, even when those products form part of a product which falls within another chapter of the CN,
      
…’
Article 27(1)(e) and (f) of the directive is worded as follows:
      
‘1.      Member States shall exempt the products covered by this Directive from the harmonised excise duty under conditions which they
         shall lay down for the purpose of ensuring the correct and straightforward application of such exemptions and of preventing
         any evasion, avoidance or abuse:
      
…
(e)      when used for the production of flavours for the preparation of foodstuffs and non-alcoholic beverages with an alcohol strength
         not exceeding 1.2% vol.;
      
(f)      when used directly or as a constituent of semi-finished products for the production of foodstuffs, filled or otherwise, provided
         that in each case the alcoholic content does not exceed 8.litres of pure alcohol per kg of the product for chocolates,
         and litres of pure alcohol per kg of the product for other products.’
      
Article 27(6) of Directive 92/provides:
      
‘Member States shall be free to give effect to the exemptions mentioned above by means of a refund of excise duty paid.’
 National legislation
Section of the Finance Act provides a mechanism for repayment of excise duty on dutiable alcoholic liquor which has
         been used in the production or manufacture of food that has an alcoholic content of not more than litres of alcohol per
         kg of the food.
      
The repayment is made on a claim by certain categories of persons and is not granted for amounts less than GBP 250.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Repertoire Culinaire is a food wholesaler.
      
On July 2002, a tractor unit and its trailer were inspected by officers of the Commissioners at the Customs Control Zone,
         Coquelles (France).
      
As regards the load carried by that vehicle, the driver of the vehicle produced a document showing pallets of cooking wine
         and designating Repertoire Culinaire as the consignee.
      
According to the findings of the officer who carried out the inspection of that load, it consisted of litres of white
         wine with an alcoholic strength of 11% by volume, litres of red wine with an alcoholic strength of 11% by volume, litres of port with an alcoholic strength of 19% by volume and litres of cognac with an alcoholic strength of 40% by volume.
      
Those goods were detained on the ground that there was no evidence that the excise duty on them had been accounted for to
         the relevant authorities of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
      
Enquiries carried out by the National Discreditation Team (a national detection team) established the presence of ‘ingredients’
         in the alcoholic beverages detained.
      
Following those enquiries, on July the goods in question were seized as liable to forfeiture.
      
Repertoire Culinaire was notified of that seizure by letter of August and on the same day requested restoration of
         its goods.
      
By letter of August 2002, the Commissioners refused that request.
      
Repertoire Culinaire sought an administrative review of that refusal.
      
By letter of October 2002, the Commissioners notified Repertoire Culinaire that, on review, the decision not to restore
         to it the goods in question had been upheld on the ground that they were liable to United Kingdom excise duty.
      
On November 2002, Repertoire Culinaire lodged an appeal against the decision of October before the national court.
      
In those circumstances the First-tier Tribunal (Tax Chamber) decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions
         to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Are cooking wine and cooking port subject to excise duty under Directive [92/83] in the Member State of importation on the
         grounds that they are within the definition of ‘ethyl alcohol’ under the first indent of Article of [that directive]?
      
(2)      Is it consistent with the Member State’s obligation to give effect to the exemption contained in Article 27(1)(f) of Directive
         92/83, when read with Article 27(6), and/or with Article EC and/or with the direct effect of those obligations and/or with
         the principles of equal treatment and proportionality to restrict the exemption for cooking wine, cooking port and cooking
         cognac to cases where alcoholic beverages have been used as an ingredient and to restrict the applicants for exemption to
         those persons who have used the alcoholic beverages as an ingredient in products and/or those persons who carry on business
         as wholesalers of such products and/or they produced or manufactured such products for the purposes of that business and subject
         to the further conditions that claims be made within an overall period of four months from the payment of duty and that the
         amount of the repayment be not less than [GBP] 250?
      
(3)      Should the cooking wine and cooking port, if liable to duty under the first indent of Article of Directive 92/83, and/or
         the cooking cognac, subject to the present appeal, be treated as exempt from excise duty at the point of manufacture under
         Article 27(1)(f) [of Directive 92/or, alternatively, Article 27(1)(e) of Directive 92/83]?
      
(4)      In the light of Articles [EC] and EC, what effect, if any, does it have on Member States’ obligations under [Articles
         and 27(1)(f) or, alternatively, Article 27(1)(e) of] Directive 92/if cooking wine, cooking port and cooking cognac have
         been released by the Member State of manufacture from the excise movement system under [Council] Directive [92/12/EEC of February
         on the general arrangements for products subject to excise duty and on the holding, movement and monitoring of such products
         (OJ L 76, p. 1)] into free movement within the European Union?’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred
 The first question
By its first question the national court asks, in essence, whether Article 20, first indent, of Directive 92/must be interpreted
         as meaning that the definition of ‘ethyl alcohol’ in that provision applies to cooking wine and cooking port.
      
It must be observed that cooking wine and cooking port, which, as edible preparations, fall within chapter of the Combined
         Nomenclature annexed to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and
         on the Common Customs Tariff (OJ L 256, p. 1), in the version resulting from Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2587/of
         July (OJ L 259, p. 1), contain ethyl alcohol falling within heading of that nomenclature, and that since
         that alcohol has an alcoholic strength exceeding 1.2% by volume, it falls within the scope of the first indent of Article
         of Directive 92/(see Case C-458/Gourmet Classic [2008] ECR I-4207, paragraphs and 36).
      
In that regard, there is no doubt that the cooking wine and cooking port at issue in the main proceedings have an alcoholic
         strength exceeding 1.2% by volume and that they are prepared from alcoholic beverages subject to the harmonised excise duty
         under that directive, that is to say, wine and port.
      
In addition, it must be observed that, since the first indent of Article of Directive 92/applies even when the products
         covered by that provision form part of a product which falls within another chapter of the combined nomenclature annexed to
         Regulation No 2658/87, as amended by Regulation No 2587/91, the fact that cooking wine and cooking port are, as such, regarded
         as edible preparations falling within chapter of that nomenclature does not affect the fact that Article of Directive
         92/is applicable to the ethyl alcohol contained in them (see Gourmet Classic, paragraphs to 38).
      
The same is true of the fact that the cooking wine and cooking port are unsuitable for consumption as beverages.
      
It follows, in particular, from Article 27(1) of Directive 92/83, read in conjunction with the eighteenth and twentieth recitals
         in the preamble thereto, that such facts are of relevance only in relation to the exemption of products subject to the harmonised
         excise duty.
      
In addition, it must be noted that, as is apparent from its title, Directive 92/seeks to harmonise in a general manner
         the structures of excise duties on both alcoholic beverages and alcohol.
      
In those circumstances, the answer to the first question is that Article 20, first indent, of Directive 92/must be interpreted
         as meaning that the definition of ‘ethyl alcohol’ in that provision applies to cooking wine and cooking port.
      
 The third question
By its third question the national court asks, in essence, whether the cooking wine, cooking port and cooking cognac at issue
         in the main proceedings must, if liable to the harmonised duty under Directive 92/83, be exempted from that duty as products
         used for the production of flavours, within the meaning of Article 27(1)(e) of that directive, or as products used for the
         production of foodstuffs, within the meaning of Article 27(1)(f).
      
In that connection, although it cannot be ruled out that cooking wine, cooking port and cooking cognac may be used for the
         production of flavours for the preparation of foodstuffs and non-alcoholic beverages, within the meaning of Article 27(1)(e)
         of Directive 92/83, that is not the use for which the products in the main proceedings are intended.
      
Thus, according to the order for reference, the cooking wine, cooking port and cooking cognac at issue in the main proceedings
         are used not for the production of flavours, but for the production of culinary dishes, as ingredients incorporated therein.
      
Consequently, unless the products at issue in the main proceedings are used for the production of flavours for the preparation
         of foodstuffs and non-alcoholic beverages, as a rule any exemption will be under Article 27(1)(f) of Directive 92/83.
      
In that context, it must be recalled that the Court has already held that the relevant provision for the exemption of cooking
         wine from harmonised excise duty is, as a rule, Article 27(1)(f) of Directive 92/(Gourmet Classic, paragraph 39).
      
In those circumstances, the answer to the third question is that, in circumstances such as those at issue in the main proceedings,
         an exemption from the harmonised excise duty for cooking wine, cooking port and cooking cognac falls under Article 27(1)(f)
         of Directive 92/83.
      
 The fourth question
By its fourth question the national court asks, in essence, whether the fact that products such as the cooking wine, cooking
         port and cooking cognac at issue in the main proceedings have been treated as not being subject to excise duty or as being
         exempted from that duty under Directive 92/and released for consumption in the Member State of manufacture has an effect
         on any application of the provisions of that directive to those products by another Member State in which the products are
         intended to be put on the market.
      
In that connection, it should be noted that, in accordance with the first and fourth recitals in the preamble to Directive
         92/12, the establishment and functioning of the internal market require the free movement of goods, including those subject
         to excise duties, and that the chargeability of excise duties should be identical in all the Member States.
      
In addition, it should be recalled that, according to the third recital in the preamble to Directive 92/83, it is important
         to the proper functioning of the internal market to determine common definitions for all the products concerned and that,
         according to the nineteenth recital in the preamble to that directive, it is necessary to lay down at the European Union level
         the exemptions which apply to goods which are transported between Member States
      
It follows that, in order to ensure the proper functioning of the internal market and to ensure the free movement of goods,
         the products subject to excise duty must be determined, and the exemptions applied, in a uniform manner within the European
         Union, unless otherwise provided.
      
The uniform application of the provisions of Directive 92/requires that the imposition or not of excise duty on a product
         and the exemption from duty of a product in a Member State must, as a rule, be recognised by all the other Member States.
      
Any other interpretation would compromise the attainment of the objective of Directive 92/and would be likely to hinder
         the free movement of goods.
      
However, in that context, a Member State cannot be bound by an incorrect application of the provisions of Directive 92/by another Member State nor denied the possibility, recognised by the twenty‑second recital in the preamble thereto and by
         Article of that directive, of adopting measures to combat any evasion, avoidance or abuse which may arise in the field
         of exemptions and to ensure the correct and straightforward application of such exemptions.
      
Nevertheless, the finding that such measures have been applied incorrectly or the adoption of such measures must be based
         on concrete, objective and verifiable evidence (see, to that effect, Case C‑482/Italy v Commission [2000] ECR I‑10861, paragraphs and 52).
      
In those circumstances, the answer to the fourth question is that, if products such as the cooking wine, cooking port and
         cooking cognac at issue in the main proceedings, which have been treated as not being subject to excise duty or as being exempted
         from that duty under Directive 92/and released for consumption in the Member State of manufacture, are intended to be put
         on the market in another Member State, the latter must treat those products in the same way in its territory, unless there
         is concrete, objective and verifiable evidence that the first Member State has failed to apply the provisions of that directive
         correctly or that, in accordance with Article 27(1) thereof, it is justifiable to adopt measures to combat any evasion, avoidance
         or abuse which may arise in the field of exemptions and to ensure the correct and straightforward application of such exemptions.
      
 The second question
By its second question, the national court asks, in essence, whether, in the case of products such as the cooking wine, cooking
         port and cooking cognac at issue in the main proceedings, Article 27(1)(f) of Directive 92/must be interpreted as meaning
         that the exemption laid down in that provision may, first, be restricted to those persons who have used those products as
         an ingredient in the production of foodstuffs and/or to those persons who carry on business as wholesalers of such foodstuffs
         and/or produced or manufactured such foodstuffs for the purposes of that business and, second, be made subject to the dual
         condition that a claim for repayment be made within four months from the payment of excise duty and that the amount of the
         repayment be not less than GBP 250.
      
In that connection, it must be borne in mind at the outset that, in accordance with Article 27(6) of Directive 92/83, read
         in conjunction with the eighteenth and twenty-third recitals in the preamble to that directive, the Member States are to be
         free to give effect to the exemptions under that directive by means of a refund of excise duty paid.
      
Furthermore, it must be recalled that the objective of the exemptions contained in Directive 92/is, in particular, to neutralise
         the impact of excise duties on alcohol used as an intermediate product in other commercial or industrial products (see Italy v Commission, paragraph 4, and Case C‑63/Profisa [2007] ECR I‑3239, paragraph 17).
      
Thus, it follows from Article 27(1)(f) of Directive 92/83, read in conjunction with the twentieth recital in the preamble
         to that directive, that the application of the exemption under that provision by a Member State depends on the end-use of
         the products in question.
      
Similarly, Article 27(1), read in conjunction with the twenty-second recital in the preamble to Directive 92/83, provides
         that the Member States may lay down conditions for the purpose of ensuring the correct and straightforward application of
         the exemptions under that provision and of preventing any evasion, avoidance or abuse.
      
In that context, it must also be recalled that the Court has held, first, that the exemption of products covered by Article
         27(1) of Directive 92/is the rule and refusal is the exception, and, second, that the power granted to Member States by
         that provision to lay down conditions for the purpose of ‘ensuring the correct and straightforward application of such exemptions
         and of preventing any evasion, avoidance or abuse’ cannot detract from the unconditional nature of the obligation imposed
         by that provision to grant exemption (see Italy v Commission, paragraph 50, and Profisa, paragraph 18).
      
It follows that, in exercising that power, the Member State concerned must put forward concrete, objective and verifiable
         evidence of a serious risk of evasion, avoidance or abuse (see, to that effect, Italy v Commission, paragraph 52) and that the conditions laid down by that Member State by virtue of the power thus conferred on it cannot
         go beyond what is necessary to attain that objective.
      
Consequently, although the Member States may give effect to the exemption under Article 27(1)(f) of Directive 92/by means
         of a refund of excise duty paid, depending on how the products in question are used, they cannot, on the other hand, make
         the application of that exemption conditional on compliance with conditions which are not proven, by concrete, objective and
         verifiable evidence, to be necessary to ensure the correct and straightforward application of such an exemption and to prevent
         any evasion, avoidance or abuse. 
      
The evidence submitted to the Court seems to indicate that the conditions laid down by the national legislation at issue in
         the main proceedings, that is to say, a restriction of the persons authorised to make a claim for recovery, a four-month period
         for bringing such a claim and the establishment of a minimum amount of repayment, are not necessary either to ensure the correct
         and straightforward application of the exemption under Article 27(1)(f) of Directive 92/or to prevent any evasion, avoidance
         or abuse.
      
However, it is for the national court, before which the dispute in the main proceedings has been brought and which must assume
         responsibility for its subsequent judicial decision, to ascertain, on the basis of concrete, objective and verifiable evidence
         in its possession, whether that is the case.
      
In those circumstances, the answer to the second question is that Article 27(1)(f) of Directive 92/must be interpreted
         as meaning that the exemption contained in that provision may be made conditional on compliance with conditions such as those
         laid down by the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings, that is to say, the restriction of the persons authorised
         to make a claim for recovery, a four-month period for bringing such a claim and the establishment of a minimum amount of repayment,
         only if it is apparent from concrete, objective and verifiable evidence that those conditions are necessary to ensure the
         correct and straightforward application of the exemption in question and to prevent any evasion, avoidance or abuse. It is
         for the national court to ascertain whether that is true of the conditions laid down by that legislation.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article 20, first indent, of Council Directive 92/83/EEC of October on the harmonisation of the structures of excise
            duties on alcohol and alcoholic beverages must be interpreted as meaning that the definition of ‘ethyl alcohol’ in that provision
            applies to cooking wine and cooking port.
2.      In circumstances such as those at issue in the main proceedings, an exemption from the harmonised excise duty for cooking
            wine, cooking port and cooking cognac falls under Article 27(1)(f) of Directive 92/83.
3.      If products such as the cooking wine, cooking port and cooking cognac at issue in the main proceedings, which have been treated
            as not being subject to excise duty or as being exempted from that duty under Directive 92/and released for consumption
            in the Member State of manufacture, are intended to be put on the market in another Member State, the latter must treat those
            products in the same way in its territory, unless there is concrete, objective and verifiable evidence that the first Member
            State has failed to apply the provisions of that directive correctly or that, in accordance with Article 27(1) thereof, it
            is justifiable to adopt measures to combat any evasion, avoidance or abuse which may arise in the field of exemptions and
            to ensure the correct and straightforward application of such exemptions.
4.      Article 27(1)(f) of Directive 92/must be interpreted as meaning that the exemption contained in that provision may be made
            conditional on compliance with conditions such as those laid down by the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings,
            that is to say, the restriction of the persons authorised to make a claim for recovery, a four-month period for bringing such
            a claim and the establishment of a minimum amount of repayment, only if it is apparent from concrete, objective and verifiable
            evidence that those conditions are necessary to ensure the correct and straightforward application of the exemption in question
            and to prevent any evasion, avoidance or abuse. It is for the national court to ascertain whether that is true of the conditions
            laid down by that legislation.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 