
Case C-423/Sarah Margaret Richards
v
Secretary of State for Work and Pensions
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Social Security Commissioner)
(Equal treatment for men and women in matters of social security – Directive 79/7/EEC – Refusal to award a retirement pension at the age of to a transsexual who has undergone male-to-female gender reassignment
         surgery)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Social policy – Equal treatment for men and women in matters of social security –Directive 79/(Council Directive 79/7, Art. 4(1))
2.        Preliminary rulings – Interpretation – Effect of interpretative judgments ratione temporis
(Art. EC)
1.        Article 4(1) of Directive 79/on the progressive implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women in
         matters of social security is to be interpreted as precluding legislation which denies a person who, in accordance with the
         conditions laid down by national law, has undergone male-to-female gender reassignment entitlement to a retirement pension
         on the ground that she has not reached the age of 65, when she would have been entitled to such a pension at the age of had she been held to be a woman as a matter of national law.
      
The scope of Directive 79/cannot thus be confined simply to discrimination based on the fact that a person is of one or
         other sex. In view of its purpose and the nature of the rights which it seeks to safeguard, the scope of that directive is
         also such as to apply to discrimination arising from the gender reassignment of the person concerned.
      
(see paras 24, 38, operative part 1)
2.        It is only exceptionally that, in application of a general principle of legal certainty which is inherent in the Community
         legal order, the Court may decide to restrict the right to rely upon a provision it has interpreted with a view to calling
         in question legal relations established in good faith.
      
Moreover, the financial consequences which might ensue for a Member State from a preliminary ruling do not in themselves justify
         limiting the temporal effects of the ruling.
      
(see paras 40-41)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Equal treatment for men and women in matters of social security – Directive 79/7/EEC – Refusal to award a retirement pension at the age of to a transsexual who has undergone male-to-female gender reassignment
         surgery)
      
In Case C-423/04,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Social Security Commissioner (United Kingdom) made by decision
         of September 2004, received at the Court on October 2004, in the proceedings
      
Sarah Margaret Richards
v
Secretary of State for Work and Pensions,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann, President of the Chamber, K. Schiemann, N. Colneric, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur) and E. Juhász,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs,
Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on October 2005,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Ms Richards, by J. Sawyer and T. Eicke, Barristers,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by R. Caudwell, acting as Agent, and T. Ward, Barrister,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by D. Martin and N. Yerrell, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on December 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles and of Council Directive 79/7/EEC of December on the progressive implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women in matters of social
         security (OJ L 6, p. 24).
      
This reference was made in the course of proceedings between Ms Richards, a transsexual who has undergone a gender reassignment
         operation, and the Secretary of State for Work and Pensions (‘the Secretary of State’) regarding the latter’s refusal to award
         her a retirement pension as from her 60th birthday.
      
 Legal context
 Community law
Article 4(1) of Directive 79/provides:
      
‘The principle of equal treatment means that there shall be no discrimination whatsoever on ground of sex either directly,
         or indirectly by reference in particular to marital or family status, in particular as concerns:
      
–        the scope of the schemes and the conditions of access thereto,
–        the obligation to contribute and the calculation of contributions,
–        the calculation of benefits including increases due in respect of a spouse and for dependants and the conditions governing
         the duration and retention of entitlement to benefits.’
      
Article 7(1) of Directive 79/provides that the directive is to be without prejudice to the right of Member States to exclude
         from its scope:
      
‘(a)      the determination of pensionable age for the purposes of granting old-age and retirement pensions and the possible consequences
         thereof for other benefits;
      
…’
 National legislation
Section 29(1) and (3) of the Births and Deaths Registration Act prohibits any alteration to the Register of Births, except
         in cases of clerical or factual error.
      
Section of the Social Security Contributions and Benefits Act provides that a person is to be entitled to a Category
         A retirement pension (the ‘normal’ retirement pension) if he is over pensionable age and satisfies various conditions regarding
         contributions.
      
According to paragraph of Part I of Schedule to the Pensions Act 1995, a man attains pensionable age at and a woman
         born before April attains pensionable age at 60.
      
On July 2004, the Gender Recognition Act (hereinafter ‘the Act’), which came into force on April 2005, was adopted.
      
That Act permits persons who have already undergone gender reassignment or who intend to undergo gender reassignment surgery
         to apply for a gender recognition certificate, on the basis of which near-complete recognition of their change of gender can
         be obtained.
      
Under section 2(1) of the Act, a gender recognition certificate must be issued if the applicant fulfils, inter alia,
         the following conditions:
      
‘(a)      [the applicant] has or has had gender dysphoria,
(b)      [the applicant] has lived in the acquired gender throughout the period of two years ending with the date on which the application
         is made,
      
…’
Section 9(1) of the Act provides that:
      
‘Where a full gender recognition certificate is issued to a person, the person’s gender becomes for all purposes the acquired
         gender (so that, if the acquired gender is the male gender, the person’s sex becomes that of a man, and if it is the female
         gender, the person’s sex becomes that of a woman).’
      
Under section 9(2) of the Act, the gender recognition certificate does not affect things done, or events occurring, before
         the certificate is issued.
      
As regards retirement benefits, paragraph 7(3) of Part of Schedule to the Act provides:
      
‘… if (immediately before the certificate is issued) the person –
(a)      is a man who has attained the age at which a woman of the same age attains pensionable age, but
(b)      has not attained the age of 65,
the person is to be treated … as attaining pensionable age when it is issued.’
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling 
Ms Richards was born on February and her birth certificate registered her gender as male. Having been diagnosed as
         suffering from gender dysphoria, she underwent gender reassignment surgery on May 2001.
      
On February she applied to the Secretary of State for Work and Pensions for a retirement pension to be paid as from
         February 2002, the date on which she turned 60, the age at which, under national law, a woman born before April is eligible to receive a retirement pension.
      
By decision of March 2002, that application was refused on the ground that ‘the claim was made more than months before
         the claimant reaches age 65’,  which is the retirement age for men in the United Kingdom.
      
As the appeal which Ms Richards brought before the Social Security Appeal Tribunal was dismissed, she appealed to the Social
         Security Commissioner, claiming that, following the ruling in Case C-117/K.B. [2004] ECR I-541, the refusal to pay her a retirement pension as from the age of was a breach of Article of the European
         Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, as well as discrimination contrary to Article of
         Directive 79/7.
      
In that appeal, the Secretary of State for Work and Pensions submitted that the claim by the appellant in the main proceedings
         did not fall within the scope of Directive 79/7. According to him, Community law provides only for a measure of coordination
         for old-age benefits but does not confer a right to receive such benefits. Moreover, Ms Richards had not been discriminated
         against having regard to those who constitute the correct comparator, namely men who have not undergone gender reassignment
         surgery.
      
In order to be able to dispose of the case, the Social Security Commissioner decided to stay the proceedings and refer the
         following questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Does Directive 79/prohibit the refusal of a retirement pension to a male-to-female transsexual until she reaches the age
         of and who would have been entitled to such a pension at the age of had she been held to be a woman as a matter of national
         law?
      
(2)       If so, from what date should the Court’s ruling on Question have effect?’
 The first question
By its first question, the national court is essentially asking whether Article 4(1) of Directive 79/precludes legislation
         which denies a person who has undergone male-to-female gender reassignment entitlement to a retirement pension on the ground
         that she has not reached the age of 65, when she would have been entitled to such a pension at the age of had she been
         held to be a woman as a matter of national law.
      
First of all, it should be noted that it is for the Member States to determine the conditions under which legal recognition
         is given to the change of gender of a person (see to that effect K.B., paragraph 35).
      
In order to answer the first question, it is necessary to state at the outset that Directive 79/is the embodiment in the
         field of social security of the principle of equal treatment of men and women which is one of the fundamental principles of
         Community law.
      
Moreover, in accordance with settled case-law, the right not to be discriminated against on grounds of sex is one of the fundamental
         human rights the observance of which the Court has a duty to ensure (see Case 149/Defrenne [1978] ECR 1365, paragraphs and 27, and Case C-13/P. v S. [1996] ECR I-2143, paragraph 19).
      
The scope of Directive 79/cannot thus be confined simply to discrimination based on the fact that a person is of one or
         other sex. In view of its purpose and the nature of the rights which it seeks to safeguard, the scope of that directive is
         also such as to apply to discrimination arising from the gender reassignment of the person concerned (see, as regards Council
         Directive 76/207/EEC of February on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards
         access to employment, vocational training and promotion, and working conditions (OJ L 39, p. 40), P. v S., paragraph 20).
      
The United Kingdom Government submits that the facts which gave rise to the dispute in the main proceedings stem from the
         choice made by the national legislature to prescribe differential pensionable ages for men and women. As such a right was
         expressly granted to the Member States under Article 7(1)(a) of Directive 79/7, they are permitted to derogate from the principle
         of equal treatment for men and women in the field  of retirement pensions. It is irrelevant that, as in the main proceedings,
         the distinction made by the pension scheme on the basis of gender affects the rights of transsexuals.
      
That line of argument cannot be accepted.
      
Ms Richards argues that she was precluded from obtaining a retirement pension on reaching the age of 60, the age at which
         women who were born before April are entitled to such a pension in the United Kingdom.
      
The unequal treatment at issue in the main proceedings is based on Ms Richards’ inability to have the new gender which she
         acquired following surgery recognised with a view to the application of the Pensions Act 1995.
      
Unlike women whose gender is not the result of gender reassignment surgery and who may receive a retirement pension at the
         age of 60, Ms Richards is not able to fulfil one of the conditions of eligibility for that pension, in this case that relating
         to retirement age.
      
As it arises from her gender reassignment, the unequal treatment to which Ms Richards was subject must be regarded as discrimination
         which is precluded by Article 4(1) of Directive 79/7.
      
The Court has already found that national legislation which precludes a transsexual, in the absence of recognition of his
         new gender, from fulfilling a requirement which must be met in order to be entitled to a right protected by Community law
         must be regarded as being, in principle, incompatible with the requirements of Community law (see K.B., paragraphs to 34).
      
The United Kingdom Government submits that no Community right has been breached by the decision of March refusing
         to award Ms Richards a pension, as entitlement to a retirement pension derives only from national law.
      
In that regard, it is enough to remember that, according to settled case-law, Community law does not affect the power of the
         Member States to organise their social security systems, and that in the absence of harmonisation at Community level it is
         therefore for the legislation of each Member State to determine, first, the conditions governing the right or duty to be insured
         with a social security scheme and, second, the conditions for entitlement to benefits. Nevertheless, the Member States must
         comply with Community law when exercising that power (Case C-157/Smits and Peerbooms [2001] ECR I-5473, paragraphs to 46, and Case C-92/Kristiansen [2003] ECR I-14597, paragraph 31). 
      
Furthermore, discrimination contrary to Article 4(1) of Directive 79/falls within the scope of the derogation provided for
         by Article 7(1)(a) of that directive only if it is necessary in order to achieve the objectives which the directive is intended
         to pursue by allowing Member States to retain a different pensionable age for men and for women (Case C-9/Equal Opportunities Commission [1992] ECR I-4297, paragraph 13).  
      
Although the preamble to Directive 79/does not state the reasons for the derogations which it lays down, it can be inferred
         from the nature of the exceptions contained in Article 7(1) of the directive that the Community legislature intended to allow
         Member States to maintain temporarily the advantages accorded to women with respect to retirement in order to enable them
         progressively to adapt their pension systems in this respect without disrupting the complex financial equilibrium of those
         systems, the importance of which could not be ignored. Those advantages include the possibility for female workers of qualifying
         for a pension earlier than male workers, as envisaged by Article 7(1)(a) of the same directive (Equal Opportunities Commission, paragraph 15).
      
According to settled case-law, the exception to the prohibition of discrimination on grounds of sex provided for in Article
         7(1)(a) of Directive 79/must be interpreted strictly (see Case 152/Marshall [1986] ECR 723, paragraph 36; Case 262/Beets-Proper [1986] ECR 773, paragraph 38; and Case C-328/Thomas and Others [1993] ECR I-1247, paragraph 8).
      
Consequently, that provision must be interpreted as relating only to the determination of different pensionable ages for men
         and for women. However, the action in the main proceedings does not concern such a measure.
      
It is clear from the foregoing that Article 4(1) of Directive 79/must be interpreted as precluding legislation which denies
         a person who, in accordance with the conditions laid down by national law, has undergone male-to-female gender reassignment
         entitlement to a retirement pension on the ground that she has not reached the age of 65, when she would have been entitled
         to such a pension at the age of had she been held to be a woman as a matter of national law.
      
 The second question
By its second question the national court asks whether, if the Court finds that Directive 79/precludes the national legislation
         at issue in the main proceedings, the temporal effects of such a judgment must be limited.
      
It is only exceptionally that, in application of a general principle of legal certainty which is inherent in the Community
         legal order, the Court may decide to restrict the right to rely upon a provision it has interpreted with a view to calling
         in question legal relations established in good faith (Case 24/Blaizot [1988] ECR 379, paragraph 28, and Case C‑104/Buchner and Others [2000] ECR I-3625, paragraph 39). 
      
Moreover, it is settled case-law that the financial consequences which might ensue for a Member State from a preliminary ruling
         do not in themselves justify limiting the temporal effects of the ruling (Case C‑184/Grzelczyk [2001] ECR I-6193, paragraph 52, and Case C‑209/Bidar [2005] ECR I-2119, paragraph 68).
      
The Court has taken that step only in quite specific circumstances, where there was a risk of serious economic repercussions
         owing in particular to the large number of legal relationships entered into in good faith on the basis of rules considered
         to be validly in force and where it appeared that individuals and national authorities had been led to adopt practices which
         did not comply with Community legislation by reason of objective, significant uncertainty regarding the implications of Community
         provisions, to which the conduct of other Member States or the Commission of the European Communities may even have contributed
         (Bidar, paragraph 69).
      
In this case, the entry into force of the Act on April is liable to lead to the disappearance of disputes such
         as that which gave rise to the case in main proceedings. Furthermore, in both the written observations which it submitted
         to the Court and at the hearing, the United Kingdom Government did not maintain the claim which it had submitted in the action
         in the main proceedings seeking a limitation as to the temporal effect of the judgment.
      
Consequently, the answer to the second question must be that there is no need to limit the temporal effect of this judgment.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article 4(1) of Council Directive 79/7/EEC of December on the progressive implementation of the principle of equal
            treatment for men and women in matters of social security is to be interpreted as precluding legislation which denies a person
            who, in accordance with the conditions laid down by national law, has undergone male-to-female gender reassignment entitlement
            to a retirement pension on the ground that she has not reached the age of 65, when she would have been entitled to such a
            pension at the age of had she been held to be a woman as a matter of national law.
2.      There is no need to limit the temporal effects of this judgment.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 