
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-246/Commission of the European CommunitiesvKingdom of the Netherlands
«(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 91/439/EEC – Driving licences – Mutual recognition – Compulsory registration – Calculation of the duration of validity)»
Opinion of Advocate General Léger delivered on November I - Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), July I - Summary of the Judgment
1..
Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Driving licence – Directive 91/– Mutual recognition of driving licences   (Council Directive 91/439, Art. 1(2)) 
2..
Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Driving licence – Directive 91/– Possibility for a Member State which did not issue the licence to apply some of its national rules – Limits  (Council Directive 91/439, Art. 1(3)) 
1.
 Article 1(2) of Directive 91/on driving licences provides for mutual recognition of driving licences issued by other Member
         States. That recognition, which is to be carried out without any formality, is a clear and unconditional obligation and the
         Member States have no discretion as to the measures to be adopted in order to comply with the requirement. If registration
         of a driving licence issued by another Member State becomes an obligation because holders of such a licence are subject to
         a sanction if, after having taken up residence in the host Member State, they operate a motor vehicle without having registered
         their driving licence, such registration must be deemed to constitute a formality and is thus contrary to Article 1(2) of
         that directive. see paras 60-2.
 The measures adopted by a Member State to avail itself of the possibility, offered by Article 1(3) of Directive 91/on
         driving licences, of applying to the holder of a driving licence issued by another Member State its national rules on the
         period of validity of the licence, medical checks and tax arrangements and to enter on the licence the information indispensable
         for administration must not hinder or make less attractive for Community nationals the exercise of their right to free movement
         and freedom of establishment and, where they none the less do so, those measures must be applied in a non-discriminatory manner,
         be justified by imperative reasons of public interest, be appropriate for guaranteeing the attainment of the objective pursued
         and not go beyond what is necessary to attain that objective. see para. JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)July (1)
((Failure by a Member State to comply with its obligations – Directive 91/439/EEC – Driving licences – Mutual recognition – Compulsory registration – Calculation of the duration of validity))
In Case C-246/00, 
            
 Commission of the European Communities,  represented by M. Wolfcarius and H. M. H. Speyart, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, 
v
 Kingdom of the Netherlands,   represented by M.A. Fierstra, acting as Agent,
            
defendant, supported by Kingdom of Spain,   represented by R. Silva de Lapuerta, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
intervener, 
APPLICATION for a declaration that, by adopting and maintaining in force Articles 107(1), 108(1)(h), and 111(1)(a) of
            the Wegenverkeerswet (Road Traffic Law) of April (Stbl. No 475), as amended (Stbl. No 276) and Article of the Reglement Rijbewijzen (Decree on driving licences) of May (Stbl. No 277), as amended by the Decree of
            June (Stbl. No 326), the Kingdom of the Netherlands has failed to comply with its obligations under Articles
            1(2) and 6(1)(c) of, and point of Annex III to, Council Directive 91/439/EEC of July on driving licences (OJ L 237, p. 1), as amended by Council Directive 96/47/EC of July (OJ L 235, p. 1), 
            
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
composed of: R. Schintgen (Rapporteur), President of the Second Chamber, acting as President of the Sixth Chamber, C. Gulmann, V. Skouris, F. Macken and N. Colneric, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: P. Léger, Registrar: H. von Holstein, Deputy Registrar, 
            
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,after hearing oral argument from the parties at the hearing on September 2002, at which the Commission was represented
            by H.M.H. Speyart, the Kingdom of the Netherlands by J.G.M. van Bakel, acting as Agent, and the Kingdom of Spain by R. Silva
            de Lapuerta,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on November 2002, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on June 2000, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         for a declaration that, by adopting and maintaining in force Articles 107(1), 108(1)(h), and 111(1)(a) of the Wegenverkeerswet
         (Road Traffic Law) of April (Stbl. No 475), as amended (Staatsblad No 276) (
         the WVW 1994) and Article of the Reglement Rijbewijzen (Decree on driving licences) of May (Stbl. No 277), as amended
         by the Decree of June (Stbl. No 326) (
         the RR), the Kingdom of the Netherlands has failed to comply with its obligations under Articles 1(2) and 6(1)(c) of, and point
         of Annex III to, Council Directive 91/439/EEC of July on driving licences (OJ L 237, p. 1), as amended by Council
         Directive 96/47/EC of July (OJ L 235, p. 1, hereinafter  
         Directive 91/439).  
         
Legal background
Community legislation
         
            
The first recital of Directive 91/reads as follows: ... for the purpose of the common transport policy, and as a contribution to improving road traffic safety, as well as to
         facilitate the movement of persons settling in a Member State other than that in which they have passed a driving test, it
         is desirable that there should be a Community model national driving licence mutually recognised by the Member States without
         any obligation to exchange licences.
         
            
The ninth and tenth recitals of that directive read as follows: ... the provisions set out in Article of Directive 80/1263/EEC, and in particular the obligation to exchange driving licences
         within a period of one year of changing normal residence, constitute an obstacle to the free movement of persons; ... this
         is inadmissible in the light of the progress made towards European integration;... in addition, for reasons connected with road safety and traffic, Member States should be able to apply their national
         provisions on the withdrawal, suspension and cancellation of driving licences to all licence holders having acquired normal
         residence in their territory.
         
            
Article of Directive 91/provides: 1. Member States shall introduce a national driving licence based on the Community model described in Annex I or Ia, in accordance
         with the provisions of this Directive.2. Driving licences issued by Member States shall be mutually recognised.3. Where the holder of a valid national driving licence takes up normal residence in a Member State other than that which
         issued the licence, the host Member State may apply to the holder of the licences its national rules on the period of validity
         of the licences, medical checks and tax arrangements and may enter on the licence any information indispensable for administration.
         
            
Article 2(2) of Directive 91/reads as follows: Member States shall take all necessary steps to avoid any risk of forgery of driving licences.
         
            
Article of the directive lists different categories of vehicles which may be driven using the driving licence provided for
         in Article 1. 
         
            
Article of Directive 91/provides as follows: 1. The minimum age conditions for the issue of driving licences shall be as follows:
         
(a)
 ... 
         
(b)
years: 
         
 ─
for category A; however, access to the driving of motorcycles with a power exceeding kW or a power/weight ratio exceeding
                  0.kW/kg (or motorcycles with sidecars with a power/weight ratio exceeding 0.kW/kg) shall be subject to a minimum of
                  two years' experience on motorcycles with lower specifications under an A licence; this requirement as to previous experience
                  may be waived if the candidate is at least years old, subject to the candidate's passing a specific test of skills and
                  behaviour; 
               
 ─
for categories B, B+E; 
               
 ─
for categories C, C+E ...;  
               
(c)
years: 
         
 ─
for the categories D and D+E ... . 
               
2.
 Member States may derogate from the minimum age requirements laid down for categories A, B and B+E and issue such driving
         licences from the age of years, except in the case of the provisions for category A laid down in the last sentence of the
         first indent of paragraph 1(b).
         
3.
 Member States may refuse to recognise the validity in their territory of driving licences issued to drivers under years
         of age.
         
            
Article of Directive 91/provides: 
         
1.
 Driving licences shall, moreover, be issued only to those applicants:
         
(a)
who have passed a test of skills and behaviour and a theoretical test and who meet medical standards, in accordance with the
         provisions of Annexes II and III; 
         
(b)
who have their normal residence in the territory of the Member State issuing the licence, or can produce evidence that they
         have been studying there for at least six months. 
         
2.
 Without prejudice to provisions to be adopted by the Council in this regard, each Member State shall retain the right to determine,
         on the basis of national criteria, the period of validity of the driving licences which it issues.
         
3.
 Member States may, with the agreement of the Commission, derogate from the provisions of Annex III where such derogations
         are compatible with the development of medical science and with the principles laid down in that Annex.
         
4.
 Without prejudice to national criminal and police laws, Member States may, after consulting the Commission, apply to the issue
         of driving licences the provisions of their national rules relating to conditions other than those referred to in this Directive.
         
5.
 No person may hold a driving licence from more than one Member State.
         
            
Article of Directive 91/provides: 
         
1.
 Where the holder of a valid national driving licence issued by a Member State has taken up normal residence in another Member
         State, he may request that his driving licence be exchanged for an equivalent licence; it shall be for the Member State effecting
         the exchange to check, if necessary, whether the licence submitted is in fact still valid.
         
2.
 Subject to observance of the principle of territoriality of criminal and police laws, the Member States of normal residence
         may apply its national provisions on the restriction, suspension, withdrawal or cancellation of the right to drive to the
         holder of a driving licence issued by another Member State and, if necessary, exchange the licence for that purpose.
         
3.
 The Member State effecting the exchange shall return the old licence to the authorities of the Member State which issued it
         and give the reasons for so doing.
         
4.
 A Member State may refuse to recognise the validity of any driving licence issued by another Member State to a person who
         is, in the former State's territory, the subject of one of the measures referred to in paragraph 2.
         A Member State may likewise refuse to issue a driving licence to an applicant who is the subject of such a measure in another
         Member State....
         
            
Under Article of Directive 91/439,  
         normal residence means the place where a person usually lives, that is, for at least days in each calender year, because of personal and
         occupational ties, or, in the case of a person with no occupational ties, because of personal ties which show close links
         between that person and the place where he is living. 
         
            
Article 12(1) of Directive 91/provides that, after consulting the Commission and before July 1994, Member States are
         to adopt the laws, regulations or administrative provisions necessary to comply with that directive as of July 1996.  
         
            
Under point of Annex I to Directive 91/439, the Community model driving licence consists of six pages. 
         
            
Point of Annex I to Directive 91/provides: Where the holder of a driving licence issued by a Member State has taken up normal residence in another Member State, the
         latter may indicate: 
         
─
change(s) of residence on page 6, 
         
─
information essential for administrative purposes such as serious offences committed in its territory, on page 5,  
         
provided that it also enters this type of information in the licences which it issues and that there is a space available
         for that purpose. ...
         
            
Point of Annex III to Directive 91/439, entitled  
         Minimum standards of physical and mental fitness for driving a power-driven vehicle, provides that drivers are classified in two groups: group 1, which includes drivers of vehicles of categories A, B and B+E,
         and group 2, which includes drivers of vehicles of categories C, C+E, D and D+E.  
         
            
Annex III provides as follows with regard to medical examinations that those two groups of drivers must undergo: 
         
3.
 Group :  Applicants shall be required to undergo a medical examination if it becomes apparent, when the necessary formalities are being
         completed or during the tests which they have to undergo prior to obtaining a driving licence, that they have one or more
         of the medical disabilities mentioned in this Annex. 
         
4.
 Group :  Applicants shall undergo a medical examination before a driving licence is first issued to them and thereafter drivers shall
         undergo such periodic examinations as may be prescribed by national legislation.
         
            
According to the common declaration of the Council and the Commission concerning Article 1(3) of Directive 91/439, they recognise
         that the directive does not preclude Member States from registering the information from driving licences issued by another
         Member States when the holders of those licences take up normal residence in their territory.  
         
            
Directive 96/47, which entered into force on September 1996, added Annex Ia to Directive 91/439. That annex offers Member
         States the possibility of issuing licences according to a model defined therein, which is different from the one provided
         for in Annex I to Directive 91/439. The second licence model is in the form of a polycarbonate card of the type used for bank
         and credit cards.  
         
            
In accordance with point of Annex Ia, the licence model is to have two sides, with the second side having a space reserved
         for the possible entry by the host Member State of information essential for administering the licence, in implementation
         of paragraph 3(a) of that annex. 
         
            
Point 3(a) of Annex Ia to Directive 91/provides: Where the holder of a driving licence issued by a Member State in accordance with this Annex has his normal place of residence
         in another Member State, that Member State may enter in the licence such information as is essential for administering it,
         provided that it also enters this type of information in the licences which it issues and provided that there remains enough
         space for the purpose.
         National legislation
         
            
In the Netherlands, most of the provisions governing driving licences are contained in the general legislation on road traffic,
         of which the WVW is the foundation. 
         
            
Article 107(1) of the WVW requires the driver of a motor vehicle operating on public roads to be in possession of a driving
         licence issued by the competent authority authorising that person to drive that vehicle, it being understood that the authority
         contemplated is the competent one in the Netherlands. Article 107(2) lays down the various characteristics the licence must
         have, in particular that it must be valid. 
         
            
Article 108(1)(h) of the WVW provides: 1. Article shall not apply to drivers of:...(h) motor vehicles if those drivers reside in the Netherlands and the competent authority of another Member State of the European
         Communities or another Contracting Party to the European Economic Area has issued them a driving licence valid for driving
         a motor vehicle such as the one they are driving, for the duration of validity in the Netherlands fixed when that licence
         is registered in the registry of driving licences or, if the licence is not registered in the registry of driving licences
         or if the duration of validity in the Netherlands fixed at the time of registration is less than one year, provided that a
         year has not elapsed since the day of their establishment in the Netherlands.
         
            
Article of the WVW provides: 
         
1.
 The duration of validity in the Netherlands fixed at the time of registration provided for in Article 108(1)(h) shall be:
         
(a)
years from the date of issue if the driving licence was issued to a person who had not yet reached the age of at the
         date of issue; 
         
(b)
the period to the date when the holder will reach the age of 70, if the licence was issued to a holder who was over the age
         of but under the age of at the date of issue; 
         
(c)
five years as from the date of issue if the driving licence was issued to a holder having reached the age of at the date
         of issue. 
         
2.
 The registration takes place at the request of the holder.
         
3.
 The person responsible for the registration shall verify the identity of the applicant, and shall be empowered to require
         the applicant to be present at a specific time and place before a specific person.
         
4.
 The person responsible for the registration shall ensure that the driving licence presented for registration is valid and
         that it satisfies the conditions of registration applicable to it.
         
5.
 The methods of registration shall be prescribed by public administrative regulations. A ministerial regulation may lay down
         how the rules are to be implemented.
         
            
Article of the RR adopted to define the methods envisaged in Article 109(5) of the WVW provides: The driving licence to be registered pursuant to Article 108(1)(h) of the [WVW 1994] must have been issued to the applicant
         during the period forming part of a year during which he or she resided at least days in the country where the licence
         was issued or during a period during which he or she was enrolled for at least six months at a university, middle, secondary
         or post-secondary professional teaching institution or in another middle, secondary or post-secondary teaching institution
         in the country where the licence was issued and must still be valid on the date the application is filed.
         
            
Article of the RR provides: When the application for registration is made, the following documents must be provided:
         
(a)
a completed application form, in accordance with the model established by ministerial regulation; 
         
(b)
a certified photocopy of the driving licence for which the application for registration is being made;  
         
(c)
a certified copy of the necessary information concerning the applicant, from the population registry of the municipality where
         the applicant is registered, issued no more than six months prior to the application; 
         
(d)
supporting documents certifying that the requirements of Article for registering licences are satisfied.
         
            
Article of the RR specifies the information which must be notified to the holder of the registered licence. That information
         includes the date of registration and the duration of validity of the licence registered in the Netherlands. 
         
            
Article of the RR provides that the holder of a foreign driving licence may obtain a Netherlands driving licence in exchange
         for his or her foreign driving licence. The exchange takes place at the request of the holder. That request, made by means
         of a form, must, pursuant to Article of the RR, be accompanied by a number of supporting documents which are essentially
         the same as those provided for in Article of the RR, although the driving licence to be exchanged must also be included.
         Article of the RR provides that the licence is to be sent back to the authority which issued it. 
         
            
The duration of validity of Netherlands driving licences obtained by exchange is determined pursuant to Article of the
         WVW 1994, a provision which corresponds essentially to Article 109(1) of the WVW 1994. 
         
            
Article 126(1) of the WVW provides that a registry of driving licences is to be kept. Article 126(2) states that the
         registry is to contain information about the licences issued and case-law on revocation of motor vehicle driving licences,
         in so far as that information is necessary to ensure proper implementation of the WVW 1994. Article 126(4) provides that,
         for the application of the other provisions of that article,  
         driving licence is to be understood as meaning also a driving licence issued by the competent authority of another Member State of the European
         Union or a Contracting Party to the Agreement on the European Economic Area of May (OJ L 1, p. 3) whose holder
         resides in the Netherlands. 
         
            
Article 177(1) of the WVW provides that driving without a driving licence, with an expired driving licence or with a
         driving licence which does not satisfy the requirements imposed by or under the WVW is to be subject to a penal sanction
         of up to two months in prison or a fine. 
         
            
Article 2(1) of the Wet administratiefrechtelijke handhaving verkeersvoorschriften (Law on the administrative implementation
         of the traffic rules) of July (Stbl. No 300), as most recently amended by the Law of October (Stbl. No 469), provides for the application of administrative sanctions instead of the penal sanctions provided for in the WVW in the case of certain conduct which infringes provisions established by or under the WVW 1994. 
         
            
As regards the age-limits for obtaining driving licences, Article 111(1)(a) of the WVW provides that a driving licence
         may not be issued to a person who has not reached the age of 18. That provision holds for all categories of vehicles. 
         
            
As regards the compulsory medical examinations, Article 100(3) of the RR provides that, when an application for a driving
         licence is made, a medical report established no more than two weeks before the application is made must be provided when
         the application concerns: 
         
(a)
the issue of a driving licence to an applicant over years of age; 
         
(b)
the issue of a driving licence to an applicant who has reached years of age and is in possession of a driving licence which
         expires on or after the day the applicant reaches years; 
         
(c)
the issue of a type C, D or E driving licence.
         
Pre-litigation procedure
            
Following an exchange of correspondence between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Commission, the provisions of the WVW
         and the RR were adopted and notified to the Commission. The Commission, taking the view that the legislation adopted
         contained provisions which were not compatible with Directive 91/439, sent the Netherlands a letter of formal notice on June 1997, asking it to submit its observations within two months. 
         
            
By letters of October and July 1998, the Netherlands Government sent the Commission supplementary information on
         the provisions referred to in the letter of formal notice. 
         
            
Not satisfied by the observations submitted by the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Commission issued a reasoned opinion on
         December asking that Member State to fulfil its obligations under Directive 91/within two months of notification
         of the reasoned opinion. 
         
            
By letter of April 1999, the Netherlands Government again gave the Commission explanations about the system adopted in
         the Netherlands for registering driving licences. 
         
            
The Commission, judging that information not to be sufficient, decided to bring the present action. 
         
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on December 2002, the Netherlands Government asked for the oral procedure, which
         had been closed on November 2002, to be reopened, following delivery of the Opinion of the Advocate General. That request
         was denied by order of the Court of February 2003. 
         
            
By order of the President of the Court of February 2001, the Kingdom of Spain was granted leave to intervene in support
         of the forms of order sought by the Kingdom of the Netherlands. 
         The action
            
In support of its action, the Commission relies on four complaints, concerning the procedure for registering driving licences
         issued by another Member State, the calculation of the duration of validity of those licences, the age-limit set for obtaining
         a Category D licence and the obligation for drivers of vehicles in categories C, C+E, D and D+E to undergo medical examinations
         periodically.  
         Procedure for registering driving licences issued by another Member State
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
By its first complaint, the Commission criticises the Kingdom of the Netherlands for having infringed Article 1(2) of Directive
         91/by having established a compulsory registration system for driving licences issued by other Member States one year
         after the licence holder's establishment in the Netherlands and for having provided for a registration procedure which, by
         its cumbersomeness, is barely distinguishable from the procedure for exchanging driving licences. 
         
            
As regards, first, the obligation to register under Articles to of the WVW 1994, the Commission submits that, in the
         light of the first and ninth recitals to Directive 91/439, the mutual recognition provided for in Article 1(2) of that directive
         implies that driving licences issued by a Member State must be recognised by the other Member States and that holders of those
         licences may not be required to go through any additional formalities. Accordingly, at the current stage of harmonisation
         of the conditions for obtaining driving licences, the host Member State cannot require holders of driving licences issued
         by other Member States to register their driving licences as a precondition for driving a motor vehicle on its territory.
          
         
            
The Commission adds that, since driving a motor vehicle with an unregistered licence is an offence, it matters little that
         the sanction provided for in the event of non-compliance with the obligation to register is administrative or penal in nature.
         
         
            
In addition, it follows from Case C-193/Skanavi and   Chryssanthakopoulos  [1996] ECR I-929, paragraph 26, and Case C-230/Awoyemi  [1998] ECR I-6781, paragraphs and 42, that any formalities required in order to have a driving licence issued in one Member
         State recognised in another Member State constitutes an obstacle to the free movement of persons.  
         
            
Turning, next, to the registration procedure provided for by the WVW and the RR, the Commission maintains that the formalities
         to be completed during that procedure are excessively cumbersome and are similar to those required for the exchange of a driving
         licence, whereas Directive 91/expressly prohibits Member States from providing for such an exchange procedure. 
         
            
The Commission adds that in any case it is not possible to justify the registration procedure at issue in this case by the
         fact that the Kingdom of the Netherlands is seeking to use the opportunity provided for in Article 1(3) of Directive 91/to apply to the holder of a driving licence issued by another Member State its national rules on the period of validity of
         the licences, medical checks and tax arrangements and to enter on the licence any information indispensable for administration.
         
         
            
First, such an approach disregards the fact that Article 1(3) of Directive 91/constitutes merely an exception to the principle
         of mutual recognition of driving licences provided for in Article 1(2) and thus must be interpreted narrowly. Second, it undermines
         the effectiveness of Article 1(3) of Directive 91/439, to the detriment of the effectiveness of Article 1(2), which is, in
         the light of the relation between the two provisions, unacceptable. Lastly, there are other, less restrictive ways of ensuring
         the application of the national provisions referred to in Article 1(3) of Directive 91/439. 
         
            
In its observations concerning the intervention by the Kingdom of Spain, the Commission states that the infringement it alleges
         on the part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands does not reside in the fact of having established a registration system for
         driving licences, but rather in the compulsory nature of the registration and the cumbersomeness of the registration procedure
         itself. 
         
            
The Netherlands Government submits that, in the absence of a European registration system which is centralised or coordinated
         between the Member States, the establishment of a national registration system for driving licences, such as the one in place
         in the Netherlands, is indispensable if the validity of the licences is to be checked effectively. Such a system, which is
         justified on grounds of road traffic safety and anti-fraud efforts, enables any officer checking a driver to ascertain whether
         the information on the driving licence corresponds to the information in the driving licence register. 
         
            
The Netherlands Government points out that Directive 91/gives Member States the opportunity to apply to the holder of
         a licence issued by another Member State their national rules on the period of validity of the driving licences and to enter
         on the licence any information indispensable for administration. The Netherlands legislature availed itself of that opportunity
         and, because of the physical impossibility of including some of the information on some driving licences, had to adopt a system
         which enabled the competent authorities to enter that information elsewhere than on the licences themselves. In addition,
         since driving licences from other Member States are still very varied, an assessment of their validity requires expert knowledge,
         which makes registration indispensable. 
         
            
The Netherlands Government submits that although Directive 91/provides for the mutual recognition of driving licences,
         it does not ensure their complete harmonisation and that, as long as those differences persist as regards, for example, the
         duration of validity, there can be no complete mutual recognition. 
         
            
At the hearing, the Netherlands Government added that there is no system of compulsory registration of driving licences, as
         the Commission maintains, because holders of driving licences issued by another Member State who take up residence in the
         Netherlands may choose between registration and exchange of their licence. In response to a question put by the Court, the
         Netherlands Government stated that holders of driving licences issued by another Member State who have resided in the Netherlands
         for more than one year without registering or exchanging their licence are subject to a sanction if they operate a motor vehicle
         in the Netherlands. That sanction is, however, administrative in nature, not penal. 
         
            
Regarding the registration procedure, the Netherlands Government maintains that, contrary to what the Commission contends,
         the registration procedure is different in several respects from the exchange procedure and is not a constraint which is disproportionate
         to the objective pursued. 
         
            
The Kingdom of Spain, which has intervened in support of the submissions of the Netherlands on the first complaint put forward
         by the Commission, submits that a provision such as Article 108(1)(h) of the WVW does not infringe Article 1(2) of Directive
         41/and is covered by Article 1(3). 
         
            
The registration of licences issued by other Member States is essential if the host Member State is to be able to avail itself
         of the powers conferred by Article 1(3) of Directive 91/439. Were it not for such registration, a host Member State would
         be unable to apply  the provisions of its own legislation to the holder of a driving licence who has taken up residence on
         its territory, because it would have no specific information on that holder or the vehicles that person is authorised to operate.
         
         
            
The Spanish Government submits that a register containing information on the holder is also necessary for the application
         of Article 8(2) of Directive 91/439. Only such a register can enable a Member State to take measures providing, for example,
         for harsher penalties in the event of repeat offences. 
         
            
It adds that the Netherlands registration system is not contrary to the principle of mutual recognition of driving licences
         because the holder of a driving licence issued by another Member State may continue to use that licence and is not obliged
         to exchange it for a Netherlands driving licence. 
         
            
The Spanish Government also maintains that Article 1(3) of Directive 91/is not an exception to the principle of mutual
         recognition laid down in Article 1(2) because the two provisions are independent of each other. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
As regards, first, the compulsory nature of the registration provided for by the Netherlands legislation, it is appropriate
         to recall that Article 1(2) of Directive 91/provides for mutual recognition of driving licences issued by other Member
         States and that the Court has held that that recognition is to be carried out without any formality (see  
          Skanavi and Chryssanthakopoulos , paragraph 26, and  
          Awoyemi , paragraph 41). 
         
            
In addition, as indicated in paragraph of  
          Awoyemi , the obligation of mutual recognition of driving licences is a clear and unconditional obligation and the Member States have
         no discretion as to the measures to be adopted in order to comply with the requirement. 
         
            
It is thus clear that if registration of a driving licence issued by another Member State becomes an obligation because holders
         of such a licence are subject to a sanction if, after having taken up residence in the host Member State, they operate a motor
         vehicle without having registered their driving licence, such registration must be deemed to constitute a formality within
         the meaning of the case-law referred to in paragraph of this judgment and is thus contrary to Article 1(2) of Directive
         91/439. 
         
            
In the present case, it is common ground that holders of driving licences issued by another Member State who have been resident
         in the Netherlands for over a year are deemed to have committed an offence which is subject to a fine if they operate a motor
         vehicle without having registered their driving licence in the Netherlands. Consequently, the registration in question constitutes
         such a formality and is thus contrary to Article 1(2) of Directive 91/439. 
         
            
This finding is not affected by the argument that the sanction applied in the event of failure to comply with the registration
         obligation is administrative and not penal in nature; nor is it affected by the argument that the compulsory registration
         of driving licences is essential in order to make use of the possibility offered by Article 1(3) of Directive 91/439. 
         
            
First, the nature of the fine to which drivers who have not registered their driving licences within the prescribed time-period
         are subject is irrelevant because the very existence of a sanction, of whatever nature, necessarily makes the registration
         in question compulsory. 
         
            
Second, for the reasons indicated by the Advocate General in paragraphs to of his Opinion, the measures adopted by a
         Member State to avail itself of the possibility offered by Article 1(3) of Directive 91/of applying to the holder of a
         driving licence issued by another Member State who takes up residence in the Netherlands its national rules on the period
         of validity of the licences, medical checks and tax arrangements and to enter on the licence the information indispensable
         for administration must not hinder or make less attractive for Community nationals the exercise of their right to free movement
         of persons and freedom of establishment and, where they none the less do so, those measures must be applied in a non-discriminatory
         manner, be justified by imperative reasons of public interest, be appropriate for guaranteeing the attainment of the objective
         pursued and not go beyond what is necessary to attain that objective. 
         
            
In the present case, it is clear that although road traffic safety, which is the objective pursued by Article 1(3) of Directive
         91/439, is among the imperative reasons of public interest which may justify a restriction on fundamental freedoms guaranteed
         by the EC Treaty, and although the measure in dispute here is in effect applied to Netherlands nationals and nationals of
         other Member States alike and appears to be appropriate for attaining the objective pursued, the compulsory registration of
         driving licences goes beyond what is necessary to attain the objective pursued. 
         
            
First of all, the fact that a licence issued by another Member State is not registered in the Netherlands does not prevent
         the Netherlands authorities from applying correctly the national provisions on the duration of validity of driving licences
         by adding years to the date of issue stated on the driving licence when road checks are carried out. 
         
            
Next, the registration at issue here is also not essential in order to enable the competent authorities to ensure that the
         national provisions governing the renewal of driving licences and medical examinations have been complied with, since it is
         for the holder of the driving licence to prove that the relevant provisions have been complied with. Accordingly, it is sufficient
         to inform holders of driving licences issued by other Member States of the obligations they have under national legislation
         when they take the steps necessary to take up residence in the Netherlands and apply the sanctions provided for in the event
         of non-compliance with the provisions in question. 
         
            
Lastly, the fact that in some Member States driving licences made of polycarbonate are used does not make compulsory registration
         of those licences essential because, contrary to the contentions of the Netherlands Government, those licences must contain
         a space reserved for the possible entry by the host Member State of information essential for administering the licence. 
         
         
            
Accordingly, the Court finds that the first part of the Commission's first complaint is well founded. 
         
            
As regards, second, the cumbersomeness of the registration procedure, it is important to emphasise that it follows from Article
         109(5) of the WVW and from Articles 11, and of the RR, adopted to ensure the application of the WVW 1994, that
         the supporting documents to be submitted for a registration or an exchange of a driving licence are almost identical. Since,
         as noted in paragraph of this judgment, the registration procedure must be completed if holders of driving licences issued
         by another Member State who have taken up residence in the Netherlands wish to operate a motor vehicle in the Netherlands
         without being subject to a sanction, it is clear that the system at issue in this case is similar to the system for exchanging
         driving licences, a system which Directive 91/is expressly intended to abolish, as evidenced by its ninth recital. 
         
            
The Court notes, moreover, on a reading of Articles and together of the RR, that holders of driving licences issued
         by another Member State who wish to have their licence registered in the Netherlands must provide proof that, during the year
         in which the licence was obtained, they resided at least days in the Member State where the licence was issued or were
         enrolled for at least six months at a school or university in that State.  
         
            
This requirement, along with the fact that it requires the holder of the licence to be registered to prove something the evidence
         for which can be extremely difficult to provide owing to the time which may elapse between when the licence is obtained and
         when the person takes up residence in the Netherlands and the distance there may be between the place where the licence holder
         resided when the driving licence was obtained and the municipality in which the licence holder decides to take up residence
         in the Netherlands, negates the very recognition of driving licences issued by other Member States, because it amounts to
         rechecking whether the licence holder has fulfilled the conditions for obtaining a licence provided for in Articles 7(1)(b)
         and of Directive 91/439. 
         
            
The Court notes, from a reading of Articles 7(1)(b) and together of Directive 91/439, that it is for the authorities who
         issue driving licences to ensure that applicants have their normal residence in the State issuing the licence or that they
         are enrolled at a school or university there. Accordingly, if a person holds a driving licence issued by a Member State, that
         should be deemed to be proof that the licence holder has fulfilled the conditions for the issue of a licence provided for
         in Directive 91/439; the host Member State cannot then require the holder to prove again that he or she actually satisfied
         the conditions laid down in Articles 7(1)(b) and of Directive 91/439, without violating the principle of mutual recognition
         of driving licences. 
         
            
Accordingly, the second part of the first complaint is also well founded. 
         Calculation of the duration of validity of driving licences issued by other Member States
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
By its second complaint, the Commission alleges that the Kingdom of the Netherlands has infringed Article 1(2) of Directive
         91/by providing that the duration of validity of a driving licence issued by another Member State is determined on the
         basis of the date of issue of that licence in that State rather than the date on which the licence holder took up residence
         in the Netherlands. 
         
            
It submits in this regard, first, that one consequence of the Netherlands system is that holders of licences issued by another
         Member State more than nine years before they take up residence in the Netherlands will have their licences recognised for
         only one year, due to the application of Article 108(1)(h) of the WVW 1994. After that period has lapsed, they will be obliged
         to have their licences registered. Since under Article 109(1)(a) of the WVW the maximum duration of validity of a driving
         licence is years, the licence holders will have to exchange their licences for Netherlands licences. The Commission adds,
         and has not been contradicted on this point by the Netherlands Government, that the Netherlands system prevents some 54% of
         Community nationals likely to have a driving licence and be entitled to exercise their right to free movement from being able
         effectively to enjoy the benefit of the mutual recognition of driving licences provided for by Directive 91/439. 
         
            
The Commission maintains, second, that the Netherlands registration system constitutes an obstacle to the free movement of
         persons because it obliges large numbers of people who have exercised their right to move freely to exchange their driving
         licence for a Netherlands licence. The exception provided for in Article 1(3) of Directive 91/is to be construed narrowly
         and cannot be used to negate the principle of mutual recognition of driving licences provided for in Article 1(2). In addition,
         the calculation of the duration of validity of the driving licences does not  
         concern the safety of highway traffic as contemplated in Case 16/Choquet  [1978] ECR 2293. 
         
            
Moreover, the sanction provided for in the WVW in the event of failure to comply with the obligation to exchange a driving
         licence issued by another Member State for a Netherlands driving licence is disproportionate and constitutes an obstacle to
         the free movement of persons. 
         
            
The Commission submits, third, that the argument that calculating the duration of validity of a driving licence issued by
         another Member State on the basis of the date of issue rather than the date of the holder's taking up residence in the Netherlands
         serves, in order to combat fraud, to ensure that rights cannot be derived from documents over years old proves that the
         Kingdom of the Netherlands does not intend to recognise many of the licences issued in other Member States or the measures
         taken by those Member States to combat fraud. Moreover, the Netherlands system is disproportionate to the objective pursued,
         since that objective could also be attained by calculating the duration of validity of a foreign licence on the basis of the
         date on which the holder takes up residence in the Netherlands.  
         
            
The Netherlands Government contends, first, that Directive 91/does not limit the power the Member States have to apply
         their legislation governing the duration of validity of driving licences to licences issued by other Member States. The purpose
         of the scheme established by Article 109(1) of the WVW is precisely to exercise that power. The fact that the implementation
         of that scheme means that mutual recognition of driving licences remains a dead letter for many driving- licence holders,
         as maintained by the Commission, is merely an inevitable consequence of the possibility offered by Article 1(3) of Directive
         91/439. The provisions adopted by other Member States in order to be able to apply their respective legislation leads in any
         case to the same result. 
         
            
Next, the Netherlands Government maintains that the decision to calculate the duration of validity of driving licences issued
         by other Member States on the basis of their date of issue rather than the date of the holders' taking up residence in the
         Netherlands was necessary for reasons of effective control and road traffic safety and to combat fraud. It is necessary to
         prevent individuals from being able to derive rights from documents over years old because an identification photo over
         years old is not sufficient to identify a person clearly. Moreover, in order to combat fraud effectively, it is necessary
         to remain at the forefront of progress in security techniques.  
         Findings of the Court
         
            
Since neither the title of the second complaint nor the appurtenant observations indicate that this complaint by the Commission
         concerned the obligation to exchange driving licences resulting from the Netherlands legislation, the second complaint must
         be understood as concerning only the calculation of the duration of validity of driving licences issued by other Member States
         the holders of which have taken up residence in the Netherlands. 
         
            
The Court finds, in this connection, that the Commission has not demonstrated how calculating the duration of validity on
         the basis of the date of issue rather than the date of the holder's taking up residence in the Netherlands undermines Article
         1(2) of Directive 91/and the principle of the mutual recognition of driving licences laid down therein. 
         
            
The method of calculation proposed by the Commission amounts merely to giving nationals of other Member States wishing to
         take up or having taken up residence in the Netherlands more time to fulfil the conditions provided for by the Netherlands
         legislation in order to obtain an extension of the duration of validity of their driving licences in the Netherlands. Provided
         that the provisions of the host Member State governing the duration of validity of driving licences or medical examinations
         may validly be applied to the holders of driving licences issued by other Member States and are not such as to undermine the
         principle of mutual recognition laid down by Directive 91/439, the method chosen to determine the date from which those holders
         must fulfil the conditions provided for in the host Member State's legislation cannot by itself amount to a violation of the
         principle of mutual recognition of driving licences. 
         
            
It follows that the second complaint must be dismissed. 
         The minimum age requirement for obtaining a Category D driving licence and the periodic medical examination for drivers of
         category C, C+E, D and D+E vehicles
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
The Commission's third complaint is based on infringement of Article 6(1)(c) of Directive 91/by Article 111(1)(a) of the
         WVW 1994, on the ground that that provision provides for a minimum age of instead of for obtaining a category D driving
         licence. 
         
            
By its fourth complaint, the Commission criticises the Kingdom of the Netherlands for having infringed point of Annex III
         to Directive 91/by not providing for a periodic medical examination for drivers of category C, C+E, D and D+E vehicles
         in Article of the WVW 1994. 
         
            
As regards the third and fourth complaints, the Kingdom of the Netherlands admits that it has not yet adopted the measures
         necessary to comply with Article 6(1)(c) of, and point of Annex III to, Directive 91/439. It stresses, however, that national
         legislative provisions designed to end those infringements are in the process of being adopted. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
Since it is common ground in the present case that the Kingdom of the Netherlands has not adopted the measures necessary to
         ensure the transposition of Article 6(1)(c) of, and point of Annex III to, Directive 91/439, the Court finds that the third
         and fourth complaints are well founded. 
         
            
In the light of all the foregoing, the Court finds that, by adopting and maintaining in force Articles 107(1), 108(1)(h),
         111(1)(a) of the WVW 1994, Article of the RR, and Article 109(5) of the WVW 1994, read in conjunction with Articles 11,
         and of the RR, the Kingdom of the Netherlands has failed to comply with its obligations under Articles 1(2) and 6(1)(c)
         of, and point of Annex III to, Directive 91/439.  
         
Costs
            
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party's pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Kingdom of the Netherlands
         has been unsuccessful in the main, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs. Under Article 69(4) of the Rules of Procedure,
         the Kingdom of Spain must pay its own costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
hereby:  
         
1.
 Declares that, by adopting and maintaining in force Articles 107(1), 108(1)(h) and Article 111(1)(a) of   the Wegenverkeerswet (Road Traffic Law) of April 1994, as amended, as well as Article of the Reglement Rijbewijzen
               (Decree on driving licences) of May 1996, as amended by the Decree of June 1996, together with Article 109(5) of the
               Wegenverkeerswet, read in conjunction with Articles 11, and of the Reglement Rijbewijzen, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
               has failed to comply with its obligations under Articles 1(2) and 6(1)(c) of, and point of Annex III to, Council Directive
               91/439/EEC of July on driving licences, as amended by Council Directive 96/47/EC of July 1996; 
2.
 Dismisses the remainder of the application; 
3.
 Orders the Kingdom of the Netherlands to pay the costs; 
4.
 Orders the Kingdom of Spain to bear its own costs.
Schintgen
Gulmann 
Skouris 
Macken
Colneric 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on July 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
J.-P. Puissochet  
Registrar
President of the Sixth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: Dutch.
Top  
 