
Avis juridique important
|
61997JJudgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber) of October 1998.  -  Commission of the European Communities v Hellenic Republic.  -  Failure of a Member State to fulfil its obligations - Directive 95/23/EC - Failure to transpose within the prescribed period.  -  Case C-386/97.  
European Court reports Page I-Parties
Grounds
Decision on costs
Operative part
Keywords
Member States - Obligations - Implementation of directives - Failure to fulfil obligations not contested(EC Treaty, Art. 169)  
Parties
In Case C-386/97,Commission of the European Communities, represented by Maria Condou Durande, of its Legal Service, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the office of Carlos Gómez de la Cruz, of its Legal Service, Wagner Centre, Kirchberg, applicant, v Hellenic Republic, represented by Nana Dafniou, Legal Assistant in the Special European Community Legal Service of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ioannis Chalkias, Legal Adviser in the State Legal Service, and Foteini Dedousi, Agent for Legal Proceedings in the same Service, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg at the Greek Embassy, Val Sainte-Croix, defendant, "APPLICATION for a declaration that, by failing to adopt within the prescribed period the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Council Directive 95/23/EC of June amending Directive 64/433/EEC on conditions for the production and marketing of fresh meat (OJ L 243, p. 7), the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EC Treaty and that directive, THE COURT (Sixth Chamber), composed of: P.J.G. Kapteyn, President of the Chamber, G. Hirsch, G.F. Mancini, H. Ragnemalm and R. Schintgen (Rapporteur), Judges, Advocate General: A. La Pergola, Registrar: R. Grass, having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur, after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on June 1998, gives the following Judgment  
Grounds
By application lodged at the Court Registry on November 1997, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action under Article of the EC Treaty for a declaration that, by failing to adopt within the prescribed period the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Council Directive 95/23/EC of June amending Directive 64/433/EEC on conditions for the production and marketing of fresh meat (OJ L 243, p. 7, hereinafter `the Directive'), the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the EC Treaty and the Directive.Under the first subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the Directive, Member States were to bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with the Directive by July and forthwith to inform the Commission thereof. Since it had not received any communication relating to the transposition of the Directive into Greek law, and had no information to show that the Hellenic Republic had fulfilled that obligation, the Commission gave formal notice to that State by letter of February 1996, calling on it to submit its observations within a period of two months. In the absence of any reply from the Greek authorities, the Commission, on March 1997, sent a reasoned opinion to the Hellenic Republic, calling on it to take the measures necessary to comply with its obligations under the Directive within two months of its notification. By letter of April 1997, the Hellenic Government informed the Commission that, in order to transpose the Directive, it had prepared a draft presidential decree which had been submitted for signature. Having, however, received no communication thereafter regarding the adoption of measures to transpose the Directive, the Commission brought the present proceedings. The Hellenic Republic does not dispute that the Directive was not transposed within the prescribed period. As the Directive was not transposed within the period prescribed therein, the Commission's action must be considered well founded. Accordingly, it must be held that, by failing to adopt within the prescribed period the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with the Directive, the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under the Directive.  
Decision on costs
CostsUnder Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party's pleadings. Since the Commission applied for costs and the Hellenic Republic has been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs.  
Operative part
On those grounds,THE COURT (Sixth Chamber) hereby: Declares that, by failing to adopt within the prescribed period the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Council Directive 95/23/EC of June amending Directive 64/433/EEC on conditions for the production and marketing of fresh meat, the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive; Orders the Hellenic Republic to pay the costs.  
Top  
 