
Case C-537/Katja Candolin and Others
v
Vahinkovakuutusosakeyhtiö Pohjola and Jarno Ruokoranta
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Korkein oikeus)
(Compulsory motor vehicle insurance – Directives 84/5/EEC and 90/232/EEC – Rules on civil liability – Passenger’s contribution to the loss or injury – Refusal or limitation of the right to compensation)
Opinion of Advocate General Geelhoed delivered on March Judgment of the Court (First Chamber), June Summary of the Judgment
Approximation of laws — Insurance against civil liability in respect of motor vehicles — Directives 72/166, 84/and 90/— Determination of the rules on civil liability applicable to road accidents — Conditions for limiting the right to compensation
            paid by compulsory motor vehicle insurance based on the contribution to the damage of a passenger who is a victim of the accident
            — Powers of the Member States — Limits — Effect of the fact that the passenger concerned is the ‘owner of the vehicle’ — None
(Council Directives 72/166, Art. 3(1), 84/5, Art. 2(1), and 90/232, Art. 1)
It is clear from the aim of Directives 72/166, 84/and 90/on the approximation of the laws of the Member States in relating
         to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles, and from their wording, that they do not seek
         to harmonise the rules of the Member States governing civil liability and that, as Community law stands at present, the Member
         States are free to determine the rules of civil liability applicable to road accidents, and, in particular, the conditions
         for limiting the right to compensation paid by the compulsory motor vehicle insurance on account of the fact that the passenger
         who is a victim of the accident contributed to the injury.
      
The Member States must, however, exercise their powers in compliance with Community law and, in particular, with Article 3(1)
         of Directive 72/166, Article 2(1) of Directive 84/and Article of Directive 90/232, whose aim is to ensure that compulsory
         motor vehicle insurance allows all passengers who are victims of an accident caused by a motor vehicle to be compensated for
         the injury or loss they have suffered. The national provisions which govern compensation for road accidents cannot, therefore,
         deprive those provisions of their effectiveness.
      
Such would be the case specifically where, solely on the basis of the passenger’s contribution to the occurrence of his injuries,
         national rules, established on the basis of general and abstract criteria either denied the passenger the right to be compensated
         by the compulsory motor vehicle insurance or limited such a right in a disproportionate manner. The fact that the passenger
         concerned is the owner of the vehicle the driver of which caused the accident is irrelevant in that regard.
      
(see paras 24, 27-29, 31, 35, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)
June (*)
      
(Compulsory motor vehicle insurance – Directives 84/5/EEC and 90/232/EEC – Rules on civil liability – Passenger’s contribution to the loss or injury – Refusal or limitation of the right to compensation)
In Case C-537/03,
Reference for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Korkein Oikeus (Finland), made by decision of December 2003, received
         at the Court on December 2003, in the proceedings
      
Katja Candolin,
Jari-Antero Viljaniemi,
Veli-Matti Paananen,
v
Vahinkovakuutusosakeyhtiö Pohjola,
Jarno Ruokoranta,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
composed of P. Jann, President of the Chamber, K. Lenaerts, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur), E. Juhász and M. Ilešič, Judges,
Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed,
Registrar: H. von Holstein, Deputy Registrar,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on January 2005,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       Mr Paananen, by M. Hunnakko, asianajaja,
–       Vahinkovakuutusosakeyhtiö Pohjola, by M. Mäkelä, acting as Agent,
–       the Finnish Government, by T. Pynnä, acting as Agent,
–       the German Government, by M. Lumma, acting as Agent,
–       the Austrian Government, by E. Riedl, acting as Agent,
–       the Swedish Government, by K. Norman, acting as Agent,
–       the Norwegian Government, by I. Djupvik, acting as Agent, and T. Nordby, advocate,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by E. Traversa and M. Huttunen, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Second Council Directive 84/5/EEC of December on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use
         of motor vehicles (OJ L 8, p. 17) (‘the Second Directive’) and Third Council Directive 90/232/EEC of May on the
         approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor
         vehicles (OJ L 129, p. 33) (‘the Third Directive’).
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between Ms Candolin, Mr Viljaniemi and Mr Paananen and the insurance company
         Vahinkovakuutusosakeyhtiö Pohjola (‘Pohjola’) and Mr Ruokoranta, concerning damages to be paid to them as a result of a car
         accident.
      
 Legal background
 Community law
Pursuant to Article 3(1) of Council Directive 72/166/EEC of April on the approximation of the laws of Member States
         relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles, and to the enforcement of the obligation
         to insure against such liability (OJ, English Special Edition (II), p. 360) (‘the First Directive’):
      
‘Each Member State shall … take all appropriate measures to ensure that civil liability in respect of the use of vehicles
         normally based in its territory is covered by insurance. The extent of the liability covered and the terms and conditions
         of the cover shall be determined on the basis of these measures.’ 
      
The seventh and ninth recitals in the preamble to the Second Directive are worded as follows:
‘Whereas it is in the interest of victims that the effects of certain exclusion clauses be limited to the relationship between
         the insurer and the person responsible for the accident; …
      
… the members of the family of the insured person, driver or any other person liable should be afforded protection comparable
         to that of other third parties, in any event in respect of their personal injuries’.
      
Article 2(1) of the Second Directive provides that:
‘Each Member State shall take the necessary measures to ensure that any statutory provision or any contractual clause contained
         in an insurance policy issued in accordance with Article 3(1) of Directive 72/166/EEC, which excludes from insurance the use
         or driving of vehicles by: 
      
–       persons who do not have express or implied authorisation thereto, 
or
–       persons who do not hold a licence permitting them to drive the vehicle concerned, 
or
–       persons who are in breach of the statutory technical requirements concerning the condition and safety of the vehicle concerned,
shall, for the purposes of Article 3(1) of Directive 72/166/EEC, be deemed to be void in respect of claims by third parties
         who have been victims of an accident.
      
However the provision or clause referred to in the first indent may be invoked against persons who voluntarily entered the
         vehicle which caused the damage or injury, when the insurer can prove that they knew the vehicle was stolen.
      
…’
Article of the Third Directive provides:
‘Without prejudice to the second subparagraph of Article 2(1) of Directive 84/5/EEC, the insurance referred to in Article
         3(1) of Directive 72/166/EEC shall cover liability for personal injuries to all passengers, other than the driver, arising
         out of the use of a vehicle.
      
…’
 National law
At the time the facts arose in the main proceedings, Paragraph 7(1) and (3) of the Law on motor vehicle insurance (Liikennevakuutuslaki
         (279/1959)) of June 1959, as amended by Law 656/1994, was worded as follows:
      
‘1.      If a person who has met with road accident damage himself contributed to its occurrence, his compensation may, as regards
         damage incurred other than personal injury, be reduced or refused depending on what his fault was, how the vehicle was driven
         and what other circumstances influenced the damage. If a person has caused injury to his own person deliberately or by gross
         negligence, compensation for that is paid only in so far as the other circumstances have influenced the occurrence of the
         injury.
      
…
If a person has caused injury to his own person when driving a vehicle in a situation in which the alcohol content of his
         blood during the journey or after it was at least 1.per mille or he had at least 0.milligrams of alcohol per litre of
         air exhaled, or has caused injury when driving a vehicle otherwise under the influence of alcohol or/and of an intoxicating
         substance other than alcohol or under the joint influence of alcohol and an intoxicating substance other than alcohol, so
         that his ability to act correctly was considerably impaired, compensation is paid from the vehicle’s insurance only in so
         far as there is a special reason for that. What is said above on the driver’s right to compensation applies also to a passenger,
         if when he sustained the injury he was in the vehicle although he knew or should have known of the driver’s condition referred
         to above.’
      
As a result of a reasoned opinion sent on March by the Commission of the European Communities to the Republic of Finland,
         the second sentence of Paragraph 7(3) was amended by Law 548/2002. Pursuant to that new provision:
      
‘A passenger’s compensation may be reasonably reduced on the ground of his own contributory fault, if when he sustained the
         injury he was in the vehicle with a driver as described in this subparagraph.’
      
Since the entry into force on February of Law 1144/2002, Paragraph 7(1) of the Law on motor vehicle insurance is worded
         as follows:
      
‘If a person has intentionally caused personal injury to himself, compensation is paid only in so far as the other circumstances
         have influenced the occurrence of injury. If a person has contributed by gross carelessness to the occurrence of the personal
         injury he has suffered, the compensation may be reduced or refused according to what is reasonable having regard to the circumstances.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
On April Mrs Candolin, the mother of Ms Candolin, was travelling together with Mr Viljaniemi and Mr Paananen in Mr Paananen’s
         car, which was driven on that occasion by Mr Ruokoranta. During the journey a road accident occurred, causing the death of
         Mrs Candolin as well as serious injuries to the other passengers.
      
It is apparent from the order for reference that the driver and all the other passengers were drunk.
The Porin Käräjäoikeus (District Court, Pori) sentenced Mr Ruokoranta to a term of imprisonment and ordered him to pay compensation
         to Ms Candolin, Mr Viljaniemi and Mr Paananen. As regards the question of the payment of compensation by Pohjola, the District
         Court, taking the view that the passengers should have noticed the driver’s drunken state, held that, in principle, none of
         them was entitled to receive compensation from Pohjola by reason of Paragraph 7(3) of the Law on motor vehicle insurance as
         amended by Law 656/1994. However, if there were a ‘special reason’, within the meaning of Paragraph 7(3,) for paying compensation
         then Pohjola could be ordered to pay it. Taking account of the serious injuries suffered by Mr Paananen and the fact that
         Mr Ruokoranta, given his financial circumstances, would probably be unable to compensate him, the Porin Käräjäoikeus held
         that Pohjola had to pay that compensation. On the other hand, it held that no ‘special reason’ could be relied on as regards
         Ms Candolin and Mr Viljaniemi. 
      
An appeal was brought before Turun Hovioikeus (Court of Appeal, Turku) which held that Pohjola was no longer liable to pay
         the compensation which Mr Ruokoranta owed to Mr Paananen.
      
Ms Candolin, Mr Viljaniemi and Mr Paananen therefore brought an appeal against the judgment of the Turun Hovioikeus before
         the Korkein Oikeus (Supreme Court). They claim that their compensation should be covered by the insurance company on the basis
         of the motor vehicle insurance. Pohjola denies that it has any obligation to pay compensation on the ground that where a passenger
         enters a vehicle in the knowledge that he runs a higher than normal risk of being injured he must be liable for the consequences
         of his conduct.
      
Taking the view that the legal provisions in force at the time of the facts must be interpreted in accordance with Community
         law, the Korkein Oikeus decided to stay its proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary
         ruling:
      
‘1.      Does the requirement in Article of the Third Directive …, under which all passengers other than the driver are to be compensated
         from insurance for personal injuries arising out of the use of a vehicle, or any other provision or principle of Community
         law lay down restrictions in assessing the significance of the passenger’s own contributory fault under national law, in connection
         with his right to compensation payable from compulsory motor vehicle insurance?
      
2.      Is it consistent with Community law, in any situation other than the cases mentioned in the second subparagraph of Article
         2(1) of the Second Directive …, to exclude or limit, on the basis of the conduct of a passenger in a vehicle, his right to
         obtain compensation from compulsory motor vehicle insurance for road accident damage? May that come into question, for example,
         when a person has entered a vehicle as a passenger although he could have seen that the danger of an accident and of his suffering
         injury was greater than normal?
      
3.      Does Community law preclude the driver’s intoxication, which influences his capability of driving the vehicle safely, from
         being regarded as such a factor to be taken into account?
      
4.      Does Community law preclude the right of a car owner who is a passenger in the car to compensation for personal injury payable
         from compulsory motor vehicle insurance from being assessed more severely than that of other passengers on the ground that
         he permitted an intoxicated person to drive his car?’
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
By those questions, which it is appropriate to examine together, the national court asks essentially whether the second subparagraph
         of Article 2(1) of the Second Directive and Article of the Third Directive preclude a national law according to which compensation
         paid under compulsory motor vehicle insurance may be refused or limited on the basis of the passenger’s contribution to the
         injury he has suffered, and whether the answer is different where the passenger is the owner of the vehicle.
      
As a preliminary point it must be recalled that the First, Second and Third Directives are designed to ensure the free movement
         of vehicles normally based on Community territory and of persons travelling in those vehicles and to guarantee that the victims
         of accidents caused by those vehicles receive comparable treatment irrespective of where in the Community the accident has
         occurred (Case C-129/Ruiz Bernáldez [1996] ECR I-1829, paragraph 13). 
      
In view of the aim of protecting victims, the Court has held that Article 3(1) of the First Directive precludes an insurer
         from relying on statutory provisions or contractual clauses in order to refuse to compensate third-party victims of an accident
         caused by the insured vehicle (RuizBernáldez, paragraph 20).
      
The Court has also held that the first subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the Second Directive simply repeats that obligation
         with respect to provisions or clauses in a policy excluding from insurance the use or driving of vehicles in particular cases
         (persons not authorised to drive the vehicle, persons not holding a driving licence, persons in breach of the statutory technical
         requirements concerning the condition and safety of the vehicle) (RuizBernáldez, paragraph 21).
      
By way of derogation from that obligation, the second subparagraph of Article 2(1) provides that certain persons may be excluded
         from compensation by the insurer, having regard to the situation they have themselves brought about (persons entering a vehicle
         which they know to have been stolen) (RuizBernáldez, paragraph 21).
      
However, as it is a provision which establishes a derogation from a general rule, the second subparagraph of Article 2(1)
         of the Second Directive must be interpreted strictly. 
      
As the Advocate General rightly stated, in point of his Opinion, any other interpretation would allow Member States to
         limit payment of compensation to third-party victims of a road accident to certain circumstances, which is precisely what
         the directives are intended to avoid.
      
It follows that the second subparagraph of Article 2(1) of the Second Directive must be interpreted as meaning that a statutory
         provision or a contractual clause in an insurance policy which excludes the use or driving of vehicles from the insurance
         may be relied on against third parties who are victims of a road accident only where the insurer can prove that the persons
         who voluntarily entered the vehicle which caused the injury knew that it was stolen.
      
As regards the refusal or limitation of the right to compensation paid by the compulsory motor vehicle insurance on account
         of the fact that the passenger who is a victim of an accident contributed to the injury, it is clear from the aim of the first,
         second and third directives, and from their wording, that they do not seek to harmonise the rules of the Member States governing
         civil liability and that, as Community law stands at present, the Member States are free to determine the rules of civil liability
         applicable to road accidents (Case C-348/Mendes Ferreiraand Delgado Correia Ferreira [2000] ECR I-6711, paragraphs and 29).
      
In that regard, Pohjola and the Finnish, German, Austrian and Norwegian Governments claim that Community law does not impose
         any limits on the appraisal, under national law on civil liability, of the extent to which the passenger contributed to the
         occurrence of his injuries.
      
Such an argument cannot be accepted.
The Member States must exercise their powers in compliance with Community law and, in particular, with Article 3(1) of the
         First Directive, Article 2(1) of the Second Directive and Article of the Third Directive, whose aim is to ensure that compulsory
         motor vehicle insurance allows all passengers who are victims of an accident caused by a motor vehicle to be compensated for
         the injury or loss they have suffered.
      
The national provisions which govern compensation for road accidents cannot, therefore, deprive those provisions of their
         effectiveness.
      
Such would be the case specifically where, solely on the basis of the passenger’s contribution to the occurrence of his injuries,
         national rules, established on the basis of general and abstract criteria, either denied the passenger the right to be compensated
         by the compulsory motor vehicle insurance or limited such a right in a disproportionate manner.
      
It is only in exceptional circumstances that the amount of the victim’s compensation may be limited on the basis of an assessment
         of his particular case.
      
In the determination of whether those circumstances exist and whether the limit on the compensation is proportionate, which
         is a matter for the national court, the fact that the passenger concerned is the owner of the vehicle the driver of which
         caused the accident is irrelevant.
      
By providing that insurance for civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles covers liability for personal injuries
         to all passengers other than the driver, Article of the Third Directive lays down only one distinction between the driver
         and the other passengers. 
      
Furthermore, the protective aims recalled in paragraphs to of this judgment require that the legal position of the owner
         of the vehicle, present in the vehicle at the time of the accident as a passenger, be the same as that of any other passenger
         who is a victim of the accident.
      
That interpretation is supported by the way in which Community law has evolved. The seventh recital in the preamble to the
         Second Directive states that it is in the interest of victims that the effects of certain exclusion clauses should be limited
         to the relationship between the insurer and the person responsible for the accident. In order to give protection comparable
         to that of other third parties who are victims, as is clear from the ninth recital in the preamble to that directive, Article
         has extended insurance cover for personal injuries to members of the family of the insured person and the driver or any
         other person who is liable. Article of the Third Directive adopts an even broader formula, by providing for compensation
         for personal injuries for all passengers other than the driver. Therefore, the owner of the vehicle, who is a passenger, is
         not excluded from the benefit of compensation.
      
In light of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the questions referred must be that, in circumstances such as those
         in the main proceedings, Article 2(1) of the Second Directive and Article of the Third Directive preclude a national rule
         which allows the compensation borne by the compulsory motor vehicle insurance to be refused or limited in a disproportionate
         manner on the basis of the passenger’s contribution to the injury or loss he has suffered. The fact that the passenger concerned
         is the owner of the vehicle the driver of which caused the accident is irrelevant.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (First Chamber) rules as follows:
In circumstances such as those in the main proceedings, Article 2(1) of Second Council Directive 84/5/EEC of December on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use
            of motor vehicles and Article of Third Council Directive 90/232/EEC of May on the approximation of the laws of the
            Member States relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles, preclude a national rule
            which allows the compensation borne by the compulsory motor vehicle insurance to be refused or limited in a disproportionate
            manner on the basis of the passenger’s contribution to the injury or loss he has suffered. The fact that the passenger concerned
            is the owner of the vehicle the driver of which caused the accident is irrelevant.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Finnish.
      
Top  
 