
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Reference for a preliminary ruling — Value added tax — Sixth Directive 77/388/EEC — Directive 2006/112/EC — Exemption of imported goods which are intended to be placed under warehousing arrangements other than customs — Obligation to physically place the goods in the warehouse — Non-compliance — Obligation to pay VAT notwithstanding the fact that it has already been settled under the reverse charge mechanism)
In Case C‑272/13,
REQUEST for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Commissione tributaria regionale per la Toscana (Italy),
         made by decision of May 2012, received at the Court on May 2013, in the proceedings
      
Equoland Soc. coop. arl
v
Agenzia delle Dogane — Ufficio delle Dogane di Livorno,
      
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
composed of A. Borg Barthet, President of the Chamber, E. Levits and F. Biltgen (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: N. Jääskinen,
Registrar: L. Carrasco Marco, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on April 2014,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Equoland Soc. coop. arl, by M. Turci, R. Vianello and D. D’Alauro, avvocati,
–        the Italian Government, by G. Palmieri, acting as Agent, assisted by G. Albenzio, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Spanish Government, by J. García-Valdecasas Dorrego and L. Banciella Rodríguez-Miñón, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by D. Recchia and C. Soulay, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This request for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article of Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC of May
         on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes — Common system of value added tax:
         uniform basis of assessment (OJ L 145. p. 1), as amended by Council Directive 2006/18/EC of February (OJ L 51, p. 12) (‘the Sixth Directive’), and Articles and of Council Directive 2006/112/EC of November on the
         common system of value added tax (OJ L 347, p. 1) (‘the VAT directive’).
      
The request has been made in proceedings between Equoland Soc. coop. arl (‘Equoland’) and the Agenzia delle Dogane — Ufficio
         delle Dogane di Livorno (the Livorno Customs Agency, ‘the Customs Agency’) involving a decision of the latter requiring Equoland
         to pay value added tax (‘VAT’) on the importation of goods not physically placed in a tax warehouse, even though Equoland
         had already paid that tax under the reverse charge mechanism.
      
 Legal context
 EU law
Article 10(3) of the Sixth Directive provides:
      
‘The chargeable event shall occur and the tax shall become chargeable when the goods are imported. Where goods are placed
         under one of the arrangements referred to in Article 7(3) on entry into the Community, the chargeable event shall occur and
         the tax shall become chargeable only when the goods cease to be covered by those arrangements.
      
However, where imported goods are subject to customs duties, to agricultural levies or to charges having equivalent effect
         established under a common policy, the chargeable event shall occur and the tax shall become chargeable when the chargeable
         event for those Community duties occurs and those duties become chargeable.
      
Where imported goods are not subject to any of those Community duties, Member States shall apply the provisions in force governing
         customs duties as regards the occurrence of the chargeable event and the moment when the tax becomes chargeable.’
      
Article 16(1) of the Sixth Directive, in the version resulting from Article 28c of that directive (‘Article 16(1) of the Sixth
         Directive’), provides:
      
‘Without prejudice to other Community tax provisions, Member States may, subject to the consultations provided for in Article 29,
         take special measures designed to exempt all or some of the following transactions, provided that they are not aimed at final
         use and/or consumption and that the amount of [VAT] due on cessation of the arrangements [or] situations referred to at A
         to E corresponds to the amount of tax which would have been due had each of these transactions been taxed within the territory
         of the country:
      
A.      imports of goods which are intended to be placed under warehousing arrangements other than customs.
B.      supplies of goods which are intended to be:
(a)      produced to customs and, where applicable, placed in temporary storage;
(b)      placed in a free zone or in a free warehouse;
(c)      placed under customs warehousing arrangements or inward processing arrangements;
…
(e)      placed, within the territory of the country, under warehousing arrangements other than customs warehousing.
For the purposes of this Article, warehouses other than customs warehouses shall be taken to be:
–        for products subject to excise duty, the places defined as tax warehouses for the purposes of Article 4(b) of [Council Directive
         92/12/EEC of February on the general arrangements for products subject to excise duty and on the holding, movement
         and monitoring of such products (OJ L 76, p. 1)].
      
–        for goods other than those subject to excise duty, the places defined as such by the Member States. However, Member States
         may not provide for warehousing arrangements other than customs warehousing where the goods in question are intended to be
         supplied at the retail stage.
      
...’
Article of the Sixth Directive, as amended by Article 28f thereof, provides:
      
‘1.      A right of deduction shall arise at the time the deductible tax becomes chargeable.
2.      In so far as the goods and services are used for the purposes of his taxable transactions, the taxable person shall be entitled
         to deduct from the tax which he is liable to pay:
      
...
(b)      the [VAT] due or paid in respect of imported goods within the territory of the country;
...’
Under Article 4(b) of Directive 92/12, a tax warehouse means ‘a place where goods subject to excise duty are produced, processed,
         held, received or dispatched under duty-suspension arrangements by an authorised warehousekeeper in the course of his business,
         subject to certain conditions laid down by the competent authorities of the Member State where the tax warehouse is located’.
      
 Italian law
Decree Law No of August 1993, concerning harmonisation of the provisions relating to taxes on mineral oils, alcohol,
         alcoholic beverages and manufactured tobacco, and in respect of VAT, with the provisions laid down in the EEC directive, and
         amendments deriving from such harmonisation, as well as provisions relating to the system of authorised tax assistance centres,
         tax reimbursement procedures, the exclusion of local income tax (‘ILOR’) from business income up to the amount corresponding
         to direct professional expenses, the establishment for of an extraordinary consumption tax on certain goods, and other
         tax provisions (GURI No 203, of August 1993), provides in Article 50a(4):
      
‘The following transactions may be carried out without payment of [VAT]:
…
(b)      releases for free circulation of non-Community goods which are to be placed in a VAT warehouse, on presentation of a suitable
         guarantee commensurate with the tax. The presentation of the guarantee is not required for those economic operators certified
         under Article 14a of Regulation (EEC) No 2454/… and for those exempted by Article of the Consolidated text of the
         legislative provisions in customs matters provided for by Decree No of the President of the Republic of January 1973.’
      
Article of Legislative Decree No of December on the reform of non-criminal tax penalties in the field of direct
         taxation, value added tax and tax collection, in accordance with Article 3(133)(q) of Law No of December (GURI
         No of January 1998, Ordinary Supplement) (‘Legislative Decree No 471/97’), provides:
      
‘1.      Any person who fails to pay, in whole or in part, within the prescribed periods, instalments, periodic payments, the equalisation
         payment or the balance of tax due on the tax return, after deduction in those cases of the amount of the periodic payments
         and instalments, even if they have not been paid, shall be liable to an administrative penalty amounting to 30% of each outstanding
         amount, even where, after the correction of material or calculation errors noted during the inspection of the annual tax return,
         it appears that the tax is greater or that the deductible surplus is less. For payments on loans guaranteed in full by forms
         of real or personal security prescribed by law or recognised by the tax authority, made with a delay not exceeding days,
         the penalty referred to in the first sentence, in addition to the provisions of Article 13(1)(a) of Legislative Decree No of December 1997, is further reduced to an amount equal to one-fifteenth for each day of delay. The same penalty applies
         in the case of assessment of the tax increased under Articles 36(a) and 36(b) of Decree No of the President of the Republic
         of September 1973, and Article of Decree No of the President of the Republic of October 1972.
      
2.      Except in cases of registered assessments, the penalty shall apply in all cases of non-payment of a tax or a portion of that
         tax within the prescribed period.
      
3.      The penalties provided for in this article shall not apply if the payments were made in good time at a desk, office or concession
         holder other than that which is competent.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
On the basis of the order for reference and the observations submitted by Equoland, the Italian and Spanish Governments and
         by the European Commission, the facts in the main proceedings may be summarised as follows.
      
In June Equoland imported, via from the Customs Agency, a consignment of goods from a third country. On the customs declaration,
         it was stated that those goods were destined for the tax warehouse for the purposes of VAT. Consequently, no payment of VAT
         on importation was requested on the date of that transaction.
      
On the day after the import, the manager of the warehouse to which the goods were destined registered them in the warehouse
         register. However, the goods were never physically stored in the warehouse, but were placed there ‘virtually’, namely by including
         them in that register. The goods were then immediately withdrawn from the tax warehouse arrangements and the VAT was paid
         by Equoland under the reverse charge mechanism.
      
Considering that, as the goods were not physically placed in the tax warehouse, the necessary conditions for the postponement
         of payment of VAT on importation were not met, the Customs Agency considered that Equoland had not paid the tax due and sought,
         under Article of Legislative Decree No 471/97, payment of the VAT on importation plus a penalty of 30% of that VAT amount.
      
Equoland brought an action against that decision before the Commissione tributaria provinciale di Livorno (Provincial Tax
         Court of Livorno) arguing that it had regularised its situation with regard to the VAT on importation through the reverse
         charge mechanism, paying that VAT on importation to the Agenzia delle Entrate (the tax authority) rather than paying it to
         the Customs Agency. Consequently, it argued that Article of Legislative Decree No 471/is not applicable to a case such
         as that in the main proceedings.
      
Since its action was dismissed, Equoland appealed against that dismissal decision to the Commissione Tributaria Regionale
         per la Toscana, reiterating its view that the adjusted assessment notice was based solely on the fact that the imported goods
         had not been ‘physically’ placed in the tax warehouse, with no VAT deduction since, at the time of release for consumption,
         Equoland had undertaken to issue invoices to itself for the purchase by importation and to pay the adjusted VAT. Moreover,
         Equoland argues that, in several Member States, the ‘virtual’ placing of goods in a tax warehouse is legal.
      
The Customs Agency claims, first, that the application of the law on VAT warehouses, which suspends the obligation to pay
         the tax upon importation and allows it to be paid only at the time of the periodic VAT return, is subject to the necessary
         condition that the imported goods are ‘physically’ placed in such a warehouse. The national provisions are clear and require
         the ‘physical’ placing of those goods in the warehouse since the delayed collection of the VAT would be guaranteed only by
         the presence of those goods in a duly authorised tax warehouse.
      
Next, the principle of VAT neutrality, which relates to the economic effects of that tax on consumption only, cannot be relied
         on in order to evade the obligation to pay VAT when the chargeable event occurs. In the present case, this is when the goods
         are imported.
      
Finally, as VAT on importation is a tax related to crossing the border, it should be calculated and collected by the customs
         authorities, in this case the Customs Agency, which, moreover, allows payment of the part owed to the European Union in good
         time.
      
When the referring court heard the case, it noted that the interpretation advocated by the Customs Agency would result in
         the VAT being charged twice for failure to comply with an obligation which should be considered as being purely formal in
         nature. The infringement of such an obligation could be independently penalised if the physical placing of the goods in the
         tax warehouse were held to be mandatory, but this should not lead to VAT being applied to those goods where there has not
         been a taxable transaction.
      
In those circumstances, the Commissione tributaria regionale per la Toscana decided to stay proceedings and refer the following
         questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      In order to benefit, under Article of the [Sixth Directive] and Articles and of [the VAT Directive], from the exemption
         from the payment of the VAT on importation resulting from the placement of the imported goods under warehousing arrangements
         other than customs warehousing, that is to say under VAT warehousing arrangements, is it sufficient that such placement occur
         only on paper and not physically? 
      
(2)      Do the [Sixth Directive] and [the VAT Directive] preclude a practice whereby a Member State collects VAT on importation despite
         the fact that that VAT — by error or irregularity — has been settled already under the reverse charge mechanism through self-invoicing
         and simultaneous entry in the sales and purchases register?
      
(3)      Is the principle of VAT neutrality breached when the Member State seeks to collect VAT which has already been settled under
         the reverse charge mechanism through self-invoicing and simultaneous entry in the sales and purchases register?’
      
 Consideration of the questions referred
As is apparent from the file submitted to the Court, the importation of the goods at issue in the main proceedings took place
         during the month of June 2006, so that Directive 2006/112, which only came into force on January 2007, is not applicable,
         ratione temporis, to the main proceedings.
      
Accordingly, the request for a preliminary ruling must be understood as seeking an interpretation of the Sixth Directive only.
      
 The first question
By its first question, the referring court asks, in essence, whether Article 16(1) of the Sixth Directive must be interpreted
         as precluding national legislation which makes the grant of an exemption from the payment of the VAT on importation provided
         for by that legislation subject to the condition that the goods imported and destined for a tax warehouse for the purposes
         of VAT are physically placed in that warehouse.
      
In that regard, it should be pointed out, first, that Article 16(1) of the Sixth Directive, in so far as it derogates from
         the principle, set out in Article 10(3) of that directive, that the chargeable event shall occur and the VAT on importation
         shall become chargeable when the goods are imported, is to be interpreted strictly.
      
Next, the EU legislature made the exercise of the option conferred on Member States by Article 16(1) of the Sixth Directive
         subject to two substantive conditions, namely, first, that the goods to be exempted upon importation are not aimed at final
         use or consumption and, secondly, that the amount of VAT due upon cessation of the arrangements to which those goods were
         subject corresponds to the amount of VAT which would have been due had each of the transactions been taxed within the territory
         of the country.
      
Finally, under the power vested in Member States, the latter may take specific measures to grant the benefit of the exemption
         set out in Article 16(1) of the Sixth Directive.
      
In those circumstances, and in the absence of other guidance in that regard in the Sixth Directive, it is, in principle, for
         the Member States to determine the procedural requirements which the taxable person must meet in order to qualify for exemption
         from payment of VAT under that provision.
      
It must be added, however, that when exercising the powers thus vested in them, the Member States must comply with EU law
         and its general principles and, consequently, the principle of proportionality (see judgment in Rēdlihs, C‑263/11, EU:C:2012:497, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In the present case, as is apparent from the order for reference, the Italian legislation provides that, in order to qualify
         for exemption from payment of VAT on importation, the taxable person is required to physically place the imported goods in
         the tax warehouse, as that physical presence is intended to ensure subsequent collection of the tax.
      
However, it should be noted that such an obligation, notwithstanding its formal nature, is likely to be an efficient way to
         achieve the objectives pursued, namely to ensure correct collection of VAT and to prevent evasion of that tax, and does not,
         as such, go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives.
      
Therefore, the answer to the first question is that Article 16(1) of the Sixth Directive must be interpreted as not precluding
         national legislation which makes the grant of an exemption from the payment of the VAT on importation provided for by that
         legislation subject to the condition that goods which are imported and destined for a tax warehouse for the purposes of VAT
         be physically placed in that warehouse.
      
 The second and third questions
By its second and third questions, which it is appropriate to examine together, the referring court asks, in essence, whether
         the Sixth Directive is to be interpreted, in accordance with the principle of neutrality of VAT, as precluding national legislation
         under which a Member State requires the payment of VAT on importation even though that VAT has been settled already under
         the reverse charge mechanism through self-invoicing and entry in the sales and purchases register of the taxable person.
      
In that regard, it must be recalled that where, to exercise the powers assigned under Article 16(1) of the Sixth Directive,
         Member States adopt measures, such as the obligation to physically place the imported goods in the tax warehouse, those Member
         States are also empowered, in the absence of legislation in relation to penalties, to choose the penalties which seem to them
         to be appropriate (see, to that effect, judgment in Rēdlihs, EU:C:2012:497, paragraph 44).
      
It is therefore legitimate for a Member State, in order to ensure the correct collection of VAT on importation and to prevent
         evasion, to provide, in its national legislation, appropriate penalties for failure to observe the obligation to physically
         place imported goods in the tax warehouse.
      
Such penalties must not, however, go further than is necessary to attain those objectives (see, to that effect, judgments
         in Ecotrade, C‑95/and C‑96/07, EU:C:2008:267, paragraphs to 67; EMS-Bulgaria Transport, C‑284/11, EU:C:2012:458, paragraph 67; and Rēdlihs, EU:C:2012:497, paragraph 47).
      
In order to assess whether such a penalty is consistent with the principle of proportionality, the nature and the degree of
         seriousness of the infringement which that penalty seeks to sanction must, inter alia, be taken into account, as must also
         the means of establishing the amount of that penalty.
      
As regards, in the first place, the nature and seriousness of the infringement, it must be recalled, on the one hand, that
         the obligation to physically place imported goods in the tax warehouse is, as has been found in paragraph above, a formal
         requirement.
      
It is important to note, on the other hand, that, as the referring court pointed out, failure to comply with that obligation
         has not, at least in the main proceedings, resulted in non-payment of VAT on importation since that was settled by the taxable
         person under the reverse charge mechanism.
      
It could indeed be argued that, since the imported goods were not physically placed in the tax warehouse, the VAT was due
         upon importation and that, therefore, payment under the reverse charge mechanism constitutes late payment of that VAT.
      
However, the Court has consistently held that a belated settlement of VAT, in the absence of attempted evasion or detriment
         to the budget of the State, constitutes merely a formal infringement that cannot call into question the taxable person’s right
         to deduct. In any event, such belated payment cannot be equated with evasion, which presupposes, first, that the transaction
         concerned, notwithstanding compliance with the conditions laid down by the relevant provisions of the Sixth Directive and
         the national legislation transposing it, results in the accrual of a tax advantage the grant of which would be contrary to
         the purpose of those provisions and, secondly, that it is apparent from a number of objective factors that the essential aim
         of the transaction concerned is to obtain a tax advantage (see, to that effect, judgments in Halifax and Others, C‑255/02, EU:C:2006:121, paragraphs and 75, and EMS-Bulgaria Transport, EU:C:2012:458, paragraph 74).
      
In the second place, with regard to the methods for determining the amount of the penalty, it must be noted, at the outset,
         that the requirement that the taxable person must, in addition to an increase of 30%, again pay the VAT on importation, without
         consideration being given to the payment already made, amounts, in essence, to depriving that taxable person of his right
         to deduct. To make a single transaction subject to double imposition of VAT, while only allowing that tax to be deducted once,
         leaves the taxable person liable to pay the remaining VAT.
      
In that regard, without it being necessary to examine the compatibility of that part of the penalty with the principle of
         proportionality, it suffices to recall, first, that the Court has repeatedly held that, in view of the preponderant position
         which the right to deduct has in the common system of VAT, which seeks to ensure complete neutrality of taxation of all economic
         activities, that neutrality presupposes that a taxable person may deduct the VAT paid or payable in the course of all his
         economic activities, a penalty consisting of a refusal of the right to deduct is not compatible with the Sixth Directive where
         no evasion or detriment to the budget of the State is ascertained (see, to that effect, judgments in Sosnowska, C‑25/07, EU:C:2008:395, paragraphs and 24, and EMS-Bulgaria Transport, EU:C:2012:458, paragraphs and 70).
      
Furthermore, it is clear from the case-law of the Court that, contrary to what the Italian Government argued at the hearing,
         the reverse charge mechanism provided for under the Sixth Directive enables authorities, inter alia, to counter the tax evasion
         and avoidance observed in certain types of transactions (see judgment in Véleclair, C‑414/10, EU:C:2012:183, paragraph 34).
      
In so far as, according to the referring court, there is neither evasion nor attempted evasion in the main proceedings, the
         part of the penalty consisting of requiring a new payment of VAT already paid, without that second payment giving rise to
         a right to deduct, cannot be regarded as consistent with the principle of VAT neutrality.
      
Next, in relation to the part of the penalty consisting of an increase of the tax at a fixed percentage, it suffices to point
         out that the Court of Justice has already held that such a procedure for establishing the amount of the penalty — which does
         not include any possibility of gradation — may go further than is necessary to ensure the correct levying and collection of
         the VAT and the prevention of evasion (see, to that effect, judgment in Rēdlihs, EU:C:2012:497, paragraphs and to 52).
      
In this case, having regard to the level of the percentage used for the increase laid down by national legislation and the
         impossibility of adapting it to the specific circumstances of each case, it is possible that the procedure for establishing
         the amount of the penalty and, therefore, the part corresponding to that increase, may prove to be disproportionate (judgment
         in Rēdlihs, EU:C:2012:497, paragraph 52).
      
Finally, it should further be added that, in accordance with the Court’s case-law, the payment of default interest may constitute
         an adequate penalty in the case of infringement of a formal obligation, provided that it does not go further than is necessary
         to achieve the objectives pursued, of ensuring the correct collection of VAT and of preventing evasion (see judgment in EMS-Bulgaria Transport, EU:C:2012:458, paragraph 75).
      
However, if the overall sum of interest for which the taxable person is liable had to correspond to the amount of deductible
         tax, thereby depriving him of his right to deduct, such a penalty should be considered disproportionate.
      
In any event, it is for the referring court alone to make the final assessment as to whether the penalty at issue in the main
         proceedings is proportionate.
      
In view of the foregoing, the answer to the second and third questions referred for a preliminary ruling is that the Sixth
         Directive must be interpreted, in accordance with the principle of neutrality of VAT, as precluding national legislation under
         which a Member State requires the payment of VAT on importation even though that VAT has been settled already under the reverse
         charge mechanism through self-invoicing and entry in the sales and purchases register of the taxable person.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Sixth Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article 16(1) of Sixth Council Directive 77/388/EEC of May on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating
            to turnover taxes — Common system of value added tax: uniform basis of assessment, as amended by Council Directive 2006/18/EC
            of February 2006, in the version resulting from Article 28c of the Sixth Directive, must be interpreted as not precluding
            national legislation which makes the grant of an exemption from the payment of the value added tax on importation provided
            for by that legislation subject to the condition that goods which are imported and destined for a tax warehouse for the purposes
            of value added tax be physically placed in that warehouse.
2.      Sixth Directive 77/388, as amended by Directive 2006/18, must be interpreted, in accordance with the principle of neutrality
            of value added tax, as precluding national legislation under which a Member State requires the payment of value added tax
            on importation even though that tax has been settled already under the reverse charge mechanism through self-invoicing and
            entry in the sales and purchases register of the taxable person.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 