
Case C-249/José Allard
v
Institut national d’assurances sociales pour travailleurs indépendants (INASTI)
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Cour du travail de Liège, Neufchâteau section)
(Articles and of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Articles EC and EC) – Regulation (EEC) No 1408/– Self-employed persons pursuing professional activities in the territories of two Member States and residing in one of them
         – Requirement of a moderation contribution – Basis of calculation)
      
Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber), May Summary of the Judgment
1.     Social security for migrant workers — Legislation applicable — Self-employed person pursuing activities in two Member States
            and residing in one of them — Legislation of the State of residence — Levying of a special contribution by the State of residence
            which takes into account the income obtained in another Member State — Whether permissible
(Council Regulation No 1408/71, Arts 13(1), 14a(2), 14c and 14d(1))
2.     Freedom of movement for persons — Workers — Freedom of establishment — Self‑employed person pursuing activities in two Member
            States and residing in one of them — Levying of a special contribution by the State of residence which takes into account
            the income obtained in another Member State — National measure implementing Regulation No 1408/— Measure not constituting
            a restriction on freedom of establishment
(EC Treaty, Art. (now, after amendment, Art. EC); Council Regulation No 1408/71, Art. et seq.)
1.     It is clear from the wording of Article 13(1), Article 14a(2), Article 14c and Article 14d(1) of Regulation No 1408/that
         a self-employed person to whom that regulation applies is subject to the legislation of a single Member State only and that,
         where a person is normally self-employed in the territory of two or more Member States, he is subject to the legislation of
         the Member State in whose territory he resides if he pursues any part of his activity in the territory of that Member State.
         In such a case, the self-employed person is to be treated as if he pursued all his professional activity or activities in
         the territory of the Member State of residence.
      
It follows that Article et seq. require that, in the case of a self-employed person pursuing professional activities in
         the territories of two Member States and residing in one of them, a contribution such as the moderation contribution provided
         for in the legislation of the State of residence must be calculated in such as way as to include under the heading of occupational
         income the income obtained in the territory of a Member State other than the Member State whose social legislation is applicable
         even if, after paying that contribution, the self-employed person cannot claim any social security or other benefit at the
         expense of that State. 
      
(see paras 19, 21, 24, operative part 1)
2.     Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) does not preclude the imposition of a contribution such
         as a moderation contribution, payable in the Member State of residence and calculated taking into account income obtained
         in another Member State, on self‑employed persons pursuing professional activities in that capacity in those two Member States.
         
      
Such a calculation is carried out on the basis of Article et seq. of Regulation No 1408/71. The application of those articles
         is not liable to hamper or to render less attractive the exercise of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty but,
         on the contrary, contributes to facilitating the exercise of those freedoms. Therefore, the national measures implementing
         those provisions, such as those relating to that contribution, do not constitute restrictions on freedom of establishment.
      
(see paras 32-34, operative part 2)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Articles and of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Articles EC et EC) – Regulation (EEC) No 1408/– Self‑employed persons pursuing professional activities in the territories of two Member States and residing in one of them
         – Requirement of a moderation contribution – Basis of calculation)
      
In Case C-249/04,
REFERENCE under Article EC for a preliminary ruling, by the Cour du travail de Liège, Neufchâteau section (Belgium), by
         decision of June 2004, received at the Court on June 2004, in the proceedings
      
José Allard
v
Institut national d’assurances sociales pour travailleurs indépendants (Inasti),
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
composed of R. Silva de Lapuerta, President of the Chamber, P. Kūris and J. Klučka (Rapporteur), Judges,
Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure, 
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–       the Institut national d’assurances sociales pour les travailleurs indépendants (Inasti), by L. Paeme, in his capacity as director,
–       the Belgian Government, by E. Dominkovits, acting as Agent,
–       the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and P. Gentili, avvocato dello Stato,
–       the Commission of the European Communities, by D. Martin, acting as Agent,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion, 
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article et seq. of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/of
         the Council of June on the application of social security schemes to employed persons, to self-employed persons and
         to members of their families moving within the Community, as amended and updated by Council Regulation (EEC) No 2001/of
         June (OJ L 230, p. 6, ‘Regulation No 1408/71’), and of Articles and of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment,
         Articles EC and EC). 
      
This reference was made in proceedings before the Cour du travail de Liège (Higher Labour Court, Liège), Neufchâteau section,
         between Mr Allard and the Institut national d’assurances sociales pour les travailleurs indépendants (National Social Security
         Institute for Self‑Employed Persons, ‘Inasti’) concerning the payment and method of calculation of a ‘moderation contribution’
         (cotisation de modération) payable under Royal Decree No of March (Moniteur belge of April 1984, p. 4370, ‘the Royal Decree’). 
      
 Law 
 Community legislation
Article 13(1) of Regulation No 1408/provides: 
‘Subject to Article 14c, persons to whom this Regulation applies shall be subject to the legislation of a single Member State
         only. …’
      
Article 14a(2) of that regulation states:
‘A person normally self‑employed in the territory of two or more Member States shall be subject to the legislation of the
         Member State in whose territory he resides if he pursues any part of his activity in the territory of that Member State. …’
      
Article 14d(1) of that regulation provides:
‘The person referred to … in Article 14a(2), (3) and (4) … shall be treated, for the purposes of application of the legislation
         laid down in accordance with [this provision], as if he pursued all his professional activity or activities in the territory
         of the Member State concerned.’
      
 National legislation
Article of the Belgian Law of July (Moniteur belge of July 1983, p. 8939) conferring certain special powers on the King authorises the latter to take all necessary measures
         to ensure the financial balance of all social security schemes for employed and self‑employed persons.
      
Pursuant to that provision, the Royal Decree, enacting certain temporary measures relating to the moderation of the income
         of self‑employed persons with a view to reducing public expenditure and ensuring the financial balance of the social security
         scheme for self‑employed persons, introduces a ‘moderation contribution’, which is an additional occupational charge levied
         from those persons where their occupational income for 1984, and is higher than for 1983. 
      
Pursuant to Article of the Royal Decree, Inasti was entrusted with the task of calculating and collecting that contribution.
In addition, Article of the Loi de redressement (Law on financial stabilisation) of January (Moniteur belge of January 1985, p. 699), containing social security provisions, provides that the proceeds of the contributions collected
         pursuant to the Royal Decree are to be allocated to the self‑employed persons’ old-age and survivor’s pension scheme.
      
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Mr Allard is a Belgian national residing in Belgium and pursuing activities as a self‑employed person both in Belgium and
         in France. Inasti claimed payment of the moderation contribution from him for and 1985.
      
When Mr Allard refused to pay that contribution, Inasti brought proceedings before the Tribunal du travail d’Arlon (Labour
         Court, Arlon), which, on December 2000, ordered him to pay it. 
      
He then appealed to the referring court. In his view, Inasti had wrongly taken account of his income in France in calculating
         the amount of the contribution for 1985. He therefore sought a reduction of that amount.
      
Those were the circumstances in which the Cour du travail de Liège, Neufchâteau section, decided to stay the proceedings and
         to refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Do Article et seq. of Council Regulation (EEC) No 1408/… preclude a contribution such as the moderation contribution
         due under [the Royal Decree] … from being calculated in such a way as to include under the heading of occupational income
         the income derived by a self‑employed person from the pursuit of a professional activity in the territory of a Member State
         other than the State of taxation if, after paying that contribution, the self-employed person cannot claim any social security
         or other benefit at the expense of that State?
      
2.      Does the Treaty of Rome of March establishing the European Community, and in particular Articles and thereof
         (formerly Articles and 52), preclude the imposition of a contribution calculated on that basis on self-employed persons
         who exercise their right to freedom of movement?’
      
 The first question 
By its first question, the referring court is, in essence, asking the Court whether Article et seq. of Regulation No 1408/preclude the imposition, in a Member State, of a contribution such as the ‘moderation contribution’ on the whole of the income
         of a self-employed person residing in the territory of that State but pursuing professional activities as a self‑employed
         person both in the territory of the State of residence and in that of another Member State. 
      
It is apparent both from the content of the order for reference and from the wording of the first question that the referring
         court is in doubt as to the applicability of Regulation No 1408/to a contribution the levying of which does not give rise,
         in return, to any entitlement to a social security or other benefit. The referring court is of the view that the moderation
         contribution is more like ‘a form of emergency tax’ than a social security contribution considered to be one of the matters
         covered by Regulation No 1408/71, as they are defined in Article of that regulation. 
      
It should first be recalled that the Court has already ruled that, for the purposes of the application of Regulation No 1408/71,
         the decisive criterion is that of the specific allocation of a contribution to the funding of a social security scheme of
         a Member State. Whether benefits are obtained or not in return is therefore irrelevant in that connection (Case C‑34/Commission v France [2000] ECR I‑995, paragraph 40, and Case C‑169/Commission v France [2000] ECR I‑1049, paragraph 38).
      
In this case, it is not disputed that the proceeds of the moderation contribution are allocated to the self-employed persons’
         old-age and survivor’s pension scheme.
      
It follows that Regulation No 1408/applies to a contribution such as the moderation contribution.
As the Court has already ruled, it is clear from the wording of Article 13(1) of Regulation No 1408/that, subject to Article
         14c thereof, a person to whom that regulation applies is subject to the legislation of a single Member State only. It is also
         clear from the wording of Article 14a(2) that, where a person is normally self‑employed in the territory of two or more Member
         States, he is subject to the legislation of the Member State in whose territory he resides if he pursues any part of his activity
         in the territory of that Member State (see order in Case C‑242/Vogler [2000] ECR I‑9083, paragraph 19).
      
That means that, in this case, Mr Allard is, according to Regulation No 1408/71, exclusively subject to the social security
         scheme established by Belgian legislation (see, by analogy, order in Vogler, cited above, paragraph 20).
      
Furthermore, Article 14d(1) of Regulation No 1408/specifies that the person referred to in Article 14a(2) of that regulation
         is to be treated as if he pursued all his professional activity or activities in the territory of the Member State concerned
         (see, by analogy, Case C‑71/Van Pouke [1994] ECR I‑1101, paragraph 24).
      
Consequently, a person in the situation described in the order for reference who is simultaneously self‑employed in Belgium
         and in France must be subject, as a result of the latter activity, to the appropriate Belgian legislation under the same conditions
         as if he was self-employed in Belgium (see by analogy, Van Pouke, paragraph 25).
      
It follows that a social security contribution such as the moderation contribution payable in Belgium by Mr Allard must be
         calculated taking into account the income received in France.
      
The answer to the first question must therefore be that Article et seq. of Regulation No 1408/require a contribution
         such as the moderation contribution to be calculated in such a way as to include under the heading of occupational income
         the income obtained in the territory of a Member State other than the Member State whose social legislation is applicable
         even if, after paying that contribution, the self-employed person cannot claim any social security or other benefit at the
         expense of that State. 
      
 The second question
By its second question, the referring court asks the Court whether Articles and of the Treaty preclude the imposition
         of a social security contribution, such as the moderation contribution, on self‑employed persons who exercise their right
         to freedom of movement.
      
As a preliminary point, it should be noted at the outset that Article of the Treaty, which relates to employed persons,
         does not apply in this case since Mr Allard is a self‑employed person. Consequently, the Court is required to rule only on
         the part of the question concerning Article of the Treaty. 
      
It follows from the answer to the first question that the relevant provisions of Regulation No 1408/require account to
         be taken of the income received in another Member State for the purpose of calculating the moderation contribution payable
         by self‑employed persons who are in Mr Allard’s situation.
      
It should first be recalled that the Court has already ruled, first, that, in regard to social security, the purpose of the
         principle of application of the legislation of a single Member State is to avoid the complications which might ensue from
         the simultaneous application of a number of national legislative systems and, second, that the attachment of a worker to the
         legislation of the State where he resides, in a case where he pursues one or more self-employed activities in two or more
         Member States, is by no means unreasonable (see order in Vogler, paragraphs and 27).
      
Secondly, it should be noted that, under Article of the Treaty, restrictions on the freedom of establishment of nationals
         of a Member State in the territory of another Member State are prohibited and that freedom of establishment includes the right
         to take up and pursue activities as self-employed persons under the conditions laid down for its own nationals by the law
         of the country where such establishment is effected.
      
Finally, according to settled case‑law, in principle, the only measures prohibited by the Treaty as being restrictions on
         freedom of establishment are national measures liable to hamper or to render less attractive the exercise of fundamental freedoms
         guaranteed by the Treaty (see, to that effect, Case C-19/Kraus [1993] ECR I‑1663, paragraph 32, and Case C-55/Gebhard [1995] ECR I‑4165, paragraph 37).
      
It is established that, in making self‑employed persons who pursue a professional activity in that capacity in more than one
         Member State subject, in respect of the whole of their income, to a single system of social legislation, Regulation No 1408/pursues a general objective, which is to ensure free movement of employed and self-employed persons within the Community,
         while respecting the special character of the various national laws, and seeks to guarantee the equality of treatment of all
         workers occupied in the territory of a Member State as effectively as possible and not to penalise workers who exercise their
         right to freedom of movement (see, to that effect, Case C‑68/Commission v Germany [2001] ECR I‑1865, paragraphs and 23).
      
It follows that the application of Article et seq. of Regulation No 1408/is not, in this case, liable to hamper or to
         render less attractive the exercise of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty, but, on the contrary, contributes
         to facilitating the exercise of those freedoms.
      
Consequently, national measures which implement those provisions taking into account income received in another Member State
         for the purpose of calculating the moderation contribution payable by self‑employed persons who are in the same situation
         as Mr Allard do not constitute restrictions on freedom of establishment.
      
The reply to the referring court must therefore be that Article of the EC Treaty does not preclude the imposition of a
         contribution such as the moderation contribution payable in the Member State of residence and calculated taking into account
         the income obtained in another Member State on self‑employed persons pursuing professional activities in that capacity in
         those two Member States.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fifth Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article et seq. of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/of the Council of June on the application of social security schemes
            to employed persons, to self-employed persons and to members of their families moving within the Community, as amended and
            updated by Council Regulation (EEC) No 2001/of June 1983, require a contribution such as the moderation contribution
            payable under Royal Decree No of March to be calculated in such as way as to include under the heading of occupational
            income the income obtained in the territory of a Member State other than the Member State whose social legislation is applicable
            even if, after paying that contribution, the self‑employed person cannot claim any social security or other benefit at the
            expense of that State.
2.      Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) does not preclude the imposition of a contribution such
            as the moderation contribution, payable in the Member State of residence and calculated taking into account income obtained
            in another Member State, on self‑employed persons pursuing professional activities in that capacity in those two Member States.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 