
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-121/P Eoghan O'HannrachainvEuropean Parliament
«(Appeals – Officials – Grade A post – Article 29(2) of the Staff Regulations – Notice of vacancy – Documents drawn up after the contested decision)»
Opinion of Advocate General Geelhoed delivered on September I - Judgment of the Court (Second Chamber), June I - Summary of the Judgment
1..
Officials – Recruitment – Procedures – Passage from the procedure under Article 29(1) of the Staff Regulations to the procedure under Article 29(2) of the Staff
                     Regulations – Whether permissible – Discretion of the appointing authority to extend its options  
                  (Staff Regulations, Art. 29) 
2..
Officials – Recruitment – Recruitment under Article 29(2) of the Staff Regulations – Content of the candidate's file – Production in defence before the Court of First Instance of documents certifying the qualifications of the candidate selected
                     drawn up after the decision to appoint – Whether permissible  
                  
3..
Appeals – Pleas in law – Incorrect assessment of the facts – Inadmissible – Review by the Court of Justice of assessment of evidence – Excluded unless the sense of evidence has been distorted  (Art. EC; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58) 
4..
Officials – Actions – Pleas in law – Misuse of powers – Definition  
1.
 Since the appointing authority has a wide discretion, where a vacant post is to be filled, for the purpose of finding the
         candidates with the highest standard of ability, efficiency and integrity it may go on from one stage of the recruitment procedure
         to another even if it has received valid applications in the first stage. The use of the formulation  
         whether ... can in Article 29(1) of the Staff Regulations clearly indicates moreover that the appointing authority is not bound absolutely
         to fill that post by way of promotion or transfer, but merely to consider in each case whether those measures are capable
         of resulting in the appointment of a person of the highest standard of ability, efficiency and integrity. It follows that the appointing authority may decide to go on to the recruitment procedure provided for by Article 29(2) of
         the Staff Regulations, even where there are one or more candidates who satisfy all the conditions and requirements set out
         in the vacancy notice for the post to be filled. Moreover, that decision  need not necessarily be taken when the vacancy notices
         are published and need not be published. Similarly, the fact that applicants for the internal recruitment procedure were not
         informed of the recourse to the recruitment procedure open to outside candidates could not constitute a breach of Article
         29(2) where the first applicants were taken into account in the new procedure and the conditions required by the notice of
         vacancy were not altered.   see paras 14-17, 2.
 It is true that the legality of a decision on recruitment must be appraised in the light of the information available to the
         appointing authority when it adopted that decision.  However, in recruitment procedures under Article 29(2) of the Staff Regulations,
         candidates are not required to produce documents certifying their qualifications or other documentary evidence, nor must the
         appointing authority have on the file, when the decision is taken, documents confirming the information it has. see para. 3.
 Under Article EC and Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, an appeal lies on points of law only and, therefore,
         the Court of First Instance alone has jurisdiction to find and appraise the facts, save where the factual inaccuracy of its
         findings results from the documents in the case before it.  The appraisal of the facts by the Court of First Instance does
         not constitute, save where the clear sense of the evidence produced before it is distorted, a question of law which is subject,
         as such, to review by the Court of Justice. see para. 4.
 The concept of misuse of powers has a precise scope and refers to the use of powers by an administrative authority for a purpose
         other than that for which they were conferred on it.  A measure is only vitiated by misuse of powers if it appears, on the
         basis of objective, relevant and consistent evidence, to have been taken with the exclusive or main purpose of achieving an
         end other than that stated or evading a procedure specifically prescribed.  see para. JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)June (1)
((Appeals – Officials – Grade A post – Article 29(2) of the Staff Regulations – Notice of vacancy – Documents drawn up after the contested decision))
In Case C-121/P, 
            
 Eoghan O'Hannrachain,  official of the European Parliament, residing in Cents (Luxembourg), represented by G. Vandersanden and L. Levi, avocats,
            
appellant, 
APPEAL against the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities (Fifth Chamber) of January in Case T-97/Chamier and O'Hannrachain   v  
             Parliament  [2001] ECR-SC I-A-and II-1, seeking to have that judgment set aside in part,
            
the other party to the proceedings being: 
             European Parliament,  represented by J. Schoo, H. von Hertzen and D. Moore, acting as Agents, assisted by D. Waelbroeck, avocat, with an address
            for service in Luxembourg,defendant at first instance, 
THE COURT (Second Chamber),,
composed of: J.-P. Puissochet, President of the Sixth Chamber, acting for the President of the Second Chamber, V. Skouris and N. Colneric (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
Advocate General: L.A. Geelhoed, Registrar: H. von Holstein, Deputy Registrar, 
            
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,after hearing oral argument from the parties at the hearing on May 2002, 
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2002, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on March 2001, Mr O'Hannrachain brought an appeal under Article of the EC
         Statute of the Court of Justice seeking partial annulment of the judgment of the Court of First Instance in Joined Cases T-97/and T-99/Chamier and O'Hannrachain  v  
          Parliament  [2001] ECR-SC I-A-and II-(
         the judgment under appeal), dismissing in their entirety as unfounded the actions brought by him and by Mr Chamier seeking, first, annulment of the
         decision of the appointing authority of July appointing Mr Lopez Veiga to the post of Director-General of the Directorate-General
         for Finance and Financial Control (
         the post at issue), the decisions of the same date not to appoint them to that post and, so far as relevant, the decisions of January rejecting their complaints, and, second, an order that the Parliament pay damages. 
         
Legal background
            
The first subparagraph of Article 7(1) of the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Communities (
         the Staff Regulations) provides: The appointing authority shall, acting solely in the interest of the service and without regard to nationality, assign each
         official by appointment or transfer to a post in his category or service which corresponds to his grade.
         
            
The first paragraph of Article of the Staff Regulations provides: Recruitment shall be directed to securing for the institution the services of officials of the highest standard of ability,
         efficiency and integrity, recruited on the broadest possible geographical basis from among nationals of Member states of the
         Communities.
         
            
Article of the Staff Regulations provides: 
         
1.
 Before filling a vacant post in an institution, the appointing authority shall first consider:
         
(a)
whether the post can be filled by promotion or transfer within the institution; 
         
(b)
whether to hold competitions internal to the institution; 
         
(c)
what applications for transfer have been made by officials of other institutions of the three European Communities; 
         and then follow the procedure for competitions on the basis either of qualifications or of tests, or of both qualifications
         and tests.  Annex III lays down the competition procedure....
         
2.
 A procedure other than the competition procedure may be adopted by the appointing authority for the recruitment of Grade A
         or A officials and, in exceptional cases, also for recruitment to posts which require special qualifications.
         
Factual background to the litigation
            
The factual background to the litigation is set out in the judgment under appeal in the following terms: 
         
            
On January 1998, the Bureau of the European Parliament (
         the Bureau) adopted the proposal of the Secretary-General to split the Directorate-General for Personnel, the Budget and Finance (DG
         V) in order to create a Directorate-General for Finance and Financial Control (DG VIII) and a Directorate-General for Personnel
         (DG V). 
         
            
Following that decision, a grade A post of Director-General was declared vacant in each of those two Directorates-General.
          The procedure for recruitment of a Director-General of DG VIII was opened under Article 29(1)(a) of the Staff Regulations
         ... . 
         
            
The notice of vacancy of June for the post of Director-General of DG VIII reads: In accordance with the provisions of the Staff Regulations, the President of the European Parliament has decided to open the
         procedure for filling this post, initially by promotion or transfer within the institution. (1) DUTIES Under the authority of the Secretary-General and without prejudice to the responsibilities allocated to the Accounting Officer
         and the independence granted to the Financial Controller by the Financial Regulation and the detailed implementing rules:
         
         
─
leadership of the administrative departments responsible for financial matters, i.e. Members' allowances, the budget, treasury
            and accounting, the inventory and financial management and control;  
         
─
coordination and organisation of the departments and supervision of the staff of the Directorate-General; 
         
─
relations with the other institutions of the European Communities, particularly in connection with the budget procedure. (2) QUALIFICATIONS AND SKILLS REQUIRED 
         
─
University degree in economics or finance or equivalent professional experience; 
         
─
sound knowledge of the structure and functioning of the European Union and its institutions, particularly Parliament, and
            of the Treaties and Community legislation; 
         
─
in-depth knowledge of the rules and regulations applicable to the Community institutions, particularly in the financial sphere;
            
         
─
excellent organisational skills and proven ability to lead large teams of staff and carry out administrative management; 
         
─
ability to analyse and summarise problems; 
         
─
thorough knowledge of one official language of the European Union and very good knowledge of a second.  For practical reasons,
            knowledge of other official languages will be taken into consideration.  The duties described under point call for the highest degree of competence, efficiency and integrity, a very high level
            of judgment and decision-making ability and a flair for human relations.
         
            
On July 1998, Mr Lopez Veiga, a Commission official on secondment to the Parliament as the President's chef de cabinet,
         applied for the post at issue in the following terms: I hereby apply for the post of Director-General of the Directorate-General for Finance and Financial Control in the event
         that the appointing authority decides to open the recruitment procedure under Article 29(2) of the Staff Regulations.
         
            
The applicants, Mr O'Hannrachain and Mr Chamier, officials of the Parliament, applied for that post on and July respectively.  Mr B., Mr V. and Mr C. also applied for the post.  However, only the applications of Mr B. and Mr V. were considered
         admissible under Article 29(1)(a) of the Staff Regulations.  As Mr C. and Mr Lopez Veiga were Commission officials their applications
         were not admissible. 
         
            
At the meeting of the Bureau of July 1998, the Secretary-General of the Parliament, after giving details of the four applicants
         under Article 29(1) of the Staff Regulations and of the two applicants who could be considered under Article 29(2) of the
         Staff Regulations, proposed that, given the nature of the post to be filled, the Bureau should resort to the procedure under
         Article 29(2) of the Staff Regulations.  The Bureau, in its capacity as appointing authority, decided the same day to open
         that procedure and to consider the applications of Mr C.  and Mr Lopez Veiga.  The minutes of that meeting of the Bureau read
         as follows: 
         
3.
 Filling A and A posts (in camera) The Bureau
         
─
heard a statement by the Secretary-General, who referred to the applications received for the three A vacancies (Director-General
         of Personnel ─ DG V; Director-General of Finance and Financial Control ─ DG VIII; Director-General of Administration ─ DG
         VI) and for the A vacancy (Director of Presidency Services ─ DG I) and proposed to open the procedure provided for in Article
         29(2) of the Staff Regulations regarding the post of Director-General of Finance and Financial Control ─ DG VIII ─ (post No
         VIII/A/3942) in order to widen the choice of candidates for this particular post on the basis of the considerations set out
         in his note of July 1998; 
         
─
heard a statement by the President, who proposed that consideration of the applications for all four posts concerned should
         be resumed on Thursday, July at 8.a.m. on the basis of the file submitted on July to the members of the
         Bureau; 
         
─
decided to open the procedure pursuant to Article 29(2) of the Staff Regulations as regards the post of Director-General of
         Finance and Financial Control.
         
            
On July 1998, the Secretary-General was informed that Mr V. and Mr C. had withdrawn their applications for the post at
         issue.  The same day he proposed to the Bureau that Mr Lopez Veiga should be appointed to the post of Director-General of
         DG VIII. 
         
            
At its meeting of July 1998, the Bureau heard  
         statements by the President, Mrs Fontaine and Mr Cot, Vice-Presidents, the Secretary-General, the Legal Adviser, Mr Imbeni,
         Mrs Hoff, Mr Martin, Mr Anastassopoulos, Mr Gutiérrez Díaz, Mrs Schleicher, Mr Verde i Aldea, Mr Haarder and Mr Collins, Vice-Presidents and decided, following a vote, to appoint Mr Lopez Veiga to the post of Director-General at issue, pursuant to the procedure
         laid down by Article 29(2) of the Staff Regulations. 
         
            
On September 1998, the applicants received a letter from the Head of the Personnel Division which stated: Following the meeting of the Bureau of the European Parliament of July 1998, I regret to inform you that your application
         for the above post has been rejected. Thank you for your interest in the post.
         
            
On October both applicants lodged a complaint against the decision of July to appoint Mr Lopez Veiga to the
         post at issue and against the decision rejecting their application of September 1998.  Those complaints were rejected by
         decisions of January 1999, notified to the applicants on January 1999.
         
The proceedings before the Court of First Instance and the judgment under appeal
            
By applications lodged at the Registry of the Court of First Instance on and April 1999, registered as Cases T-97/and T-99/99, Mr Chamier and Mr O'Hannrachain brought the actions referred to in paragraph of this judgment.  By order of
         June 2000, the President of the Fifth Chamber of the Court of First Instance ordered that the cases be joined for the purposes
         of the oral procedure and judgment. 
         
            
In support of their claims for annulment of the decisions of the appointing authority (
         the contested decisions) the applicants relied on six pleas, alleging infringement of Article of the Staff Regulations, infringement of the notice
         of vacancy, a manifest error of assessment in the choice made by the appointing authority, failure to have regard to Articles
         and of the Staff Regulations and to the principle of non-discrimination, misuse of powers, failure to have regard to
         the principle of sound management and proper administration, and breach of the obligation to provide a statement of reasons.
          They also made claims for damages alleging that their legitimate expectations were breached. 
         
            
By the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance dismissed the two actions before it in their entirety, after rejecting
         as unfounded all the pleas raised by the applicants. 
         The appeal and forms of order sought
            
Mr O'Hannrachain brought an appeal against the judgment under appeal, served on him on January 2001, in so far as it concerned
         him. 
         
            
He claims that the Court should: 
         
─
set aside the judgment under appeal; 
         
─
consequently, grant the appellant the relief sought by him in the proceedings at first instance, and thus: 
         
─
annul the appointing authority's decision of July appointing Mr L.V. to the post of Director-General of the Directorate-General
         for Finance and Financial Control and the decision of the same date rejecting the appellant's application for that post and,
         in so far as may be necessary, annul the decision adopted on January rejecting the appellant's complaint; 
         
─
order the Parliament to pay damages estimated to amount, on a fair and equitable basis, to EUR 000; 
         
─
order the Parliament to pay the costs. 
         
            
The Parliament contends that the Court should: 
         
─
dismiss the appeal as inadmissible in part and otherwise as unfounded; 
         
─
in the alternative, in the unlikely event that the Court decides to overturn the judgment under appeal, refer the case back
            to the Court of First Instance for a fresh ruling in the appellant's action; 
         
─
make an appropriate order as to costs. 
         
The pleas relating to annulment of the judgment under appeal
            
In support of his appeal, Mr O'Hannrachain raises six pleas alleging that the Court of First Instance failed to have regard
         to: 
         
─
Article of the Staff Regulations; 
         
─
the principle of legality, the obligation to state reasons and the  
            audi alteram partem rule; 
         
─
the obligation to state reasons and the effects attaching to a notice of vacancy; 
         
─
the notion of misuse of powers; 
         
─
Articles and of the Staff Regulations and the principle of non-discrimination; 
         
─
the principle of sound management and proper administration and the obligation to state reasons. 
         
The appealThe claims seeking annulment
         The plea alleging failure to have regard to Article of the Staff Regulations
         
            
Mr O'Hannrachain submits essentially, first, that, in paragraphs to and to of the judgment under appeal, the Court
         of First Instance misconstrued Article of the Staff Regulations by taking the view that the appointing authority may have
         recourse to the procedure referred to in Article 29(2) of the Staff Regulations after initiating a recruitment procedure under
         Article 29(1) of the Staff Regulations without first carrying out an examination of the comparative merits of the eligible
         candidates under Article 29(1) with a view to verifying whether they meet the requirements of the notice of vacancy.  He takes
         the view that, by acting in that way, the appointing authority failed to examine whether, in the present case and in accordance
         with Article of the Staff Regulations, the promotion/transfer procedure was likely to result in the appointment of a person
         possessing the highest levels of ability, efficiency and integrity. 
         
            
In that regard, it must be observed that the Court of First Instance was right to point out, in paragraphs to of the
         judgment under appeal, that the argument that the appointing authority could not decide to move on to the next stage of the
         recruitment procedure because it had received valid applications in the first stage is not founded.  According to settled
         case-law, the appointing authority has a wide discretion for the purpose of finding the candidates with the highest standard
         of ability, efficiency and integrity (see, in particular, Joined Cases 12/and 29/Ley  v  
          Commission  [1965] ECR 107, 118, Case 135/Vlachou  v  
          Court of Auditors  [1988] ECR 2901, paragraph 23, and Case C-174/P  
          Parliament  v  
          Richard  [2000] ECR I-6189, paragraph 37). 
         
            
Furthermore, according to equally settled case-law, the use of the formulation  
         whether ... can in Article 29(1) of the Staff Regulations clearly indicates that the appointing authority is not bound absolutely, where
         a vacant post is to be filled, to fill that post by way of promotion or transfer, but merely to consider in each case whether
         those measures are capable of resulting in the appointment of a person of the highest standard of ability, efficiency and
         integrity (see  
          Ley  v  
          Commission , cited above, and  
          Parliament  v  
          Richard , cited above, paragraph 38). 
         
            
It follows that the appointing authority may go on to a subsequent stage of the recruitment procedure, even where there are
         one or more candidates who satisfy all the conditions and requirements set out in the vacancy notice for the post to be filled
         (
          Parliament  v  
          Richard , paragraph 40).  
         
            
The Court of First Instance was also correct in pointing out, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that a decision
         to have recourse to Article 29(2) of the Staff Regulations made during the course of a recruitment procedure which has been
         initiated need not necessarily be taken when the vacancy notices are published and need not be published (see Joined Cases
         81/to 88/Marenco and Others  v  
          Commission  [1975] ECR 1247, paragraphs and 23, Case 289/Mavridis  v  
          Parliament  [1983] ECR 1731, paragraph 23, and Case C-331/Exarchos  v  
          Parliament  [1989] ECR 4185).  It was thus entitled to conclude, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the appointing authority
         could decide to have recourse to the procedure under Article 29(2) of the Staff Regulations. 
         
            
Mr O'Hannrachain then claims that the Court of First Instance failed to have regard to the fact that, although the shortness
         of the period within which Mr Lopez Veiga was appointed might not in itself be open to criticism, the circumstances in which
         the appointment was made are, given that Mr Lopez Veiga's application was considered as a result of improper recourse being
         had to the procedure under Article 29(2) of the Staff Regulations, that there was no consideration of the comparative merits
         of candidates whose applications were admissible under Article 29(1) of the Staff Regulations, that the Bureau made a precipitate
         decision on a barely reasoned proposal from the Secretary-General of the Parliament, and that there was no discussion of the
         applications finally accepted and no statement of reasons explaining why preference was given to Mr Lopez Veiga over him.
          
         
            
That argument cannot be accepted.  The Court of First Instance was justified, in the light of the principles outlined in paragraphs
         and of this judgment, in concluding, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the shortness of the period,
         properly assessed in relation to the circumstances of the appointment, does not constitute a breach of Article of the Staff
         Regulations.  In that regard, the Court of First Instance was right to point out that, given that there was no obligation
         incumbent on the appointing authority to publish the decision to have recourse to the procedure under Article 29(2) of the
         Staff Regulations, the Bureau cannot be criticised for the shortness of the period within which it concluded that procedure,
         since its choice had in fact been widened.  Finally, the Court of First Instance was also right to point out, in paragraph
         of the judgment under appeal, that the fact that the applicants had not been informed of the Bureau's intention to have
         recourse to the procedure under Article 29(2) could not constitute a breach of that provision, given that the appointing authority
         had taken into account, in the recruitment procedure open to outside applicants, those applicants who had applied in the course
         of the internal recruitment procedure, without altering the conditions required by the notice of vacancy.  Accordingly, the
         Court of First Instance did not err in law as regards the interpretation of Article of the Staff Regulations. 
         
            
Finally, Mr O'Hannrachain criticises the Court of First Instance for finding, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal,
         that the applications submitted under Article 29(2) of the Staff Regulations were of  
         a priori interest without giving reasons or justification.  That finding amounts to an acknowledgement that there was a deliberate
         and predetermined intention on the part of the Parliament to appoint Mr Lopez Veiga in breach of the procedures existing for
         that purpose.  
         
            
Such an argument cannot be upheld, based as it is on a misinterpretation of the judgment under appeal.  In fact the Court
         confined itself to pointing out, in paragraph 37, first, that the Secretary-General of the Parliament, in a note drawn up
         for the Bureau meeting of July 1998, had given details of all the applicants and proposed that the Bureau should have recourse
         to the procedure under Article 29(2) of the Staff Regulations, a proposal which was ratified at that meeting and, second,
         that that decision was clearly based on the fact that those two applications were of interest for the purposes of filling
         the post at issue.  By using that formulation, the Court of First Instance simply recorded the fact that the two applications
         at issue were at first sight of interest with a view to ensuring that the vacancy was correctly filled. 
         
            
It follows that the first plea of the appeal must be rejected. 
         The plea alleging failure to have regard to the principle of legality, the obligation to state reasons and the  audi alteram
         partem rule
         
            
Mr O'Hannrachain submits that, in paragraphs 58, and of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance infringed
         the principle of legality, the obligation to state reasons and the  
          audi alteram partem  rule by accepting production by the Parliament at first instance of documents drawn up after adoption of the decision to
         appoint Mr Lopez Veiga.  In accordance with the principle that reasons should be stated, an administrative decision must be
         based on verifiable reasons.  Where such reasons are not stated formally, they must be clear from the administrative file
         compiled during the procedure for enacting the measure.  Proof of the reasons for the contested measure can be furnished only
         by evidence established  
          in tempore non suspecto  (before or at the same time as the measure).  In the present case, the reasons should thus be based on evidence which was
         available and influenced the Parliament at the time it adopted that decision.  The principle of legality requires that the
         legality of a decision be ascertained at the time of its adoption, without regard for evidence arising subsequently, since
         the administrative authority could not be aware of it at the time it made its decision.  The  
          audi alteram partem  rule cannot justify the decision of the Court of First Instance to take account of documents postdating the adoption of that
         decision. 
         
            
The Court of First Instance held, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the documents produced by the Parliament
         as annexes 8.and 8.to its defence, relating to the curriculum vitae of Mr Lopez Veiga, fall within the  
          audi alteram partem  rule as they answer the doubts expressed by the applicants regarding the education and professional experience of the person
         concerned.  Although those documents were drawn up after that person applied for the post, they cannot, according to the Court
         of First Instance, be considered to be circumstances arising after the adoption of the appointment decision in so far as they
         constitute evidence of the authenticity and the extent of the information available to the author of that decision. 
         
            
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance held: As regards the argument of the applicants that Mr Lopez Veiga did not have a degree in economics or finance or equivalent
         professional experience, it must be observed that he holds a  
         Bachelor of administration degree from the University of South Africa.  In that connection, the Parliament sent, at the request of the Court of First
         Instance, an official copy of the degree obtained by Mr Lopez Veiga and a list of the courses followed in order to obtain
         that degree.  It is clear from those documents that the main subject studied by Mr Lopez Veiga during his university education
         was economics.  Therefore, the applicants are wrong to allege that Mr Lopez Veiga has no university degree in economics.
         
            
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance referred to Mr Lopez Veiga's curriculum vitae and
         concluded that, although unconnected with the Community institutions, the duties he had previously performed showed he had
         proven experience in the budgetary field. 
         
            
Those considerations are not vitiated by an error of law. 
         
            
It is true that the legality of a decision on recruitment must be appraised in the light of the information available to the
         appointing authority when it adopted that decision.  However, in recruitment procedures under Article 29(2) of the Staff Regulations,
         candidates are not required to produce documents certifying their qualifications or other documentary evidence, nor must the
         appointing authority have on the file, when the decision is taken, documents confirming the information it has. 
         
            
It must be observed that Mr O'Hannrachain does not claim that the appointing authority did not have at its disposal all the
         information necessary when it decided to appoint Mr Lopez Veiga to the post at issue.  He complains only that the Court of
         First Instance allowed the production of documents drawn up after the decision was taken.  In that regard, it must be accepted
         that the Court of First Instance was entitled to take account of documents produced in the course of proceedings by the Parliament
         in the exercise of its rights of defence, which is one of the aspects of the  
          audi alteram partem  rule. 
         
            
Accordingly, it must be held that, in paragraphs 58, and of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance did
         not fail to have regard to the principle of legality, nor to the obligation to state reasons in decisions of the administration,
         nor to the  
          audi alteram partem  rule. 
         The pleas alleging failure to have regard to the obligation to state reasons and to the effects attaching to a notice of vacancy
         and breach of Articles and of the Staff Regulations and the principle of non-discrimination
         
            
The third and fifth pleas should be considered together in so far as they concern the unsuitability of the appointed person
         for the post at issue in the light of the requirements of the notice of vacancy. 
         
            
By his third plea, Mr O'Hannrachain submits essentially that the assessment made by the Court of First Instance in paragraphs
         to of the judgment under appeal, regarding the qualifications and experience of Mr Lopez Veiga, is vitiated by an error
         of law in so far as it amounts to attributing to him qualifications which meet the requirements of the notice of vacancy.
          Therefore, in paragraph of that judgment, the Court of First Instance failed to have regard to the effects attaching to
         a notice of vacancy. 
         
            
More specifically, Mr O'Hannrachain submits that the decision to split the former DG V into two new Directorates-General must
         be taken into account.  Examination of the duties attaching to the post at issue shows that the person appointed must be highly
         qualified and experienced in the various aspects of the Finance Directorate.  The Court of First Instance did not take account
         of the importance attached by the Parliament itself to the technical and specialised nature of that post, which it intended
         to be distinct from general administrative duties.  The Court of First Instance failed to have regard to the fact that two
         conditions set out in the notice of vacancy are clearly not fulfilled by Mr Lopez Veiga, namely: 
         
─
university degree in economics or finance or equivalent professional experience, and 
         
─
in-depth knowledge of the rules and regulations applicable to the Community institutions, particularly in the financial sphere.
            
         
            
By that plea, Mr O'Hannrachain is in fact disputing the appraisal of the facts made by the Court of First Instance. 
         
            
In that connection, it must be recalled that under Article EC and Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice, an
         appeal lies on points of law only and that therefore the Court of First Instance alone has jurisdiction to find and appraise
         the facts, save where the factual inaccuracy of its findings results from the documents in the case before it.  The appraisal
         of the facts by the Court of First Instance does not constitute, save where the clear sense of the evidence produced before
         it is distorted, a question of law which is subject, as such, to review by the Court of Justice (see,  
          inter alia , Case C-449/P  
          EIB   v  
          Hautem  [2001] ECR I-6733, paragraph 44, and Case C-184/P  
          Hirschfeldt  v  
          AEE  [2002] ECR I-10173, paragraph 40).  
         
            
In the present case, there is no indication that the Court of First Instance distorted the clear sense of the evidence put
         before it.  Accordingly, that plea must be rejected as inadmissible. 
         
            
Mr O'Hannrachain also claims that the Court of First Instance, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, substituted its
         assessment for that of the appointing authority.  However, it must be held that the Court of First Instance respected the
         limits of the jurisdiction it has, which it described correctly in paragraph of that judgment. 
         
            
Mr O'Hannrachain submits further that the decision appointing Mr Lopez Veiga to the post at issue states no reasons which
         allow it to be ascertained whether he actually met the requirements set out in the notice of vacancy. 
         
            
That plea, which concerns the Parliament's obligation to state reasons, was not raised before the Court of First Instance.
          It was, it is true, raised by Mr O'Hannrachain in his complaint beforehand.  However, it was not incorporated as such in
         the application initiating proceedings before the Court of First Instance.  To allow a party to put forward for the first
         time before the Court of Justice a plea in law which it has not raised before the Court of First Instance would be to allow
         it to bring before the Court of Justice, whose jurisdiction in appeals is limited, a case of wider ambit than that which came
         before the Court of First Instance (Case C-155/P  
          Alexopoulou  v  
          Commission  [1999] ECR I-4069, paragraph 41).  Therefore, that plea must also be rejected as inadmissible. 
         
            
It follows that the third plea must be rejected. 
         
            
By his fifth plea, Mr O'Hannrachain essentially claims that, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, the Court
         of First Instance disregarded Articles and of the Staff Regulations and the principle of non-discrimination by not calling
         in question the appointment of a candidate not satisfying all the requirements of the vacancy notice whereas Mr O'Hannrachain
         satisfies them in all respects.  
         
            
Mr O'Hannrachain submits that the Court of First Instance made an error of assessment in holding, in paragraph of the judgment
         under appeal, that the appointing authority did not make a manifest error in assessing whether Mr Lopez Veiga's application
         fulfilled the requirements of the notice of vacancy.  He did not have the technical skills in the budgetary and financial
         fields required by the notice of vacancy.  In paragraph of that judgment, the Court of First Instance misinterpreted the
         term  
         in the interest of the service because responsibilities of a general and political nature cannot validly replace the technical expertise implicated in the
         performance of the duties involved in the post at issue. 
         
            
By those pleas, Mr O'Hannrachain again calls into question the appraisal of the facts made by the Court of First Instance.
          Accordingly, they must also be rejected as inadmissible. 
         
            
It follows from the foregoing considerations that the fifth plea must be rejected. 
         The plea alleging failure to have regard to the concept of misuse of powers
         
            
By his fourth plea Mr O'Hannrachain essentially claims that, in paragraphs 109, 111, and to of the judgment under
         appeal, the Court of First Instance misconstrued the concept of misuse of powers by not accepting that the many objective,
         relevant and consistent matters raised by Mr O'Hannrachain were evidence of a misuse of powers.  
         
            
In that regard, it must be observed that, as is clear from paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the concept of misuse
         of powers has a precise scope and refers to the use of powers by an administrative authority for a purpose other than that
         for which they were conferred on it.  A measure is only vitiated by misuse of powers if it appears, on the basis of objective,
         relevant and consistent evidence, to have been taken with the exclusive or main purpose of achieving an end other than that
         stated or evading a procedure specifically prescribed by the Treaty for dealing with the circumstances of the case (see Case
         C-110/Netherlands  v  
          Council  [2001] ECR I-8763, paragraph 137). 
         
            
The Court of First Instance did not disregard that case-law in the judgment under appeal. 
         
            
In particular, Mr O'Hannrachain claims that the Court of First Instance considered in isolation rather than as a whole the
         matters raised by the applicants in support of their allegations that Mr Lopez Veiga was the candidate selected beforehand
         by the appointing authority and that his appointment was made following an irregular procedure. 
         
            
In that regard, it must be observed that, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance
         examined in detail the factual circumstances on the basis of which Mr Lopez Veiga was appointed and which, according to the
         applicants, point to a misuse of powers.  The paragraphs mentioned do not show that the Court of First Instance examined the
         matters relied on in support of the plea of misuse of powers in isolation rather than as a whole.  It is true that, in paragraph
         of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance held, as regards the very short period between the Bureau's
         decision to have recourse to the procedure under Article 29(2) of the Staff Regulations and the decision to appoint Mr Lopez
         Veiga to the post at issue, that  
         that fact alone cannot establish the misuse of powers by the Bureau of the Parliament.  However, it must be held that it is clear from paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal taken together that the
         Court of Fist Instance, in fact, made an overall assessment of the matters put before it in support of that plea. 
         
            
Mr O'Hannrachain also claims that the Court selected certain of the documents put before it by the applicants and purposely
         and high-handedly rejected those which did not favour the appointment of Mr Lopez Veiga,  
          inter alia  the newspaper article headed  
         Liberals and Greens oppose political patronage and the excerpt from the publication entitled  
          Babilonia y babel: el Parlamento Europeo desde dentro .  In that regard, the Court of First Instance was right to hold, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that such
         documents, emanating from third parties and drawn up after the Bureau's decision to appoint Mr Lopez Veiga, cannot constitute
         relevant and objective evidence of a misuse of powers. 
         
            
Finally, Mr O'Hannrachain submits that the finding, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that Mr Lopez Veiga was
         involved in the preparation of the recruitment procedure for the post to which he was appointed shows in itself that there
         was a misuse of powers. 
         
            
It is true that Mr Lopez Veiga, because of his position as chef de cabinet of the President of the Parliament, had the task
         of informing the Secretary-General of that institution of the requirements for the drafting of the notice of vacancy.  However,
         that fact alone, given, in particular, that Mr Lopez Veiga could not apply under that notice, does not prove that the selection
         eventually made by the appointing authority, in the circumstances outlined in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, was
         motivated by considerations alien to the proper functioning of the institution.  The applicant is thus not justified in maintaining
         that the Court of First Instance was wrong to dismiss the plea that the contested decisions were vitiated by a misuse of powers.
          Accordingly, the fourth plea must be rejected. 
         The plea alleging breach of the principle of sound management and good administration and failure to observe the obligation
         to state reasons
         
            
Mr O'Hannrachain submits essentially that the Court of First Instance could not sanction the appointment of Mr Lopez Veiga
         without breaching the principle of sound management and good administration.  Moreover, the Court of First Instance disregarded
         the obligation to state reasons in taking the view that the appointment was based on proper reasons. 
         
            
The Court of First Instance misinterpreted the facts and the law in confining itself to stating, in paragraph of the judgment
         under appeal, that, in deciding to appoint Mr Lopez Veiga, the Parliament  
         remained within reasonable limits and made no manifest error of assessment.  On the contrary, it is established that the Parliament made a political appointment, favouring a person who did not have
         the specific qualifications required for the post at issue, following an irregular and abridged procedure to that end. 
         
            
In that regard, it must be observed that the Court of First Instance was right to hold, in paragraph of the judgment under
         appeal, that it is clear from consideration of the pleas relied on that the Bureau, in deciding to appoint Mr Lopez Veiga,
         remained within reasonable limits and made no manifest error of assessment.  It must be observed in that regard that the Parliament
         has a wide discretion in its choice of the most appropriate means for meeting its personnel requirements (see, to that effect,
         Joined Cases 341/85, 251/86, 258/86, 259/86, 262/and 266/86, 222/and 232/Van der Stijl and Cullington  v  
          Commission  [1989] ECR 511, paragraph 11).  In the present case, it has not been established that the appointing authority breached the
         principle of sound management and good administration. 
         
            
Finally, the argument alleging disregard of the obligation to state reasons cannot be upheld.  The Court of First Instance
         was right to hold, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the arguments relied on in support of the allegation
         that that principle was breached concern the relevance of the reasons stated concerning the comparability of Mr Lopez Veiga's
         skills to those required by the notice of vacancy and do not concern the adequacy of those reasons. 
         
            
It follows that the sixth plea must be rejected. 
         The claims for damages
         
            
As the claims in support of annulment of the contested decisions have been rejected by the Court of First Instance, it was
         entitled, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, to reject the claims of the applicants for compensation for
         the non-material damage they claim to have suffered, since they have furnished no evidence of unlawful acts by the Parliament.
          As Mr O'Hannrachain has raised no argument liable to call into question the validity of that reasoning, his claim for damages
         before the Court is unfounded. 
         
            
It follows from the foregoing considerations that the appeal must be dismissed in its entirety. 
         
Costs
            
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, which is applicable to appeal proceedings by virtue of Article 118, the unsuccessful
         party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party's pleadings.  Under Article
         of those Rules, in proceedings between the Communities and their servants, the institutions are to bear their own costs.
          However, by virtue of the second paragraph of Article of the Rules of Procedure, Article does not apply to appeals
         brought by officials or other servants of an institution against the latter.  Since the Parliament has applied for costs and
         Mr O'Hannrachain has been unsuccessful in his appeal, he must be ordered to pay the costs.  
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Second Chamber)
hereby:  
         
1.
 Dismisses the appeal; 
            
2.
 Orders Mr O'Hannrachain to pay the costs. 
            
Puissochet
Skouris 
Colneric 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on June 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
R. Schintgen  
Registrar
President of the Second Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: French.
Top  
 