
Case C-52/European Commission
v
Portuguese Republic
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Civil-law notaries – Directive 2005/36/EC)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Subject-matter of the dispute – Determination during the pre-litigation procedure
            – Adjustment to a change in Union law – Lawfulness – Conditions
(Art. EC)
2.        Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Examination of the merits by the Court – Situation to be taken into consideration
            – Situation on expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion – Situation of uncertainty resulting from particular
            circumstances arising during the legislative procedure – No failure to fulfil  obligations
(Arts EC, 45, first para., EC and EC; European Parliament and Council Directive 2005/36)
1.        In an action for failure to fulfil obligations, although the claims as stated in the application cannot as a rule be extended
         beyond the infringements alleged in the operative part of the reasoned opinion and in the letter of formal notice, the fact
         nevertheless remains that the Commission has standing to seek a declaration that a Member State has failed to fulfil obligations
         which were created in the original version of a Union measure, subsequently amended or repealed, and which were maintained
         in force under the provisions of a new Union measure. Conversely, the subject-matter of the dispute may not be extended to
         obligations arising under new provisions which do not correspond to those arising under the original version of the measure
         concerned, for otherwise it would constitute a breach of the essential procedural requirements of infringement proceedings.
         
      
(see para. 42)
2.        When, in the course of the legislative procedure, particular circumstances, such as the failure of the legislature to adopt
         a clear position or the failure clearly to determine the ambit of a provision of Union law, give rise to a situation of uncertainty,
         it is not possible to conclude that, at the end of the period prescribed in the reasoned opinion, there existed a sufficiently
         clear obligation for the Member States to transpose a directive.
      
(see paras 54-56)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Notaries – Directive 2005/36/EC)
In Case C‑52/08,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on February 2008,
European Commission, represented by H. Støvlbæk and P. Andrade, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
supported by:
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, represented by S. Ossowski, acting as Agent, and by K. Smith, barrister,
      
intervener,
v
Portuguese Republic, represented by L. Inez Fernandes and F. S. Gaspar Rosa, acting as Agents,
      
defendant,
supported by:
Czech Republic, represented by M. Smolek, acting as Agent,
      
Republic of Lithuania, represented by D. Kriaučiūnas and E. Matulionytė, acting as Agents,
      
Republic of Slovenia, represented by V. Klemenc and Ž. Cilenšek Bončina, acting as Agents,
      
Slovak Republic, represented by J. Čorba, acting as Agent,
      
interveners,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, A. Tizzano, J. N. Cunha Rodrigues, K. Lenaerts, J.-C. Bonichot, A. Arabadjiev (Rapporteur)
         and J-J. Kasel, Presidents of Chambers, R. Silva de Lapuerta, E. Juhász, G. Arestis, M. Ilešič, C. Toader and M. Safjan, Judges,
      
Advocate General: P. Cruz Villalón,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on April 2010,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application the Commission of the European Communities asks the Court to declare that, by not adopting the laws, regulations
         and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Directive 2005/36/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
         of September on the recognition of professional qualifications (OJ L 255, p. 22), the Portuguese Republic has
         failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive.
      
 Legal context
 European Union law 
Recital of the preamble to Directive 2005/states that ‘[w]hile maintaining, for the freedom of establishment, the principles
         and safeguards underlying the different systems for recognition in force, the rules of such systems should be improved in
         the light of experience’.
      
In accordance with recital of the preamble to that directive, ‘[t]he mechanism of recognition established by [Council Directive
         89/48/EEC of December on a general system for the recognition of higher-education diplomas awarded on completion of
         professional education and training of at least three years’ duration (OJ 1989, L 19, p. 16)] remains unchanged’.
      
Recital of the preamble to Directive 2005/states that it ‘is without prejudice to the application of Articles 39(4)[EC]
         and [EC] concerning notably notaries’. 
      
Article 2(3) of Directive 2005/is worded as follows:
      
‘Where, for a given regulated profession, other specific arrangements directly related to the recognition of professional
         qualifications are established in a separate instrument of Community law, the corresponding provisions of this Directive shall
         not apply’. 
      
The profession of notary is not subject to any separate instrument of European Union law of the kind specified in Article
         2(3).
      
Directive 2005/repealed Directive 89/with effect from October 2007, pursuant to Article of Directive 2005/36.
      
 National legislation
Civil-law notaries carry out their duties, within the Portuguese legal system, as members of a liberal profession. The organisation
         of that profession is regulated by Decree‑Law No 26/of February on the adoption of the Statute of Notaries (Diário da República I, Series-A, No of February 2004, ‘the Statute of Notaries’). 
      
Article 1(1) and of the Statute of Notaries provide:
      
‘1.      A notary is a lawyer whose written documents, drawn up in the course of his duties, possess authenticity.
2.      A notary is simultaneously a public official who authenticates documents and is responsible for their safekeeping and a member
         of a liberal profession who acts independently and impartially and is freely chosen by the parties concerned.’
      
Article 4(1) of that Statute states that ‘it is generally the duty of a notary to draft a public document in accordance with
         the intentions of the interested parties, which intentions he must ascertain and translate in legally valid form, informing
         the interested parties of its force and consequences’.
      
Article 4(2) of that Statute states that a notary has inter alia the power to draw up wills and other public documents, authenticate
         or verify the validity of writs or signatures, issue certificates, certify translations, issue extracts or authenticated copies,
         draw up minutes of meetings and preserve documents.
      
Pursuant to Article of the Statute of Notaries, access to the profession of notary is subject to all the following conditions:
      
–        there must be no impediment to the pursuit of official duties and no prohibition on carrying out notarial duties;
–        a law degree recognised by the Portuguese legislation must be held;
–        the notarial training period must be completed, and
–        the competition organised by the Council of the notarial profession must be passed.
Decree-law No 27/of February (Diário da República I, Series-A, No of February 2004), established the notarial professional body. The award of the notarial title is, for
         its part, governed by Decree No 398/of the Minister of Justice of April 2004.
      
Under Article of Decree-law No 76-A/of March (Diário da República I, Series-A, No of March 2006), the powers of authentication, certification and recognition of validity of documents
         have also been granted to archivists and officials of registration services, to recognised chambers of commerce or trade and
         to lawyers and ‘solicitadores’. Where a particular document is thereby authenticated, certified or recognised as valid, such
         a document has the same probative value as it would have had if it had been produced before a notary.
      
As explained by the Portuguese Republic at the hearing, the Portuguese legislature has gradually eliminated the need for notarial
         authentication in respect of almost all the documents for which such authentication was previously required. 
      
 The pre-litigation procedure
The Commission received a complaint concerning a failure to transpose Directive 89/in respect of the profession of notary
         in Portugal. Following consideration of that complaint, the Commission sent a letter of formal notice dated December to the Portuguese Republic requesting that it submit, within two months, its observations on the failure to transpose that
         directive.
      
In its reply of June to the letter of formal notice, the Portuguese Republic informed the Commission that reform of
         the legislation relating to access to the profession of notary was underway.
      
On October the Commission sent to the Portuguese Republic a reasoned opinion in which it concluded that the Portuguese
         Republic had failed to fulfil its obligations under Directive 89/48. The Commission invited the Portuguese Republic to take
         the measures necessary to comply with the reasoned opinion within two months from its receipt.
      
By letter of January the Portuguese Republic set out the grounds for its belief that the position adopted by the Commission
         was unfounded.
      
In those circumstances the Commission decided to bring the current action.
      
 The action
 Arguments of the parties
First, the Commission claims that notaries are not connected with the exercise of official authority within the meaning of
         the first paragraph of Article EC. The Commission states that since that provision is an exception to the freedom of establishment,
         that provision must be interpreted strictly (Case C‑2/Reyners [1974] ECR 631, paragraph 43).
      
The scope of that exception should, moreover, be limited to activities which, taken on their own, constitute a direct and
         specific connexion with the exercise of official authority (Reyners, paragraphs and 45). According to the Commission, the concept of official authority implies the exercise of a decision-making
         power going beyond the ordinary law and taking the form of being able to act independently of, or even contrary to, the will
         of other subjects of law. Official authority manifests itself in particular, according to the Court’s case-law, in the exercise
         of powers of constraint (Case C‑114/Commission v Spain [1998] ECR I‑6717, paragraph 37). 
      
Accordingly activities constituting assistance or support to the operation of official authority are outside the scope of
         the first paragraph of Article EC (see, to that effect, Case C‑42/Thijssen [1993] ECR I‑4047, paragraph 22). 
      
In the opinion of the Commission and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, activities connected with the
         exercise of official authority should be distinguished from those carried out in the public interest. Various professions
         can be regarded as possessing particular powers in the public interest without thereby being connected with the exercise of
         official authority. 
      
Since the Portuguese legislation does not confer decision-making powers on notaries, they are therefore not connected with
         the exercise of official authority.
      
Secondly, the Commission considers, in the light of the requirements of Directive 2005/36, the conditions governing access
         to the notarial profession in Portugal. 
      
Like the United Kingdom, the Commission considers that Recital of that directive does not exclude the profession of notary
         from the scope of that directive. That recital should be interpreted as meaning that the first paragraph of Article EC
         is applicable to the profession of notary in so far as that profession is connected with the exercise of official authority.
         Since, in the Portuguese legal system, notaries are not connected with the exercise of official authority, Directive 2005/is applicable to them.
      
In that regard, the Commission observes that the pursuit of the profession of notary in Portugal is subject to five conditions.
         First, applicants must hold a law degree issued by a Portuguese university or an equivalent university qualification in accordance
         with the Portuguese legislation. Second, applicants must pass a competition to obtain the title of notary. Third, they must
         undergo a period of training, at the end of which a qualified notary gives his opinion on the trainee’s aptitude for pursuit
         of the profession. Fourth, after completion of that training period, applicants must pass a second competition to enable them
         to pursue the profession. Fifth, applicants are to take up their duties by taking an oath before the Minister of Justice and
         the President of the professional body of notaries. 
      
The Commission considers that the first three conditions mentioned in the preceding paragraph are not compatible with the
         requirements of Directive 2005/36. The first condition is contrary to Articles 13(1) and 14(3) of that directive since it
         excludes from practising as notaries in Portugal the holders of law degrees obtained from universities of other Member States
         or the holders of university qualification which are not considered equivalent to law degrees. The second condition is contrary,
         in particular, to Article 14(3) of that directive since the competition whereby the title of notary can be obtained covers
         a broad spectrum of subjects but does not take into account subjects already covered by the candidate’s degree or qualification.
         As regards the third condition, the training period concerned constitutes not only an adaptation period but also and simultaneously
         an aptitude test, although Article 14(3) of Directive 2005/prohibits the combination of both an adaptation period and an
         aptitude test. 
      
First, the Portuguese Republic, supported by the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic,
         contends that in accordance with European Union legislation and the Court’s case-law a notary has a connection with the exercise
         of official authority, within the meaning of the first paragraph of Article EC.
      
The Court confirmed, in Case C‑405/Colegio de Oficiales de la Marina Mercante Española [2003] ECR I‑10391, paragraph 42, that the activities of a notary in relation to the execution of wills constitute participation
         in the exercise of rights under powers conferred by public law. 
      
The European Parliament also concluded that the first paragraph of Article EC was applicable to the profession of notary
         in its resolution of January on the state and organisation of the profession of notary in the twelve Member States
         of the Community (OJ C 44, p. 36), and in its resolution of March on the legal professions and the general interest
         in the functioning of legal systems (OJ C 292E, p. 105).
      
Likewise, Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of June on certain legal aspects of information
         society services, in particular electronic commerce, in the Internal Market (‘Directive on electronic commerce’) (OJ L 178, p. 1) and Directive 2006/123/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of December on services in the
         internal market (OJ L 376, p. 36), exclude notarial activities from their scope.
      
Certain aspects of a notary’s status, namely, in particular, his status as a public official, the numerus clausus rules to which a notary is subject, the taking of an oath and the disqualification from holding other office as laid down
         by the legislation, are also evidence of the fact that notaries are connected with the exercise of official authority.
      
Second, as regards the alleged failure to transpose Directive 2005/36, the Portuguese Republic, the Republic of Lithuania
         and the Republic of Slovenia contend that Recital of that directive expressly states that the directive ‘is without prejudice
         to the application of Articles 39(4)[EC] and [EC] concerning notably notaries’. That reservation confirms that the profession
         of notary is excluded from the scope of Directive 2005/36. A similar reservation appeared in the twelfth recital of the preamble
         to Directive 89/48.
      
Referring to the legislative history of Directive 2005/and, in particular, the European Parliament legislative resolution
         on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the recognition of professional qualifications (OJ C 97E, p. 230) adopted at first reading on February 2004, the Portuguese Republic concludes that the European Union legislature
         excluded the profession of notary from the scope of that directive. 
      
The Czech Republic considers that, in so far as the pursuit of the profession of notary requires thorough knowledge of the
         national law of the host Member State, to require an aptitude test relating to matters of that Member State’s domestic law
         is compatible with the conditions referred to in Article 3(1)(h) of Directive 2005/36.
      
The Republic of Slovenia claims that the Court should reject this action of its own motion because the subject-matter of the
         pre-litigation procedure was the alleged failure to transpose Directive 89/48, whereas the complaint in this action is that
         the Portuguese Republic failed to fulfil its obligations under Directive 2005/36.
      
 Findings of the Court
 Admissibility of the action
It is apparent from the Commission’s application that the subject of this action is an alleged failure to transpose Directive
         2005/36. It must be noted, however, that both the letters of formal notice and the reasoned opinion issued by the Commission
         relate to Directive 89/48. The Court must therefore examine of its own motion the admissibility of this action.
      
In accordance with its case-law, the Court may of its own motion examine whether the conditions laid down in Article EC
         for bringing an action for failure to fulfil obligations are satisfied (Case C‑362/Commission v Italy [1992] ECR I‑2353, paragraph 8, and Case C‑417/Commission v Greece [2004] ECR I‑7973, paragraph 16).
      
It is settled case-law that, in the context of proceedings under Article EC, the existence of a failure to fulfil obligations
         must be assessed in the light of the European Union legislation in force at the close of the period prescribed by the Commission
         for the Member State concerned to comply with its reasoned opinion (see, in particular, Case C‑61/Commission v Germany [1996] ECR I‑3989, paragraph 42; Case C‑377/Commission v Belgium [2006] ECR I‑9733, paragraph 33, and Case C‑416/Commission v Greece [2009] ECR I‑7883, paragraph 27). It is clear that Directive 2005/repealed Directive 89/from October 2007, in other
         words after the expiry of the period prescribed in the reasoned opinion.
      
However, as the Court has already held, although the claims as stated in the application cannot as a rule be extended beyond
         the infringements alleged in the operative part of the reasoned opinion and in the letter of formal notice, the fact nevertheless
         remains that the Commission has standing to seek a declaration that a Member State has failed to fulfil obligations which
         were created in the original version of a European Union measure, subsequently amended or repealed, and which were maintained
         in force under the provisions of a new European Union measure. Conversely, the subject‑matter of the dispute cannot be extended
         to obligations arising under new provisions which do not correspond to those arising under the original version of the measure
         concerned, for otherwise it would constitute a breach of the essential procedural requirements of infringement proceedings
         (see, in that regard, Case C‑365/Commission v Italy [1999] ECR I‑7773, paragraph 36; Case C‑363/Commission v Italy [2003] ECR I‑5767, paragraph 22, and Case C‑416/Commission v Greece, cited above, paragraph 28).
      
Consequently, the claims stated in the Commission’s application seeking a declaration that the Portuguese Republic has failed
         to fulfil its obligations under Directive 2005/are, in principle, admissible, on condition that the obligations under that
         directive are analogous to those arising under Directive 89/(see, by analogy, Case C‑416/Commission v Greece, cited above, paragraph 29).
      
However, as appears from Recital of the preamble to Directive 2005/36, while the aim of that directive is to improve, reorganise
         and rationalise the existing provisions by standardising the principles applicable, that directive maintains, for freedom
         of establishment, the principles and safeguards underlying the different systems for recognition in force, such as those established
         by Directive 89/48. 
      
Similarly, Recital of Directive 2005/states that the mechanism of recognition established inter alia by Directive 89/is to remain unchanged.
      
In the present case, the Commission’s complaint against the Portuguese Republic relates, so far as the profession of notary
         is concerned, to the failure to transpose not a particular provision of Directive 2005/but that directive as a whole. 
      
In those circumstances, the alleged obligation to transpose Directive 2005/in relation to the profession of notary is analogous
         to that arising under Directive 89/in so far as the principles and safeguards underlying the mechanism of recognition established
         by the latter directive are maintained in the former and that mechanism remained unchanged after the adoption of Directive
         2005/36. 
      
Consequently, the action must be held to be admissible. 
      
 Substance
The Commission’s criticism of the Portuguese Republic is that it did not transpose Directive 2005/in respect of the profession
         of notary. The Court must therefore examine whether that directive is capable of applying to that profession.
      
In that regard, the legislative context of that directive must be taken into account.
      
Thus it must be noted that the legislature expressly stated, in the twelfth recital of the preamble to Directive 89/48, which
         preceded Directive 2005/36, that the general system for the recognition of higher-education diplomas, established by the former
         directive, was to be ‘entirely without prejudice to the application of … Article [EC]’. The reservation thus expressed
         reflects the intention of the legislature to leave activities falling under the first paragraph of Article EC outside the
         scope of Directive 89/48.
      
However, when Directive 89/was adopted, the Court had not yet had occasion to rule on the question of whether notarial
         activities do or do not fall under the first paragraph of Article EC. 
      
Over the years following the adoption of Directive 89/48, the Parliament, in its and resolutions mentioned in paragraph
         of this judgment asserted on the one hand that the first paragraph of Article EC should be fully applied to the profession
         of notary as such, while expressing the wish on the other hand that the nationality requirement for access to that profession
         should be removed.
      
Moreover, when adopting Directive 2005/36, which replaced Directive 89/48, the European Union legislature was careful to state,
         in recital in the preamble to Directive 2005/36, that it was without prejudice to the application of Article EC ‘concerning
         notably notaries’. By expressing that reservation, the European Union legislature did not adopt a position on the applicability
         of the first paragraph of Article EC, and hence of Directive 2005/36, to the activities of notaries.
      
That is demonstrated by the legislative history of the latter directive. The Parliament proposed, in its legislative resolution
         mentioned in paragraph of this judgment, that it should be expressly stated in the text of Directive 2005/that it did
         not apply to notaries. Although that proposal was not taken up in the amended proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament
         and of the Council on the recognition of professional qualifications presented by the Commission on April [COM(2004)
         final], or in the Common Position (EC) No 10/of December adopted by the Council acting in accordance with
         the procedure referred to in Article of the Treaty establishing the European Community, with a view to adopting a directive
         of the European Parliament and of the Council on the recognition of professional qualifications (OJ C 58E, p. 1), that
         is not because the envisaged directive was to apply to the profession of notary, but because, in particular, ‘a derogation
         from the principles of freedom of establishment and freedom to provide services for activities that involve direct and specific
         participation in the exercise of official authority [was] provided for by [the first paragraph of] Article EC’. 
      
In view of the particular circumstances which accompanied the legislative procedure and the situation of uncertainty which
         resulted, as may be seen from the legislative context described above, it does not appear possible to conclude that, at the
         end of the period prescribed in the reasoned opinion, there existed a sufficiently clear obligation for the Member States
         to transpose Directive 2005/with respect to the profession of notary.
      
The action must therefore be dismissed.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, an unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied
         for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Portuguese Republic has asked that the Commission be ordered to pay the
         costs and the Commission has been unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
Under the first subparagraph of Article 69(4) of those Rules, Member States which intervene in the proceedings are to bear
         their own costs. Consequently, the Czech Republic, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Slovenia, the Slovak Republic
         and the United Kingdom must bear their own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby
1.      Dismisses the action;
2.      Orders the European Commission to pay the costs;
3.      Orders the Czech Republic, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Slovenia, the Slovak Republic and the United Kingdom
            of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to bear their own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Portuguese.
      
Top  
 