
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-100/Gerolsteiner Brunnen GmbH & Co.vPutsch GmbH(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Bundesgerichtshof)
         
«(Directive 89/104/EEC – Limitation of the effects of a trade mark in relation to indications concerning geographical origin – Use of a geographical indication as a trade mark as an element of use in accordance with honest practices in industrial or
               commercial matters)»
            
Opinion of Advocate General Stix-Hackl delivered on July Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber), January Summary of the Judgment
Approximation of laws – Trade marks – Directive 89/– Limitation of the effects of a trade mark – Right of the proprietor of a trade mark to prevent the use by a third party of an indication of geographical origin entailing
                     a likelihood of confusion with the trade mark – Condition – Use not in accordance with honest practices in industrial or commercial matters – To be determined by the national court
                  (Council Directive 89/104, Arts 5(1)(b) and 6(1)(b)) Article 6(1)(b) of First Directive 89/to approximate the laws of the Member States relating to trade marks is to be interpreted
         as meaning that, where there exists a likelihood of aural confusion between a word mark registered in one Member State and
         an indication, in the course of trade, of the geographical origin of a product originating in another Member State, the proprietor
         of the trade mark may, pursuant to Article of the directive, prevent the use of the indication of geographical origin only
         if that use is not in accordance with honest practices in industrial or commercial matters.In that connection, it is for the national court to carry out an overall assessment of all the relevant circumstances. Where
         the trade mark and indication of geographical origin are used for the marketing of bottled drinks, the circumstances to be
         taken into account by that court would include in particular the shape and labelling of the bottle in order to assess, more
         particularly, whether the producer of the drink bearing the indication of geographical origin might be regarded as unfairly
         competing with the proprietor of the trade mark.see paras 26-27, operative part
      
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)January (1)
((Directive 89/104/EEC – Limitation of the effects of a trade mark in relation to indications concerning geographical origin – Use of a geographical indication as a trade mark as an element of use in accordance with honest practices in industrial or
                  commercial matters))
               
 In Case C-100/02, 
             REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Bundesgerichtshof (Germany) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings
            pending before that court between
            
Gerolsteiner Brunnen GmbH & Co.
and
Putsch GmbH,
 on the interpretation of Article 6(1)(b) of First Council Directive 89/104/EEC of December to approximate the laws
            of the Member States relating to trade marks (OJ L 40, p. 1),
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),,
 composed of: P. Jann, acting for the President of the Fifth Chamber, C.W.A. Timmermans and D.A.O. Edward (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: C. Stix-Hackl, Registrar: M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator, 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
 Gerolsteiner Brunnen GmbH & Co., by W.J.H. Stahlberg and A. Ebert-Weidenfeller, Rechtsanwälte, 
               
─
 Putsch GmbH, by P. Neuwald, Rechtsanwalt, 
               
─
 the Greek Government, by G. Skiani and G. Alexaki, acting as Agents, 
               
─
 the United Kingdom Government, by P. Ormond, acting as Agent, and D. Alexander, Barrister, 
               
─
 the Commission of the European Communities, by R. Raith and N.B. Rasmussen, acting as Agents, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of Gerolsteiner Brunnen GmbH & Co., represented by A. Ebert-Weidenfeller; Putsch GmbH,
               represented by P. Neuwald; the Greek Government, represented by G. Skiani and G. Alexaki; the United Kingdom Government, represented
               by K. Manji, acting as Agent, and D. Alexander, and the Commission, represented by R. Raith, at the hearing on May 2003,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on July 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By order of February 2002, received at the Court on March 2002, the Bundesgerichtshof (Federal Court of Justice) referred
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC two questions on the interpretation of Article 6(1)(b) of First
         Council Directive 89/104/EEC of December to approximate the laws of the Member States relating to trade marks (OJ
         L 40, p. 1). 
         
            
 Those questions were raised in proceedings between Gerolsteiner Brunnen GmbH & Co. (
         Gerolsteiner Brunnen) and Putsch GmbH (
         Putsch) concerning the alleged infringement of Gerolsteiner Brunnen's trade mark rights by Putsch's use of the term  
         KERRY Spring on labels on soft drinks marketed by Putsch. 
         
Legal background
            
 According to the first recital in the preamble to Directive 89/104, the purpose of that directive is to abolish existing disparities
         which may impede the free movement of goods and freedom to provide services and may distort competition within the common
         market. 
         
            
 Article 6(1)(b) of that directive, entitled  
         Limitation of the effects of a trade mark, provides: 
         
1.
 The trade mark shall not entitle the proprietor to prohibit a third party from using, in the course of trade, 
         ...
         
(b)
 indications concerning the kind, quality, quantity, intended purpose, value, geographical origin, the time of production of
         goods or of rendering of the service, or other characteristics of goods or services; 
         ...provided he uses them in accordance with honest practices in industrial or commercial matters.
         
            
 The Gesetz über den Schutz von Marken und sonstigen Kennzeichen (German law on the protection of trade marks and other distinctive
         signs) of October (BGBl. I, p. 3082, I, p. 156;  
         the Markengesetz) transposed Directive 89/into German law. 
         
            
 Paragraph of the Markengesetz, entitled  
         Use of names and descriptive indications; Trade in spare parts, provides: The proprietor of a trade mark or a commercial name shall not be entitled to prevent a third party from using, in the course
         of trade,...
         
2.
 a sign identical or similar to the trade mark or commercial name as an indication concerning characteristics or particularities
         of goods or services such as, in particular, their kind, quality, intended purpose, value, geographical origin or time of
         production or rendering, 
         ...provided that that use is not contrary to honest practices.
         The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 Gerolsteiner Brunnen bottles mineral water and produces soft drinks with a mineral water base and markets them in Germany.
         It is the proprietor of word mark No Gerri, registered in Germany with priority dated December 1985, and of German word/figurative marks Nos 2010618, 2059923, and 2059925, which contain the word  
         GERRI. Those trade marks cover mineral water, non-alcoholic beverages, fruit-juice based drinks and lemonades. 
         
            
 Since the mid-1990s Putsch has marketed soft drinks in Germany bearing labels including the words  
         KERRY Spring. Those drinks are manufactured and bottled in Ballyferriter in County Kerry, Ireland, by the Irish company Kerry Spring Water
         using water from a spring called  
         Kerry Spring. 
         
            
 Gerolsteiner Brunnen commenced proceedings against Putsch in the German courts for infringement of its trade mark rights.
         At first instance, the Landgericht München (Munich Regional Court) essentially found for Gerolsteiner Brunnen and restrained
         Putsch from using the distinctive sign  
         KERRY Spring for mineral water or soft drinks. On appeal by Putsch, however, the Oberlandesgericht München (Munich Higher Regional Court)
         dismissed Gerolsteiner Brunnen's claims. Gerolsteiner Brunnen then brought an appeal on a point of law (
         Revision) before the Bundesgerichtshof. 
         
            
 The Bundesgerichtshof considers that the conditions for the likelihood of aural confusion for the purposes of Article 5(1)(b)
         of Directive 89/are met in the main proceedings. In those circumstances, the outcome of the appeal on a point of law depends
         on the interpretation of Article 6(1)(b) of Directive 89/and, more particularly, on whether use  
         as a trade mark excludes the applicability of that provision. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, by order of February 2002, the Bundesgerichtshof decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following
         questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
         
1.
 Is Article 6(1)(b) of the First Trade Mark Directive also applicable if a third party uses the indications referred to therein
         as a trade mark (markenmässig)? 
         
2.
 If so, must that use as a trade mark be taken into account when considering, pursuant to the final clause of Article 6(1)
         of the First Trade Mark Directive, whether use has been in accordance with  
         honest practices in industrial or commercial matters?
         
The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 By the questions referred for a preliminary ruling, which will be taken together, the referring court asks the Court about
         the scope of Article 6(1) of Directive 89/in a situation such as that in the main proceedings. 
         
            
 The referring court notes that there are differing views on whether the use of a geographical indication to distinguish goods
         and identify their origin, which it describes as use  
         as a trade mark (
         markenmässig), means that Article 6(1) of Directive 89/does not apply. 
         
            
 The Commission pointed out by reference to the drafting history of Directive 89/that Article of the proposal for a first
         Council Directive to approximate the laws of the Member States relating to trade marks (OJ C 351, p. 1) (which became
         Article of Directive 89/104) laid down the formula  
         provided he does not use them as a trade mark. However, that formula was replaced in the amended proposal (COM (85) final (OJ C 351, p. 4)) by the words  
         provided he uses them in accordance with honest industrial or commercial practice. The Commission adds that it is apparent from the statement of reasons for the amended proposal that that substitution was
         made in the interests of greater clarity. 
         
            
 In those circumstances, an expression such as  
         as a trade mark cannot be regarded as appropriate for determining the scope of Article of Directive 89/104. 
         
            
 In order better to define its scope in circumstances such as those in the main proceedings it should be borne in mind that,
         by a limitation of the effects of the rights derived from Article of Directive 89/by the proprietor of a trade mark,
         Article of that directive seeks to reconcile the fundamental interests of trade-mark protection with those of free movement
         of goods and freedom to provide services in the common market in such a way that trade mark rights are able to fulfil their
         essential role in the system of undistorted competition which the Treaty seeks to establish and maintain (see,  
         inter alia, Case C-63/BMW [1999] ECR I-905, paragraph 62).
         
            
 Article 5(1) of Directive 89/allows the proprietor of a trade mark to prevent all third parties from using, in the course
         of trade, any sign which is identical with the trade mark in relation to goods which are identical with those for which the
         trade mark is registered (Article 5(1)(a)) and any sign where, because of its identity with, or similarity to, the trade mark
         and the identity or similarity of the goods in question, there exists a likelihood of confusion on the part of the public
         (Article 5(1)(b)). 
         
            
 Article 6(1)(b) of Directive 89/provides that the proprietor of the trade mark may not prohibit a third party from using,
         in the course of trade, indications concerning,  
         inter alia, the geographical origin of goods provided the third party uses them in accordance with honest practices in industrial or
         commercial matters. 
         
            
 It should be noted that that provision draws no distinction between the possible uses of the indications referred to in Article
         6(1)(b) of Directive 89/104. For such an indication to fall within the scope of that article, it suffices that it is an indication
         concerning one of the characteristics set out therein, like geographical origin. 
         
            
 The main proceedings in the present case concern, first, the trade mark  
         GERRI, which has no geographical connotation and, second, the sign  
         KERRY Spring, which refers to the geographical origin of the water used in the manufacture of the product in question, the place where
         the product is bottled and the place where the producer is established. 
         
            
 The Commission emphasised the geographical nature of the expression  
         KERRY Spring by noting that  
         Kerry Spring is expressly included in the list of mineral waters recognised by Ireland for the purposes of Council Directive 80/777/EEC
         of July on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the exploitation and marketing of natural
         mineral waters (OJ L 229, p. 1) (see the list of natural mineral waters recognised by the Member States published by
         the Commission in OJ C 41, p. 1). 
         
            
 The referring court finds that there exists a likelihood of aural confusion for the purposes of Article 5(1)(b) of Directive
         89/between  
         GERRI and  
         KERRY since experience shows that, when ordering orally, customers shorten  
         KERRY Spring to  
         KERRY. 
         
            
 The question therefore arises whether such a likelihood of confusion between a word mark and an indication of geographical
         origin entitles the proprietor of the trade mark to rely upon Article 5(1)(b) of Directive 89/to prevent a third party
         from using the indication of geographical origin. 
         
            
 In answering that question, the only test mentioned in Article 6(1) of Directive 89/is whether the indication of geographical
         origin is used in accordance with honest practices in industrial or commercial matters. The condition of  
         honest practice constitutes in substance the expression of a duty to act fairly in relation to the legitimate interests of the trade mark
         owner (
         BMW, cited above, paragraph 61). 
         
            
 The mere fact that there exists a likelihood of aural confusion between a word mark registered in one Member State and an
         indication of geographical origin from another Member State is therefore insufficient to conclude that the use of that indication
         in the course of trade is not in accordance with honest practices. In a Community of Member States, with great linguistic
         diversity, the chance that there exists some phonetic similarity between a trade mark registered in one Member State and an
         indication of geographical origin from another Member State is already substantial and will be even greater after the impending
         enlargement. 
         
            
 It follows that, in a case such as that in the main proceedings, it is for the national court to carry out an overall assessment
         of all the relevant circumstances. Since the case concerns bottled drinks, the circumstances to be taken into account by that
         court would include in particular the shape and labelling of the bottle in order to assess, more particularly, whether the
         producer of the drink bearing the indication of geographical origin might be regarded as unfairly competing with the proprietor
         of the trade mark. 
         
            
 The answer to the questions referred for a preliminary ruling must therefore be that Article 6(1)(b) of Directive 89/is
         to be interpreted as meaning that, where there exists a likelihood of aural confusion between a word mark registered in one
         Member State and an indication, in the course of trade, of the geographical origin of a product originating in another Member
         State, the proprietor of the trade mark may, pursuant to Article of Directive 89/104, prevent the use of the indication
         of geographical origin only if that use is not in accordance with honest practices in industrial or commercial matters. It
         is for the national court to carry out an overall assessment of all the circumstances of the particular case in that regard.
         
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the Greek and United Kingdom Governments and the Commission, which have submitted observations to the
         Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main action, a step in the proceedings pending
         before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),
 in answer to the questions referred to it by the Bundesgerichtshof by order of February 2002, hereby rules: 
         Article 6(1)(b) of First Council Directive 89/104/EEC of December to approximate the laws of the Member States relating
            to trade marks is to be interpreted as meaning that, where there exists a likelihood of aural confusion between a word mark
            registered in one Member State and an indication, in the course of trade, of the geographical origin of a product originating
            in another Member State, the proprietor of the trade mark may, pursuant to Article of Directive 89/104,
            prevent the use of the indication of geographical origin only if that use is not in accordance with honest practices in industrial
               or commercial matters. It is for the national court to carry out an overall assessment of all the circumstances of the particular
               case in that regard.
Jann
Timmermans 
Edward 
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on January 2004. 
         
R. Grass 
V. Skouris  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: German.
Top  
 