
Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber) of October – Commission v France
(Case C-549/09)
Failure to fulfil obligations – State aid – Aid granted to fish farmers and fishermen – Decision declaring that aid incompatible with the common market – Obligation to recover immediately the aid declared unlawful and incompatible and to inform the Commission – Non-implementation – Absolute impossibility of implementation
1.                     State aid – Recovery of unlawful aid – Obligation – Duty to implement immediately and effectively the Commission’s decision
            (Arts 108(2) TFEU and TFEU; Council Regulation No 659/1999, Art. 14(3)) (see paras 26-29, 31)
2.                     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Failure to fulfil the obligation to recover unlawful aid – Defences – Absolutely
            impossible to implement – Assessment criteria – Difficulties in implementing – Member State obliged to make genuine approaches
            to the undertakings concerned and to suggest alternative solutions to the Commission enabling those difficulties to be overcome
            – Difficulty in identifying the recipients not justifying non-implementation of the Commission’s decision (Art. 108(2) TFEU;
            Council Regulation No 659/1999, Art. 14(3)) (see paras 33-34, 39)
3.                     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Non-implementation of a Commission decision concerning State aid – Defences –
            Legality of the decision called in question – Inadmissibility (see para. 43)
Re: 
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Failure to take the measures necessary to implement Commission Decision
                  2005/239/EC of July concerning certain aid measures applied by France to assist fish farmers and fishermen (OJ L 74, p. 49) – Obligation to recover immediately the aid declared unlawful and incompatible with the common market and to
                  inform the Commission thereof.
               
Operative part
The Court:
1.
	Declares that, by failing to implement, within the prescribed period, Commission Decision 2005/239/EC of July concerning
                     certain aid measures applied by France to assist fish farmers and fishermen, by recovering from the recipients of the aid
                     declared unlawful and incompatible with the common market by Articles and of that decision, the French Republic has failed
                     to fulfil its obligations under the fourth paragraph of Article TFEU and Article of that decision; 
                  
2.
	Orders the French Republic to pay the costs.
Top  
 