
Case C-172/Pontina Ambiente Srl
v
Regione Lazio
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Commissione tributaria provinciale di Roma)
(Environment – Directive 1999/31/EC – Article – Special levy on the disposal of solid waste in landfills – Operator of a landfill subject to that levy – Operating costs of a landfill – Directive 2000/35/EC – Default interest)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Environment – Waste – Landfill of waste – Directive 1999/– ‘Polluter pays’ principle
(Council Directive 1999/31, Art. 10)
2.        Approximation of laws – Combating late payments in commercial transactions –Directive 2000/– Scope
(European Parliament and Council Directive 2000/35, Arts 1, 2(1) and 3)
1.        Article of Directive 1999/on the landfill of waste, as amended by Regulation No 1882/2003, must be interpreted as meaning
         that it does not preclude a national provision which makes the operator of a landfill site subject to a levy to be reimbursed
         by the local authority depositing the waste and which provides for financial penalties to be imposed on that operator for
         late payment of the levy, on condition that those rules are accompanied by measures to ensure that the levy is actually reimbursed
         within a short time and that all the costs of recovery, and in particular, the costs resulting from late payment of amounts
         which that authority owes to the site operator on that account, including costs incurred in order to avoid any financial penalty
         which might be imposed on the site operator, are passed on in the price to be paid by the authority to that operator. It is
         for the national court to ascertain whether those conditions have been satisfied.
      
Causing the operator to bear such charges would amount to charging to him the costs arising from the disposal of waste which
         he did not generate but of which he merely disposes in the framework of his activities as a provider of services.
      
(see paras 38, 41, operative part 1)
2.        Articles 1, 2(1) and of Directive 2000/on combating late payment in commercial transactions must be interpreted as meaning
         that the sums owed to the operator of a landfill site by a local authority depositing waste in the landfill, such as the sums
         due by way of reimbursement of a levy, come within the scope of that directive and that the Member States must ensure, in
         accordance with Article thereof, that, in the case of late payment, the landfill operator may charge the local authority
         interest on those sums for which the local authority is liable.
      
(see para. 48, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
February (*)
      
(Environment – Directive 1999/31/EC – Article – Special levy on the disposal of solid waste in landfills – Operator of a landfill subject to that levy – Operating costs of a landfill – Directive 2000/35/EC – Default interest)
In Case C‑172/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, from the Commissione tributaria provinciale di Roma (Italy), made
         by decision of April 2008, received at the Court on April 2008, in the proceedings
      
Pontina Ambiente Srl
v
Regione Lazio,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C. Toader, President of the Eighth Chamber, acting for the President of the Second Chamber, C.W.A. Timmermans,
         K. Schiemann, P. Kūris (Rapporteur) and L. Bay Larsen, Judges,
      
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: R. Şereş, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on June 2009,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Pontina Ambiente Srl, by M.F. Zadotti, ragioniere, and A. Presutti, avvocato,
–        the Italian Government, by I. Bruni, acting as Agent, assisted by G. De Bellis, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by A. Aresu and J.‑B. Laignelot, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2009,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling relates to the interpretation of Articles EC, EC, EC and EC and Article
         of Council Directive 1999/31/EC of April on the landfill of waste (OJ L 182, p. 1), as amended by Regulation
         (EC) No 1882/of the European Parliament and of the Council of September (OJ L 284, p. 1, ‘Directive 1999/31’),
         and Directive 2000/35/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of June on combating late payment in commercial
         transactions (OJ L 200, p. 35).
      
The reference has been made in the course of proceedings between Pontina Ambiente Srl (‘Pontina Ambiente’) and Regione Lazio
         relating to two tax assessments finding that Pontina Ambiente had been late in paying the special levy on the disposal of
         solid waste in landfills for the third and fourth quarters of and imposing penalties on it, together with interest.
      
 Legal context
 European Union legislation
Recital in the preamble to Directive 1999/is worded as follows:
      
‘Whereas measures should be taken to ensure that the price charged for waste disposal in a landfill cover all the costs involved
         in the setting up and operation of the facility, including as far as possible the financial security or its equivalent which
         the site operator must provide, and the estimated cost of closing the site including the necessary after-care’.
      
Article 1(1) of Directive 1999/provides as follows:
      
‘With a view to meeting the requirements of [Council] Directive 75/442/EEC [of July on waste (OJ L 194, p. 39),
         as amended by Commission Decision 96/350/EC of May (OJ L 135, p. 32, “Directive 75/442”)], and in particular
         Articles and thereof, the aim of this Directive is, by way of stringent operational and technical requirements on the
         waste and landfills, to provide for measures, procedures and guidance to prevent or reduce as far as possible negative effects
         on the environment, in particular the pollution of surface water, groundwater, soil and air, and on the global environment,
         including the greenhouse effect, as well as any resulting risk to human health, from landfilling of waste, during the whole
         life-cycle of the landfill.’
      
According to Article of Directive 1999/31:
      
‘For the purposes of this Directive:
…
(l)      “operator” means the natural or legal person responsible for a landfill in accordance with the internal legislation of the Member State
         where the landfill is located; this person may change from the preparation to the after-care phase;
      
…
(n)      “holder” means the producer of the waste or the natural or legal person who is in possession of it;
      
…’
Article of Directive 1999/provides as follows:
      
‘Member States shall take measures to ensure that all of the costs involved in the setting up and operation of a landfill
         site, including as far as possible the cost of the financial security or its equivalent referred to in Article 8(a)(iv), and
         the estimated costs of the closure and after-care of the site for a period of at least years shall be covered by the price
         to be charged by the operator for the disposal of any type of waste in that site. Subject to the requirements of Council Directive
         90/313/EEC of June on the freedom of access to information on the environment [OJ L 158, p. 56], Member States
         shall ensure transparency in the collection and use of any necessary cost information.’
      
Article 3(1)(a) of Directive 75/is worded as follows:
      
‘Member States shall take appropriate measures to encourage:
(a)      first, the prevention or reduction of waste production and its harmfulness …’
Article of Directive 2000/provides that its provisions are to apply to all payments made as remuneration for commercial
         transactions. 
      
According to Article 2(1) of Directive 2000/35, ‘commercial transactions’ means ‘transactions between undertakings or between
         undertakings and public authorities which lead to the delivery of goods or the provision of services for remuneration’.
      
Article of the Directive, entitled ‘Interest in case of late payment’, provides, inter alia, that the Member States are
         to ensure that interest is payable in the case of late payment and may be claimed by the creditor if he has fulfilled his
         contractual and legal obligations; and has not received the amount due on time, unless the debtor is not responsible for the
         delay.
      
 National legislation
In order to promote a reduction in the amount of waste produced and the recovery of raw materials and energy from such waste,
         Article 3(24) of Law No of December on measures to rationalise public finances (Ordinary Supplement to GURI No
         of December 1995, ‘Law No 549/95’) introduced a special levy on the disposal of solid waste in landfills.
      
Pursuant to Article 3(25) of Law No 549/95, the event which gives rise to the levy is the depositing of solid waste in landfills.
      
It is apparent from Article 3(26) of Law No 549/that the person liable for the levy is the operator of the undertaking
         of final storage who is under an obligation to seek reimbursement from the authority providing the waste to be deposited.
      
Article 3(27) of Law No 549/provides that the levy is payable to the regions.
      
According to Article 3(28) and (29) of Law No 549/95, the amount to be paid is determined by multiplying the amount of the
         levy by the amount of waste deposited in landfills, expressed in kilograms, and by a multiplication factor which takes account
         of the specific weight and quality of the waste as well as the conditions under which it is deposited in the landfill.
      
Article 3(31) of Law No 549/provides for a financial penalty in case of non-payment, insufficient payment or late payment
         of the levy, which could be as much as 400% of the amount of the levy relating to the operation carried out.
      
Articles 1(1) and 2(a) of Legislative Decree No of October transposing Directive 2000/on combating late payment
         in commercial transactions (GURI No of October 2002, p. 16) are worded in essentially the same terms as Articles and 2(1) of that Directive.
      
 The case in the main proceedings and the reference for a preliminary ruling
Pontina Ambiente, whose registered office is in Rome, collects and disposes of waste. In particular, it receives, in a landfill
         intended for that purpose, solid waste from various municipal authorities in Regione Lazio, it stocks that waste and processes
         it in order to produce derivatives and compost and also to reduce its volume.
      
Pursuant to Law No 549/and the regional implementing law, Pontina Ambiente is liable to pay quarterly, to Regione Lazio,
         the special levy on the disposal of solid waste in landfills, which must be paid not later than the month following the end
         of the quarter of the calendar year during which the waste was deposited. Pontina Ambiente is obliged to seek reimbursement
         from the municipal authorities sending waste to landfill.
      
That company paid, late, the levy for the third and fourth quarters of 2004, which caused the competent authorities of Regione
         Lazio to issue two tax assessments to it in October and, at the same time, impose on it the financial penalties laid
         down in Article 3(31) of Law No 549/95.
      
On January 2007, Pontina Ambiente brought an action before the Commissione tributaria provinciale di Roma for annulment
         of the measures adopted by Regione Lazio.
      
Pontina Ambiente challenges Law No 549/legislation in so far as it makes the operator of the landfill liable for the levy
         in question. It also challenges the penalties imposed on it by Regione Lazio for late payment of the levy on the ground that
         the municipal authorities concerned were the cause of the delay. It criticises the fact that payment of the levy is not subject
         to a requirement on the part of the municipal authorities involved to pay for the services provided and there is no provision
         for penalties to be imposed on those authorities.
      
The company raises, in particular, the incompatibility with European Union law of certain rules for application of the levy
         at issue in regard to the determination of the person liable for the levy and the system of penalties for late payment, more
         precisely, with Articles EC, EC, EC, EC, Article of Directive 1999/and the relevant provisions of Directive
         2000/35.
      
Considering that the claims put forward by Pontina Ambiente might be well founded, the Commissione tributaria provinciale
         di Roma decided as follows:
      
‘The court finds that Article 3(26) and (31) of Law No 549/…, interpreted as set out above by the Amministrazione Finanziaria,
         and according to the incontestable literal wording of that provision, may be contrary to Articles [EC], [EC], [EC]
         and [EC], Article of Directive 1999/and recitals 7, 10, and in the preamble to Directive 2000/and that the
         issue therefore arises as to whether such national legislation is compatible with Community law; stays the pending proceedings
         and any enforcement measures; refers the matter to the Court … so that it may it may give a ruling on the question in accordance
         with its specific authority’.
      
 The reference for a preliminary ruling
 Admissibility of the reference for a preliminary ruling and formulation of the questions 
The Commission of the European Communities questions whether the reference for a preliminary ruling is admissible inasmuch
         as, on the one hand, the national court has not expressly formulated a question and, on the other, the reference asks the
         Court to rule on the compatibility of national legislation with European Union law.
      
Moreover, the Italian Government and the Commission observe that the order for reference contains nothing to indicate the
         reason why reference is made to Articles EC, EC, EC and EC.
      
It is to be borne in mind, first, that although the Court does not, in a reference for a preliminary ruling, have jurisdiction
         to give a ruling on the compatibility of a national measure with European Union law, it does have jurisdiction to supply the
         national court with a ruling on the interpretation of European Union law so as to enable that court to determine whether such
         compatibility exists with a view to deciding the case before it (Case C‑254/Futura Immobiliare and Others [2009] ECR I‑0000, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Secondly, it must be stated that, although the national court did not expressly formulate a question, it none the less provided
         sufficient information as regards both the matters of fact and the matters of law which characterise the main proceedings
         to permit the Court to understand the purpose of the reference and to provide the national court with an interpretation of
         the relevant provisions of European Union law which might be useful in resolving the dispute in the main proceedings.
      
That is the case in regard to Article of Directive 1999/and to Directive 2000/35. On the other hand, the order for reference
         provides no explanation for the relevance to the reference for a preliminary ruling of Articles EC, EC, EC and EC. In particular, it does not state how those articles could be applicable to the situation which it describes and which,
         as the Advocate General remarked in points to of her Opinion, appears to be purely internal to a single Member State
         and does not contain a cross-border element.
      
In those circumstances, it must be held that the reference for a preliminary ruling is admissible except in regard to Articles
         EC, EC, EC and EC.
      
It may be deduced from the indications provided by the national court that the reference for a preliminary ruling concerns
         the following questions:
      
1.      Is Article of Directive 1999/to be interpreted as meaning that it precludes a national provision, such as that at issue
         in the main proceedings, which makes the operator of a landfill site subject to a special levy on the disposal of solid waste
         in landfills that has to be reimbursed by the authority depositing the waste and which provides for financial penalties to
         be imposed on that operator for late payment of the levy, without requiring the authority depositing the waste to reimburse
         the amount of the levy to the operator within a specified period and, in the case of late reimbursement, to bear all the costs
         created by its delay, including the amount of the financial penalties imposed on the operator?
      
2.      Is Directive 2000/to be interpreted as meaning that sums owed to the operator of a landfill site by an authority depositing
         waste in the landfill, such as the sums due by way of reimbursement of a tax, come within the scope of that Directive and
         that the Member States must ensure, in accordance with Article thereof, that, in the case of late payment, interest is paid
         on those sums?
      
 Substance
 The first question
Pursuant to Article of Directive 1999/31, Member States are to take measures to ensure that all of the costs involved in
         the setting up and operation of a landfill site are covered by the price to be charged by the operator for the disposal of
         any type of waste in that site.
      
As the Advocate General remarked in point of her Opinion, Article of Directive 1999/does not impose on the Member
         States a specific method of financing the cost of a landfill. Consequently, as European Union law currently stands, there
         is no legislation adopted on the basis of Article EC imposing a specific method upon the Member States for financing that
         cost, so that the cost may, in accordance with the choice of the Member State concerned, equally well be financed by means
         of a tax or of a charge or in any other manner (see, by analogy, Futura Immobiliare and Others, paragraph 48).
      
It follows that Article of Directive 1999/does not preclude a Member State from imposing a levy on the waste deposited
         in a landfill which is initially payable by the operator of the landfill and then passed on to the holder who deposited the
         waste. It also does not preclude the imposition of sanctions penalising a site operator who pays the levy late, since making
         provision for such sanctions, like the designation of the person liable to such a levy, is a matter for the Member States
         alone.
      
However, as may also be seen from recital to that Directive, Article of Directive 1999/requires the Member States
         to take measures to ensure that the price charged for waste disposal in a landfill covers all the costs involved in the setting
         up and operation of the facility.
      
That requirement is an expression of the ‘polluter pays’ principle, which implies, as the Court has already held in regard
         to Directive 75/and Directive 2006/12/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of April on waste (OJ L 114, p. 9), that the cost of disposing of the waste must be borne by the waste holders (Case C‑1/Van de Walle and Others [2004] ECR I‑7613, paragraph 57; Case C‑188/Commune de Mesquer [2008] ECR I‑4501, paragraph 71; and Futura Immobiliare and Others, paragraphs and and the case-law cited). It forms part of the objective of Directive 1999/which, according to Article
         1(1) thereof, is to meet the requirements of Directive 75/442, and in particular Article thereof, which inter alia requires
         the Member States to take appropriate measures to encourage the prevention or reduction of waste production.
      
The consequence, in particular, is that whatever the national rules may be governing landfill sites, they must ensure that
         that all the operating costs of such a site is actually borne by the holders of the waste deposited in the landfill for disposal.
      
Consequently, although a Member State can introduce a levy on waste to be paid by the landfill operator and reimbursed to
         the latter by the authorities depositing waste in the landfill, it can do so only on condition that the fiscal provision in
         question is accompanied by measures to ensure that the levy is actually reimbursed within a short time so as not to impose
         excessive operating costs on the operator on account of late payment by those authorities, thereby undermining the ‘polluter
         pays’ principle. Causing the operator to bear such charges would amount to charging to him the costs arising from the disposal
         of waste which he did not generate but of which he merely disposes in the framework of his activities as a provider of services.
      
In any event, just as a levy such as that at issue in the main proceedings, calculated on the basis of the amount of waste
         deposited in the landfill, is an operating cost within the meaning of Article of Directive 1999/31, which must be included
         in the price to be paid to the operator of the landfill site by the holder of the waste being deposited in the landfill, all
         the costs relating to the recovery of amounts which the waste holder owes to the site operator on that account, and in particular,
         the costs resulting from late payment of those amounts, including any costs incurred in order to avoid a financial penalty,
         must be passed on in that price if the requirements of Article of Directive 1999/are to be satisfied.
      
The same is true of financial penalties imposed on the operator of a landfill site for late payment of such a levy when the
         delay is due to late reimbursement by the waste holder of amounts due in respect of the levy, a matter which it for the national
         court to ascertain.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the first question must be that Article of Directive 1999/must be interpreted
         as meaning that it does not preclude a national provision, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which makes the
         operator of a landfill site subject to a levy to be reimbursed by the local authority depositing the waste and which provides
         for financial penalties to be imposed on that operator for late payment of the levy, on condition that those rules are accompanied
         by measures to ensure that the levy is actually reimbursed within a short time and that all the costs of recovery, and in
         particular, the costs resulting from late payment of amounts which that authority owes to the site operator on that account,
         including costs incurred in order to avoid any financial penalty which might be imposed on the site operator, are passed on
         in the price to be paid by the authority to that operator.  It is for the national court to ascertain whether those conditions
         have been satisfied.
      
 The second question
After providing in Article thereof that its provisions are to apply to all payments made as remuneration for commercial
         transactions, Article 2(1) of Directive 2000/defines ‘commercial transactions’ as ‘transactions between undertakings or
         between undertakings and public authorities which lead to the delivery of goods or the provision of services for remuneration’.
      
Those provisions were transposed into the Italian legal system by Legislative Decree No of October 2002.
      
With regard, in the main proceedings in the present case, to the relationship between the operator of a landfill site and
         the authority depositing waste in the landfill, it is apparent from the information in the order for reference that the operator
         provides a service to the authority, namely, disposal of the waste deposited in the landfill, in return for which the authority
         pays him a remuneration, including, pursuant to Article 3(26) of Law No 549/95, the amount of the special levy paid by him.
      
It thus appears that, contrary to the Italian Government's argument, the relationship between the operator of a landfill site
         and the authority depositing waste in the landfill constitutes a transaction between an undertaking and a public authority
         which leads to a service being provided for remuneration and, consequently, a commercial transaction within the meaning of
         Article 2(1) of Directive 2000/35.
      
Therefore, the payments made by way of remuneration for such a transaction come within the scope of Directive 2000/35.
      
It follows that in a situation such as that in the main proceedings, the Member States must ensure that, in accordance with
         Article of the Directive, interest is payable in the case of late payment to the landfill site operator of the sums due
         in that connection by the local authority depositing waste in the landfill, those sums including in an appropriate case, as
         was stated in paragraph of the present judgment, the amount of the levy paid by the operator which must be reimbursed by
         the local authority having deposited the waste in the landfill.
      
It follows from the foregoing that the answer to the second question must be that Articles 1, 2(1) and of Directive 2000/have to be interpreted as meaning that the sums owed to the operator of a landfill site by a local authority depositing waste
         in the landfill, such as the sums due by way of reimbursement of a tax, come within the scope of that Directive and that the
         Member States must ensure, in accordance with to Article thereof, that, in the case of late payment, the landfill operator
         may charge the local authority interest on those sums for which the local authority is liable.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article of Council Directive 1999/31/EC of April on the landfill of waste, as amended by Regulation No 1882/of the European Parliament and of the Council of September must be interpreted as meaning that it does not preclude
            a national provision, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which makes the operator of a landfill site subject to
            a levy to be reimbursed by the local authority depositing the waste and which provides for financial penalties to be imposed
            on that operator for late payment of the levy, on condition that those rules are accompanied by measures to ensure that the
            levy is actually reimbursed within a short time and that all the costs of recovery, and in particular, the costs resulting
            from late payment of amounts which that authority owes to the site operator on that account, including costs incurred in order
            to avoid any financial penalty which might be imposed on the site operator, are passed on in the price to be paid by the authority
            to that operator.  It is for the national court to ascertain whether those conditions have been satisfied
2.      Articles 1, 2(1) and of Directive 2000/35/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of June on combating
            late payment in commercial transactions must be interpreted as meaning the sums owed to the operator of a landfill site by
            a local authority depositing waste in the landfill, such as the sums due by way of reimbursement of a levy, come within the
            scope of that Directive and that the Member States must ensure, in accordance with Article thereof, that, in the case of
            late payment, the landfill operator may charge the local authority interest on those sums for which the local authority is
            liable.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 