
Case C-372/European Commission
v
Federal Republic of Germany
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Duty‑free imports of military equipment)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Community law – Scope – No general exception excluding measures taken for reasons of public security
(Arts EC, EC, EC, EC, EC, EC and EC)
2.        Own resources of the European Communities – Establishment and making available by the Member States – Duty‑free imports of
            military equipment by a Member State
(Council Regulations No 1552/89, as amended by Regulation No 1355/96, Arts and to 11, and No 1150/2000, Arts and to
            11)
1.        Although it is for Member States to take the appropriate measures to ensure their internal and external security, it does
         not follow that such measures are entirely outside the scope of Community law. The only articles in which the Treaty expressly
         provides for derogations applicable in situations which may affect public safety are Articles EC, EC, EC, EC,
         EC, EC and EC, which deal with exceptional and clearly defined cases. It cannot be inferred that the Treaty contains
         an inherent general exception excluding all measures taken for reasons of public security from the scope of Community law.
         The recognition of the existence of such an exception, regardless of the specific requirements laid down by the Treaty, would
         be liable to impair the binding nature of Community law and its uniform application.
      
Furthermore, the derogations provided for in Articles EC and EC must, in the same way as derogations from fundamental
         freedoms, be interpreted strictly. As regards, more particularly, Article EC, although it refers to measures which a Member
         State may consider necessary for the protection of the essential interests of its security or of information the disclosure
         of which it considers contrary to those interests, that article cannot however be read in such a way as to confer on Member
         States a power to depart from the provisions of the Treaty based on no more than reliance on those interests. Consequently
         it is for the Member State which seeks to take advantage of Article EC to prove that it is necessary to have recourse
         to that derogation in order to protect its essential security interests.
      
(see paras 68-70, 72)
2.        A Member State which has refused to calculate, declare and make available to the Commission of the European Communities the
         own resources relating to imports of military material during the period from January to December and has refused
         to pay default interest payable due to the failure to make those own resources available to the Commission has failed to fulfil
         its obligations under Article and Articles to of Regulation No 1552/implementing Decision 88/on the system of
         the Communities’ own resources, as amended by Regulation No 1355/96, and the same articles of Regulation No 1150/implementing
         Decision 94/on the system of the Communities’ own resources.
      
A Member State cannot be allowed to plead the increased cost of military material because of the application of customs duties
         on imports of such material from third countries in order to avoid, at the expense of other Member States who collect and
         pay the customs duties on such imports, the obligations which the principle of joint financing of the Community budget imposes
         on it.
      
(see paras 73, 80, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
December (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Duty‑free imports of military equipment)
In Case C‑372/05,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on October 2005,
European Commission, represented by C. Cattabriga, G. Wilms, D. Triantafyllou and H. Støvlbæk, acting as Agents, with an address for service in
         Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Federal Republic of Germany, represented by M. Lumma, acting as Agent and C. von Donat, Rechtsanwalt,
      
defendant,
supported by:
Kingdom of Denmark, represented by J. Bering Liisberg, acting as Agent,
      
Hellenic Republic, represented by E.-M. Mamouna, A. Samoni-Rantou and K. Boskovits, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
Republic of Finland, represented by E. Bygglin and A. Guimaraes-Purokoski, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
interveners,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, A. Tizzano, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, K. Lenaerts, E. Levits and C. Toader, Presidents of Chambers,
         C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Borg Barthet (Rapporteur), M. Ilešič, J. Malenovský and U. Lõhmus, Judges,
      
Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on November 2008,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on February 2009,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities asks the Court to declare that, by refusing to calculate and
         to transfer the amount of own resources which were not collected in the period from January until December 2002,
         because imports of military material were, contrary to the provisions of the Community customs legislation, exempted from
         duty, and by refusing to pay default interest arising from the failure to make those own resources available to the Commission,
         the Federal Republic of Germany has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article and Articles to of Council Regulation
         (EEC, Euratom) No 1552/of May implementing Decision 88/376/EEC, Euratom on the system of the Communities’ own resources
         (OJ L 155, p. 1), as amended by Council Regulation (Euratom, EC) No 1355/of July (OJ L 175, p. 3; ‘Regulation
         No 1552/89’), and the same articles of Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1150/of May implementing Decision
         94/728/EC, Euratom on the system of the Communities’ own resources (OJ L 130, p. 1). 
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation 
Article 2(1) of Council Decision 88/376/EEC, Euratom, of June on the system of the Communities’ own resources (OJ
         L 185, p. 24) and of Council Decision 94/728/EC, Euratom, of October on the system of the European Communities’
         own resources (OJ L 293, p. 9), provides:
      
‘Revenue from the following shall constitute own resources entered in the budget of the Communities:
… 
(b)      Common Customs Tariff duties and other duties established or to be established by the institutions of the Communities in respect
         of trade with non-member countries and customs duties on products coming under the Treaty establishing the European Coal and
         Steel Community;
      
...’
Article of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/of October establishing the Community Customs Code (OJ L 302,
         p. 1, the ‘Community Customs Code’), provides:
      
‘1.      Duties legally owed where a customs debt is incurred shall be based on the Customs Tariff of the European Communities.
…
3.      The Customs Tariff of the European Communities shall comprise:
(a)      the combined nomenclature of products;
...
(c)      the rates and other items of charge normally applicable to products covered by the combined nomenclature as regards:
–        customs duties
…
(d)      the preferential tariff measures contained in agreements which the Community has concluded with certain countries or groups
         of countries and which provide for the granting of preferential tariff treatment;
      
(e)      preferential tariff measures adopted unilaterally by the Community in respect of certain countries, groups of countries or
         territories;
      
(f)      autonomous suspensive measures providing for a reduction in or relief from import duties chargeable on certain products;
(g)      other tariff measures provided for by other Community legislation.
...’
Article 217(1) of the Community Customs Code states:
      
‘Each and every amount of import duty or export duty resulting from a customs debt, hereinafter called “amount of duty”, shall
         be calculated by the customs authorities as soon as they have the necessary particulars, and entered by those authorities
         in the accounting records or on any other equivalent medium (entry in the accounts).
      
...’ 
In the context of making available to the Commission the Communities’ own resources, the Council of the European Union adopted
         Regulation No 1552/89, applicable during the period at issue in this case until May 2000. That regulation was replaced
         as from May by Regulation No 1150/which consolidates Regulation No 1552/but does not alter its content. 
      
Article of Regulation No 1552/provides:
      
‘1.      For the purpose of applying this Regulation, the Community’s entitlement to the own resources referred to in Article 2(1)(a)
         and (b) of Decision 88/376/EEC, Euratom shall be established as soon as the conditions provided for by the customs regulations
         have been met concerning the entry of the entitlement in the accounts and the notification of the debtor.
      
1a.      The date of the establishment referred to in paragraph shall be the date of entry in the accounting ledgers provided for
         by the customs regulations.
      
…’
Article 9(1) of that regulation provides:
      
‘In accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 10, each Member State shall credit own resources to the account opened
         in the name of the Commission with its Treasury or the body it has appointed. 
      
This account shall be kept free of charge.’
Under Article 10(1) of that regulation:
      
‘After deduction of 10% by way of collection costs in accordance with Article 2(3) of Decision 88/376/EC, Euratom, entry of
         the own resources referred to in Article 2(1)(a) and (b) of that Decision shall be made at the latest on the first working
         day following the 19th day of the second month following the month during which the entitlement was established in accordance
         with Article of this Regulation.
      
...’
Article of Regulation No 1552/provides:
      
‘Any delay in making the entry in the account referred to in Article 9(1) shall give rise to the payment of interest by the
         Member State concerned at the interest rate applicable on the Member State’s money market on the due date for short-term public
         financing operations, increased by two percentage points. This rate shall be increased by 0.of a percentage point for each
         month of delay. The increased rate shall be applied to the entire period of delay.’ 
      
Under Article of Regulation No 1150/2000:
      
‘Regulation (EEC, Euratom) No 1552/shall be repealed.
References to the said Regulation shall be construed as references to this Regulation and should be read in accordance with
         the correlation table set out in Part A of the Annex.’
      
Thus, apart from the fact that Regulations Nos 1552/and 1150/contain references to Decision 88/and Decision 94/respectively, Article and Articles to of those two regulations are, in essence, identical.
      
The rate of 10% specified in Article 10(1) of Regulation No 1150/was raised to 25% by Council Decision 2000/597/EC, Euratom,
         of September on the system of the European Communities’ own resources (OJ L 253, p. 42). 
      
Recital (1) in the preamble of that decision states:
      
‘The European Council meeting in Berlin on and March concluded, inter alia, that the system of the Communities’
         own resources should be equitable, transparent, cost-effective, simple and based on criteria which best express each Member
         State’s ability to contribute.’ 
      
Council Regulation No 150/of January suspending import duties on certain weapons and military equipment (OJ L 25, p. 1), adopted on the basis of Article EC, states in recital (5) of the preamble:
      
‘In order to take account of the protection of the military confidentiality of the Member States it is necessary to lay down
         specific administrative procedures for the granting of the benefit of the suspension of duties. A declaration by the competent
         authority of the Member State for whose forces the weapons or military equipment are destined, which could also be used as
         a customs declaration as required by the Customs Code, would constitute an appropriate guarantee that these conditions are
         fulfilled. The declaration should be given in the form of a certificate. It is appropriate to specify the form which such
         certificates must take and to allow also the use of means of data processing techniques for the declaration.’
      
Article of that regulation provides:
      
‘This Regulation lays down the conditions for the autonomous suspension of import duties on certain weapons and military equipment
         imported by or on behalf of the authorities in charge of the military defence of the Member States from third countries.’
         
      
Article 3(2) of that regulation states: 
      
‘Notwithstanding paragraph 1, for reasons of military confidentiality, the certificate and the imported products may be submitted
         to other authorities designated by the importing Member State for this purpose. In such cases the competent authority issuing
         the certificate shall send before January and July of each year a summary report to the customs authorities of its Member
         State on such imports. The report shall cover a period of six months immediately preceding the month on which the report has
         to be submitted. It shall contain the number and issuing date of the certificates, the date of imports and the total value
         and gross weight of the products imported with the certificates.’ 
      
Article of Regulation No 150/states that that regulation is to apply as from January 2003.
      
 Pre-litigation procedure
By letter of December the Commission advised the Federal Republic of Germany that the fact that imports of military
         equipment had, since 1998, been exempted from customs duties had caused the Community to suffer a loss of own resources. The
         Commission called upon the Member State to calculate the amounts which had not been collected in respect of the budgetary
         years subsequent to the tax year and to make those amounts available to it by March 2002. The Commission also advised
         the German authorities that default interest was payable from the latter date, pursuant to Article of Regulation No 1150/2000.
         
      
In its replies of March and May the Federal Republic of Germany expressed the view that Article 296(1)(b) EC permits
         it to derogate from the application of the Common Customs Code, where the imports are of equipment exclusively intended for
         military purposes, and where the objective is the protection of the essential interests of its security. 
      
By letter of March the Commission renewed its original request relating to imports prior to January 2003, the period
         subsequent to that date being covered by Regulation No 150/2003. 
      
In its reply of May the Federal Republic of Germany maintained its position on making available the amounts of own
         resources in question. 
      
By letter of October the Commission gave formal notice to the Federal Republic of Germany. 
      
In its reply of January the Federal Republic of Germany maintained its position.
      
On October 2004, after consideration of the Federal Republic of Germany’s reply, the Commission issued a reasoned opinion
         calling upon that Member State to take the measures necessary to achieve compliance within a period of two months from the
         date of receipt. The Member State replied on December that it was maintaining its position.
      
Since the Federal Republic of Germany moreover made a without prejudice payment of EUR but did not break down that
         sum according to imports and different periods and the Commission did not have sufficient information to do so, on December
         the Commission by letter called upon that Member State itself to provide that breakdown in order that default interest
         could be calculated. In its reply of February the Federal Republic of Germany refused to send that information, and
         commented that such information was confidential. 
      
Taking into account what the Federal Republic of Germany had said, the Commission took the view that the Federal Republic
         of Germany had not complied with the reasoned opinion and brought this action. 
      
By orders dated February and May 2006, the President of the Court allowed the applications for leave to intervene
         of the Kingdom of Denmark, the Hellenic Republic and the Republic of Finland in support of the forms of order sought by the
         Federal Republic of Germany.
      
 The action
 Admissibility
Firstly, the Federal Republic of Germany raises an objection of inadmissibility on the ground that the action is procedurally
         flawed, because the wrong legal remedy has been chosen. The Member State states that, given that it has relied on Article
         EC in order to justify not paying the customs duties relating to the relevant imports of military material, the Commission
         was not entitled to bring this action on the basis of Article EC, but was obliged to use the special procedure provided
         for in the second paragraph of Article EC.
      
In that regard, it must be observed that the Commission’s objective in this action is to obtain a declaration of a failure
         to fulfil obligations under Article and Articles to of Regulations Nos 1552/and 1150/2000. Article EC is applicable
         only if the Commission alleges improper use of the powers provided for in Articles EC and EC.
      
Consequently, the first objection of inadmissibility must be rejected. 
      
Secondly, the Federal Republic of Germany claims that this action is inadmissible because the Commission is not capable, due
         to the very nature of this action, of proving an infringement of the EC Treaty. Given that the Member State was not obliged
         to provide the information requested by the Commission, the Commission does not have sufficient evidence relating to the imports
         at issue to enable it to prove any failure to fulfil Treaty obligations. 
      
Thirdly, the Federal Republic of Germany claims that it was entitled not to send the information requested by the Commission
         and that because the action is based, inter alia, on that failure the action is therefore also inadmissible in that respect.
      
With regard to the second and third objections of inadmissibility raised by the Federal Republic of Germany, it is clear that
         they relate, on the one hand, to the burden of proof incumbent on the Commission and, on the other hand, to the applicability
         and scope of Article EC. They are related therefore more to the substance of the Commission’s action than to its form
         or validity.
      
Consequently, the second and third objections of inadmissibility must be rejected.
      
In those circumstances, the Commission’s action must be declared admissible.
      
 Substance
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission claims that the Federal Republic of Germany is wrong to rely on Article EC to justify the refusal to pay
         customs duties, since the collection of such duties does not threaten the essential security interests of that Member State.
      
The Commission considers to be misguided the Member State’s argument to the effect that information relating to imports of
         military equipment, and therefore to the security of the Federal Republic of Germany, could not be sent to the Commission,
         and that, consequently, the customs duties at issue did not have to be paid by the Federal Republic of Germany to the Commission.
         
      
The Commission considers that measures which establish derogations or exceptions, such as in particular Article EC, must
         be interpreted strictly. Accordingly, the Member State concerned which claims that Article EC applies and which proposes
         to derogate from Article of the Community Customs Code, where the general principle of the levying of duties as fixed under
         Article EC is stated, should demonstrate that it can satisfy all the conditions laid down in Article EC. 
      
The Commission also considers that the mere fact that products appear on the list established by Council Decision 255/of
         April 1958, a list which defines the products to which Article 296(1)(b) EC may be applied, does not itself mean that that
         provision is applicable, since a prerequisite of its application is that all the conditions specified therein are satisfied.
      
The Commission claims, consequently, that it is for the Federal Republic of Germany to provide specific and detailed evidence
         that the collection of customs duties on the imports at issue in this case threatens essential interests of the security of
         the Federal Republic of Germany. 
      
In that regard, the Federal Republic of Germany’s general statements that its defence capacity is an essential part of its
         security policy and that the international cooperation which is fundamental to its defence policy would be significantly hindered
         by the obligation to pay customs duties on the material in question do not constitute such evidence. The same is true of the
         argument that confidentiality clauses in international treaties and military confidentiality preclude the application of the
         Community customs legislation. Lastly, the fact that other Member States collect and pay customs duties on imports of military
         material confirms that this is perfectly possible on that type of material.
      
The Commission considers that the way in which the Community customs system operates safeguards the confidentiality of processed
         information. Furthermore, since that system is implemented by national officials, the Federal Republic of Germany is in a
         position to safeguard its essential security interests. 
      
The Commission considers that, as regards the Federal Republic of Germany’s argument that an increase in the costs of imports
         of armaments is likely to damage its defence capacity, no specific evidence of such damage has been provided by the Federal
         Republic of Germany. On the contrary, the single payment, made in 2004, of customs duties payable for five years does not
         appear to have diminished the outlays of the Federal Republic of Germany on defence. 
      
The Commission emphasises that it is not acceptable for a Member State to exempt imports of military equipment from customs
         duties in order to reduce the costs of war material, because that is evidence of a failure by that Member State to fulfil
         its obligations in respect of the joint co‑financing of the Community budget. 
      
The Commission states, in that regard, that the failure of the Federal Republic of Germany to collect the customs duties in
         question creates a disparity among the Member States in relation to their respective contributions to the Community budget.
         The effect of that failure to collect is a reduction of Community traditional own resources which can be offset only by an
         increase in the GNP resource, which is distributed between the Member States. 
      
The Commission states that the Federal Republic of Germany’s argument relating to the fear of disclosure of information supplied
         in the customs declaration and to the fear that monitoring procedures might lead the Community institutions to jeopardise
         military confidentiality has no bearing on the issue. 
      
Regulation No 150/provides that Member States are to inform the Commission of the quantity of military equipment ordered.
         It is, consequently, astonishing that, in relation to the Communities’ own resources, the Federal Republic of Germany relies
         on overriding security interests which preclude the communication of the information needed for the collection of those resources.
         
      
Furthermore, such a position can scarcely be reconciled, according to the Commission, with the fact that any individual can
         obtain access, on the internet, to information relating, for example, to the quantities purchased in that area. That freely
         accessible information is significantly more detailed than that needed for classification in the Common Customs Code and for
         payment of own resources. 
      
The Commission rejects as unfounded the Federal Republic of Germany’s argument that the negotiations which led to the adoption
         of Regulation No 150/and the suspension, in 1984, of the infringement proceedings brought against the Federal Republic
         of Germany gave rise to a legitimate expectation, namely that that Member State could reasonably expect that, during the years
         when that regulation was under preparation, it was permitted to import certain military equipment free of duties. 
      
The Commission adds that Regulation No 150/is applicable from January and that, during discussions on its adoption,
         the Commission declared that it was obliged to collect the customs duties at issue in respect of preceding years, so that
         no protection of legitimate expectations can be inferred from the adoption of that regulation. Moreover, that regulation is
         based on Article EC, and not on Article EC.
      
Similarly no protection of any legitimate expectation can be inferred from the suspension of particular infringement proceedings
         in 1984, since the Commission has, in the context of Article EC, a wide discretion which allows it to decide, inter alia,
         whether it is appropriate to initiate or continue infringement proceedings. 
      
The response of the Federal Republic of Germany is that, in the present case, the conditions for the application of Article
         296(1)(b) EC are satisfied. It considers that it is clear from the very wording of that provision that the Treaty intended
         to confer on Member States a significant discretion in relation to measures which they may take for the protection of the
         essential interests of their security and which are connected with the products to which the provisions of Article 296(1)(b)
         EC apply. Accordingly, that article allows Member States to derogate from Article EC and from the Community Customs Code
         in the case of imports of equipment exclusively intended for military purposes where the objective of those imports is the
         protection of the essential interests of the security of the Member State or Member States concerned. 
      
The Federal Republic of Germany adds that it is not obliged to levy customs duties on imports of all military material and,
         consequently, there cannot be any infringement of Article and Articles to of Regulations Nos 1552/or 1150/2000.
         There is no obligation of that kind, because, on the one hand, Community law does not provide for any unrestricted obligation
         to levy customs duties on military equipment and, on the other, the essential security interests of the Federal Republic of
         Germany preclude the levying of customs duties on imports of such equipment.
      
Moreover, the Federal Republic of Germany considers that the Commission has lost the right to seek a declaration of failure
         to fulfil obligations in relation to the exemption of imports of military equipment from customs duties because the Commission
         appeared, in 1984, to have brought to an end the infringement proceedings initiated for that purpose, but thereafter, although
         the situation was unaltered and taking into account the preparatory work for Regulation No 150/2003, resumed proceedings subsequently
         in order to penalise conduct which until then had been accepted or tolerated. Community Law does not recognise any mechanism
         for the ‘provisional’ suspension of infringement proceedings. The Commission was obliged, according to the Federal Republic
         of Germany, either to continue or terminate the infringement proceedings against it, and not interrupt the proceedings for
         years.
      
The Federal Republic of Germany states that, before the entry into force of Regulation No 150/2003, no specific procedural
         provision provided for the levying of customs duties on imports of armaments and the monitoring of that levy, which was proof
         that there was no obligation under Community law to levy the customs duties at issue. 
      
According to the Federal Republic of Germany, whether or not customs duties are levied on imports of armaments has effects
         on the trade in arms, munitions and war material. Whilst levying those customs duties restricts that trade, consequently reduces
         the operational capacity of the armed forces and impinges on that Member State’s freedom of action in the area of acquisition
         of defence material, waiver of those duties makes it possible to extend trade and strengthen cooperation in relation to armaments
         for the purposes of Article EU. 
      
The Federal Republic of Germany also contends that the test of what is ‘necessary’ within Article EC as interpreted by
         the Commission is unreasonably high. It does not involve having to demonstrate that grave damage to essential security interests
         would occur if the protective measure were not taken. It is enough if that measure improves the security situation and is
         merely necessary in the interests of national defence.
      
Similarly, the obligation of confidentiality prevents the Federal Republic of Germany communicating information to the Commission
         and a refusal to respect that obligation is likely to undermine the interests of that Member State in relation to the security
         of information. Moreover, the obligation of good faith provided for in Article EC does not involve the introduction of
         measures which are disproportionate, such as the establishment of a specific customs procedure. 
      
The open processing of information contained in a customs declaration may cause serious damage to the essential security interests
         of Member States. The confidentiality measures provided for by the Community Customs Code are not adequate to satisfy the
         requirements of security and confidentiality which a Member State is entitled to demand when the information concerned affects
         its security. 
      
The Federal Republic of Germany maintains that the fact that a Member State has exempted imports of military materials from
         customs duties on the basis of Article EC does not necessarily infringe the principle of Community solidarity. It would
         be inconsistent with that principle for Member States which bear the costs of higher defence spending to be called upon to
         make a greater contribution to the financing of the Community budget. 
      
The Federal Republic of Germany is of the opinion that the adoption of Regulation No 150/upholds the need to respect
         the security interests of the Member States and their right to rely on confidentiality where that is necessary. 
      
The Federal Republic of Germany observes that, on the basis of Regulation No 150/2003, the levying of customs duties on imports
         of certain armaments and military equipment from third countries was also excluded after January 2003, the date on which
         that Regulation was declared to be applicable. Accordingly, as from that date, the interests of the Federal Republic of Germany
         in relation to imports of armaments have been protected by the provisions of that regulation. The waiver of customs duties
         on those imports was just as necessary before as after that date, in order to ensure the protection of the essential security
         interests of Member States. Moreover, the fact that, as early as 1988, the Commission submitted a proposal for a Council Regulation
         (EEC) temporarily suspending import duties on certain weapons and military equipment (OJ C 265, p. 9) ultimately proves
         that the Commission was aware of the fact that the waiver of customs duties on those imports was necessary in order to protect
         those interests. 
      
That Member State concludes that, from the date of that proposal, and even though the outcome of that proposal in the form
         of Regulation No 150/was seen only in 2003, Member States could justifiably take the view that it was not necessary to
         collect customs duties on imports of ‘products exclusively for military use’ appearing in the list established by Decision
         255/58.
      
 Findings of the Court
The Community Customs Code provides for the charging of customs duties on imports of products for military use, such as those
         at issue, from third countries. There is no provision of the Community customs legislation which, in respect of the period
         of imports at issue, namely from January to December 2002, provided for any specific exemption from customs duties
         on imports of products of that type. Consequently, in respect of that period, nor was there any express exemption from the
         obligation to make payment to the competent authorities of the duties which were payable, accompanied, as appropriate, by
         payment of default interest.
      
It can moreover be inferred from the adoption of Regulation No 150/which provided for the suspension of customs duties
         on certain weapons and military equipment from January that the Community legislature started from the assumption that
         an obligation to pay those customs duties existed prior to that date.
      
Furthermore, the Federal Republic of Germany has not at any time denied the existence of the imports at issue during the period
         under consideration. During the pre-litigation procedure, the Federal Republic of Germany moreover made a payment, under the
         heading of own resources, of EUR related to the imports at issue, but did not break down that sum according to
         imports and different periods. 
      
The Federal Republic of Germany has confined itself to challenging the Community’s entitlement to the own resources at issue
         while arguing that, pursuant to Article EC, the obligation to pay customs duties on armaments imported from third countries
         would cause serious damage to its essential security interests. 
      
According to the Court’s settled case-law, although it is for Member States to take the appropriate measures to ensure their
         internal and external security, it does not follow that such measures are entirely outside the scope of Community law (see
         Case C‑273/Sirdar [1999] ECR I‑7403, paragraph 15, and Case C‑285/Kreil [2000] ECR I‑69, paragraph 15). As the Court has already held, the only articles in which the Treaty expressly provides for
         derogations applicable in situations which may affect public safety are Articles EC, EC, EC, EC, EC, EC
         and EC, which deal with exceptional and clearly defined cases. It cannot be inferred that the Treaty contains an inherent
         general exception excluding all measures taken for reasons of public security from the scope of Community law. The recognition
         of the existence of such an exception, regardless of the specific requirements laid down by the Treaty, would be liable to
         impair the binding nature of Community law and its uniform application (see Case C‑186/Dory [2003] ECR I‑2479, paragraph 31, and case-law there cited).
      
Furthermore, the derogations provided for in Articles EC and EC must, in accordance with settled case-law in respect
         of derogations from fundamental freedoms (see, inter alia, Case C‑503/Commission v Spain [2006] ECR I‑1097, paragraph 45; Case C‑490/Commission v Germany [2007] ECR I‑6095, paragraph 86; and Case C‑141/Commission v Germany [2008] ECR I‑6935, paragraph 50) be interpreted strictly. 
      
As regards, more particularly, Article EC, it must be observed that, although that Article refers to measures which a
         Member State may consider necessary for the protection of the essential interests of its security or of information the disclosure
         of which it considers contrary to those interests, that Article cannot however be read in such a way as to confer on Member
         States a power to depart from the provisions of the Treaty based on no more than reliance on those interests. 
      
Furthermore, in the area of value added tax, the Court declared in Case C‑414/Commission v Spain [1999] ECR I‑that there had been a failure to fulfil obligations on the ground that the Kingdom of Spain had not shown
         that the exemption from that tax on imports and acquisitions of arms, ammunition and equipment exclusively for military use,
         an exemption provided for by Spanish legislation, was justified, under Article 296(1)(b) EC, by the need to protect the essential
         interests of the security of that Member State.
      
Consequently it is for the Member State which seeks to take advantage of Article EC to prove that it is necessary to have
         recourse to that derogation in order to protect its essential security interests.
      
In the light of those considerations, a Member State cannot be allowed to plead the increased cost of military material because
         of the application of customs duties on imports of such material from third countries in order to avoid, at the expense of
         other Member States who collect and pay the customs duties on such imports, the obligations which the principle of joint financing
         of the Community budget imposes on it. 
      
As regards the argument that the Community customs procedures are not capable of safeguarding the security of the Federal
         Republic of Germany, in the light of the confidentiality requirements contained in agreements entered into with exporting
         States, it must be stated, as correctly observed by the Commission, that the application of the Community customs system requires
         the active involvement of Community and national officials who are bound when necessary by an obligation of confidentiality,
         when dealing with sensitive data, which is capable of protecting the essential security interests of Member States. 
      
Furthermore, the level of specificity to be attained in the declarations which Member States must periodically complete and
         send to the Commission is not such as to lead to damage to the interests of those States in respect of either security or
         confidentiality.
      
In those circumstances, and in accordance with Article EC which obliges Member States to facilitate the achievement of
         the Commission’s task of ensuring compliance with the Treaty, Member States are obliged to make available to the Commission
         the documents necessary to permit inspection to ensure that the transfer of the Community’s own resources is correct. However,
         as the Advocate General stated in point of his Opinion, such an obligation does not mean that Member States may not, on
         a case-by-case basis and by way of exception, on the basis of Article EC, either restrict the information sent to certain
         parts of a document or withhold it completely.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the Federal Republic of Germany has not shown that the conditions necessary for the application
         of Article EC are satisfied. 
      
Lastly, as regards the Federal Republic of Germany’s arguments intended to show that, because of the Commission’s prolonged
         lack of action and the adoption of Regulation No 150/2003, the Federal Republic of Germany could legitimately consider that
         the Commission would not bring this action on the ground that the Commission had tacitly accepted the existence of an appropriate
         derogation, it must be observed that the Commission did not at any stage of the proceedings abandon its position in principle.
      
In the declaration which the Commission made during the negotiations relating to Regulation No 150/2003, it expressed its
         firm intention to maintain its claim to the collection of customs duties which should have been paid for periods prior to
         the entry into force of that regulation and reserved the right to take the appropriate action in that regard.
      
It follows from the foregoing that, by refusing to calculate, declare and to make available to the Commission the own resources
         relating to imports of military material during the period from January to December and by refusing to pay
         default interest payable due to the failure to make those own resources available to the Commission, the Federal Republic
         of Germany has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article and Articles to of Regulation No 1552/and the same
         articles of Regulation No 1150/2000.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs to be awarded against the Federal
         Republic of Germany and the latter has been unsuccessful, the Federal Republic of Germany must be ordered to pay the costs.
         
      
Under Article 69(4) of the Rules of Procedure, the Kingdom of Denmark, the Hellenic Republic and the Republic of Finland,
         which have intervened in the proceedings, are to bear their own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by refusing to calculate, declare and make available to the European Commission the own resources relating
            to imports of military material during the period from January to December and by refusing to pay default interest
            payable due to the failure to make those own resources available to the European Commission, the Federal Republic of Germany
            has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article and Articles to of Council Regulation (EEC, Euratom) No 1552/of May implementing Decision 88/376/EEC, Euratom on the system of the Communities’ own resources, as amended by Council
            Regulation (Euratom, EC) No 1355/of July 1996, and the same articles of Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1150/of May implementing Decision 94/728/EC, Euratom on the system of the Communities’ own resources;
2.      Orders the Federal Republic of Germany to pay the costs;
3.      Orders the Kingdom of Denmark, the Hellenic Republic and the Republic of Finland to bear their own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 