
Avis juridique important
|
61993JJudgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber) of June 1994.  -  Punto Casa SpA v Sindaco del Comune di Capena et Comune di Capena and Promozioni Polivalenti Venete Soc. coop. arl (PPV) v Sindaco del Comune di Torri di Quartesolo and Comune di Torri di Quartesolo.  -  References for a preliminary ruling: Pretura circondariale di Roma - Italy.  -  Interpretation of Articles and of the Treaty - Prohibition on certain kinds of Sunday trading.  -  Joined cases C-69/and C-258/93.  
European Court reports Page I-Summary
Parties
Grounds
Decision on costs
Operative part
Keywords
++++Free movement of goods ° Quantitative restrictions ° Measures having equivalent effect ° Concept ° Obstacles resulting from national provisions regulating selling arrangements in a non-discriminatory manner ° Article of the Treaty not applicable ° Rules on business opening hours  (EEC Treaty, Art. 30)  
Summary
The application to products from other Member States of national provisions restricting or prohibiting certain selling arrangements is not such as to hinder directly or indirectly, actually or potentially, trade between Member States, provided that those provisions apply to all affected traders operating within the national territory and provided that they affect in the same manner, in law and in fact, the marketing of domestic products and of those from other Member States. Where those conditions are fulfilled, the application of such rules to the sale of products from another Member State meeting the requirements laid down by that State is not by nature such as to prevent their access to the market or to impede access any more than it impedes the access of domestic products. Such rules therefore fall outside the scope of Article of the Treaty.  It follows that Article of the Treaty is to be interpreted as not applying to national rules on the closure of shops which apply to all traders operating within the national territory and which affect in the same manner, in law and in fact, the marketing of domestic products and of products from other Member States.  
Parties
In Joined Cases C-69/and C-258/93,  REFERENCES to the Court under Article of the EEC Treaty by the Pretura Circondariale di Roma, Sezione Distaccata di Castelnuovo di Porto (Italy) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings pending before that court between  Punto Casa SpA  and  Sindaco del Comune di Capena,  Comune di Capena,  and between  Promozioni Polivalenti Venete Soc. coop. arl (PPV)  and  Sindaco del Comune di Torri di Quartesolo,  Comune di Torri di Quartesolo,  on the interpretation of Articles and of the EEC Treaty,  THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),  composed of: G.F. Mancini, President of the Chamber, M. Diez de Velasco (Rapporteur), C.N. Kakouris, F.A. Schockweiler and P.J.G. Kapteyn, Judges,  Advocate General: W. Van Gerven,  Registrar: L. Hewlett, Administrator,  after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:  - the plaintiffs in the main proceedings, by Franco Di Maria, Gianfranco Maestosi and Federico Tedeschini, of the Rome Bar,  - the Greek Government, by Vassileios Kontolaimos, a member of the State Legal Service, and Christina Sitara, a representative of the State Legal Service in judicial proceedings, acting as Agents,  - the United Kingdom, by S.L. Hudson of the Treasury Solicitor' s Department, acting as Agent, and N. Paines, Barrister,  - the Commission of the European Communities, by A. Aresu, of the Legal Service, acting as Agent,  having regard to the Report for the Hearing,  after hearing the oral observations of the plaintiffs in the main proceedings, the Greek Government, the United Kingdom and the Commission, at the hearing on February 1994,  after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 1994,  gives the following  Judgment  
Grounds
By orders of December and March 1993, received at the Court on March and April respectively, the Pretura Circondariale di Roma (Rome District Magistrates Court), Sezione Distaccata di Castelnuovo di Porto (Castelnuovo di Porto Division), referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article of the EEC Treaty two questions on the interpretation of Articles and of the Treaty, in order to enable it to assess, in the light of those provisions, the Italian legislation on the closure of retail outlets on Sundays.  Those questions were raised in connection with action taken by the authorities against the operators of two supermarkets for infringing that legislation.  Italian Law No of July regulates business opening hours and sale by retail. Article 1(2)(a) of that Law provides for total closure of shops on Sundays and public holidays, other than in the exceptional cases provided for by that Law.  Article of the Law provides for administrative penalties to be imposed in the event of infringement. Specific provisions concerning opening times are laid down by the regional authorities. Supervision to ensure compliance with the rules in force is entrusted to the mayors of the municipalities concerned, who may impose penalties.  One of the plaintiffs in the main proceedings operates a supermarket located within the Municipality of Capena, the other operates a shopping centre situated within the Municipality of Torri di Quartesolo. Since both the supermarket and the shopping centre were frequently open on Sundays and public holidays, the mayors of the two municipalities in question imposed administrative penalties on the operators concerned.  The plaintiffs in the main proceedings thereupon appealed to the competent court, claiming that a substantial part of the turnover achieved related to products from other Member States of the Community. In their view, the national provisions at issue were therefore incompatible with Article of the Treaty.  In those circumstances the Pretura Circondariale di Roma, Sezione Distaccata di Castelnuovo di Porto, stayed the proceedings and referred to the Court, in Case  C-69/93, the following questions for a preliminary ruling:  "(1) Does a provision of national law which (save for certain products) requires retail shops to close on Sundays, but does not prohibit Sunday working, and imposes the penalty of forced closure on shops in breach of that requirement, thus significantly reducing the sales of such shops, including sales of goods produced in other Member States of the Community, with a consequent reduction in the volume of imports from such States, constitute:  (a) a measure having an effect equivalent on a restriction on imports within the meaning of Article of the Treaty of Rome and subsequent rules of Community law adopted in pursuance of the principles laid down therein; or  (b) a means of arbitrary discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between Member States; or  (c) or a measure which is disproportionate and inappropriate to the aim pursued by the provision of national law;  given that:  - large stores on average sell a greater quantity of products imported from other Member States than that sold by small and medium-sized businesses;  - the turnover achieved by large stores on Sundays cannot be compensated for by substitute purchases by customers on other days of the week, such purchases being made within a commercial network which in general obtain its supplies from domestic producers?  (2) If the answer to Question is in the affirmative, does the national measure in question fall within the derogations from Article provided for in Article of the Treaty of Rome, or other derogations provided for by Community law?"  The questions submitted to the Court in Case C-258/are in substance identical to those set out above.  Question The first question seeks to ascertain whether national legislation of the kind at issue in the main proceedings falls within the scope of Article of the Treaty.  According to Article of the Treaty, quantitative restrictions on imports and all measures having equivalent effect are prohibited between Member States.  The Court has consistently held that any measure capable of hindering, directly or indirectly, actually or potentially, intra-Community trade constitutes a measure having an effect equivalent to a quantitative restriction (judgment in Case 8/Procureur du Roi v Dassonville [1974] ECR 837, paragraph 5).  The Court has also held that the application to products from other Member States of national provisions restricting or prohibiting certain selling arrangements is not such as to hinder directly or indirectly, actually or potentially, trade between Member States, within the meaning of the Dassonville judgment, cited above, provided that those provisions apply to all relevant traders operating within the national territory and provided that they affect in the same manner, in law and in fact, the marketing of domestic products and of those from other Member States. Where those conditions are fulfilled, the application of such rules to the sale of products from another Member State meeting the requirements laid down by that State is not by nature such as to prevent their access to the market or to impede access any more than it impedes the access of domestic products. Such rules therefore fall outside the scope of Article of the Treaty (see the judgment in Joined Cases C-and C-268/Keck and Mithouard [1993] ECR I-6097, paragraphs and 17).  In the case of legislation of the kind at issue, which is concerned with the arrangements whereby goods may be sold to consumers, the conditions set out in that judgment are fulfilled.  The legislation at issue applies, irrespective of the origin of the products in question, to all the traders concerned and does not affect the marketing of products from other Member States any differently from the marketing of domestic products.  Accordingly, the answer to the national court must be that Article of the Treaty is to be interpreted as not applying to national legislation on the closure of shops which applies to all traders operating within the national territory and which affects in the same manner, in law and in fact, the marketing of domestic products and of those from other Member States.  Question In view of the answer to the first question, there is no need to answer the second question.  
Decision on costs
Costs  The costs incurred by the Greek Government and the United Kingdom and by the Commission of the European Communities, which have submitted observations to the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the proceedings pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court.  
Operative part
On those grounds,  THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),  in answer to the questions referred to it by the Pretura Circondariale di Roma, Sezione Distaccata di Castelnuovo di Porto, by orders of December and March 1993, hereby rules:  Article of the EEC Treaty is to be interpreted as not applying to national legislation on the closure of shops which applies to all traders operating within the national territory and which affects in the same manner, in law and in fact, the marketing of domestic products and of those from other Member States.  
Top  
 