
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-199/P Corus UK Ltd, formerly British Steel plcvCommission of the European Communities
«(Appeal – Agreements and concerted practices – European producers of beams)»
Opinion of Advocate General Stix-Hackl delivered on September I - Judgment of the Court (Fifth Chamber), October I - Summary of the Judgment
1..
Appeals – Grounds – Procedural irregularity – Decision founded on facts or documents of which one of the parties is unaware – Infringement of the rights of the defence  (ECSC Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 51) 
2..
Procedure – Duration of the procedure before the Court of First Instance – Reasonable period – Factors to be taken into account  
3..
Appeals – Grounds – Erroneous assessment of the facts – Inadmissible – Appeal dismissed  (Art. 32d(1) CS; ECSC Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 51)
4..
Procedure – Measures of inquiry – Request for production of a document – Discretion of the Court of First Instance  (Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance, Arts and 65(b))
5..
ECSC – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Fines – Amount – Determination thereof – Criteria – Anti-competitive effects of the infringement – Criterion not conclusive  (ECSC Treaty, Art. 65(5)) 
6..
ECSC – Agreements – Concerted practice – Meaning – Criteria of coordination and cooperation – Interpretation – Agreement on the exchange of information  (ECSC Treaty, Art. 65(1); Art. 81(1) EC) 
7..
ECSC – Agreements, decisions and concerted practices – Administrative procedure – Right of access to the Commission's file – Objectives – Ensuring effective exercise of the rights of the defence – Infringement – Penalised, despite access being given during the judicial proceedings, if there are documents in the file which may be useful
                     for the undertaking's defence
                   ( ECSC Treaty, Art. 65(1)) 
8..
Acts of the institutions – Statement of reasons – Obligation – Scope – Decision imposing fines for infringement of the competition rules – Merely desirable that the method of calculating the fine be disclosed ( ECSC Treaty, Arts 15, first para., and 65(5)) 
1.
 The principle of respect for the rights of the defence is a fundamental principle of Community law. That principle is infringed
         where a judicial decision is based on facts and documents which the parties themselves, or one of them, have not had an opportunity
         to examine and on which they have therefore been unable to comment. see para. 2.
 The general principle of Community law that everyone is entitled to a fair hearing, and in particular the right to legal process
         within a reasonable period, is applicable in the context of proceedings brought against a Commission decision imposing fines
         on an undertaking for infringement of competition law. The reasonableness of a period is to be appraised in the light of the circumstances specific to each case and, in particular,
         the importance of the case for the person concerned, its complexity and the conduct of the applicant and of the competent
         authorities. In that regard, this list of criteria is not exhaustive and the assessment of the reasonableness of a period does not require
         a systematic examination of the circumstances of the case in the light of each of them, where the duration of the proceedings
         appears justified in the light of one of them. The purpose of those criteria is to determine whether the time taken in the
         handling of a case is justified. Thus, the complexity of the case or the dilatory conduct of the applicant may be deemed to
         justify a duration which is prima facie too long. Conversely, the time taken may be regarded as longer than is reasonable
         in the light of just one criterion, in particular where its duration is the result of the conduct of the competent authorities.
         Where appropriate, the duration of a procedural stage may be regarded as reasonable from the outset if it appears to be consistent
         with the average time taken in handling a case of its type. see paras 41-3.
 It is clear from Article 32d(1) CS and Article of the ECSC Statute of the Court of Justice that an appeal lies on a point
         of law only. Therefore, the Court of First Instance has sole jurisdiction to find and appraise the relevant facts and to assess
         the evidence, except where those facts and that evidence have been distorted. see para. 4.
 It is for the Community Court to decide, in the light of the circumstances of the case and in accordance with the provisions
         of the Rules of Procedure on measures of inquiry, whether it is necessary for a document to be produced. As regards the Court
         of First Instance, it follows from Article 49, read in conjunction with Article 65(b), of its Rules of Procedure that a request
         for production of documents is a measure of inquiry which the Court may order at any stage of the proceedings if it deems
         them necessary to ascertain the truth. see para 67, 5.
 An infringement of Article 65(1) of the ECSC Treaty may be found and a fine imposed under Article 65(5) even in the absence
         of anti-competitive effects. The effect that an agreement or a concerted practice may have had on normal competition is therefore
         not a conclusive criterion for assessing the proper amount of a fine. Factors relating to the intentional aspect, and therefore
         to the purpose of the conduct, may be more significant than those relating to its effects, particularly where they relate
         to infringements which are intrinsically serious, such as price-fixing and market-sharing. see para. 6.
 An agreement on the exchange of information is incompatible with the rules on competition if it reduces or removes the degree
         of uncertainty as to the operation of the market in question with the result that competition between undertakings is restricted.
         The criteria of coordination and cooperation necessary for determining the existence of a concerted practice, far from requiring
         an actual `plan' to have been worked out, are to be understood in the light of the concept inherent in the provisions of the
         EC and ECSC Treaties on competition, according to which each trader must determine independently the policy which he intends
         to adopt on the common market and the conditions which he intends to offer to his customers. While it is true that this requirement of independence does not deprive traders of the right to adapt themselves intelligently
         to the existing or anticipated conduct of their competitors, it does, however, strictly preclude any direct or indirect contact
         between such traders, the object or effect of which is to create conditions of competition which do not correspond to the
         normal conditions of the market in question, regard being had to the nature of the products or services offered, the size
         and number of the undertakings and the volume of the said market. see paras 105-7.
 Access to the file in competition cases is intended, in particular, to enable the addressees of statements of objections to
         acquaint themselves with the evidence in the Commission's file so that, on the basis of that evidence, they can express their
         views effectively on the conclusions reached by the Commission in its statement of objections. The right of access to the
         Commission's file is therefore designed to ensure effective exercise of the rights of the defence.  It follows that failure to respect that right during the procedure prior to adoption of a decision can, in principle, cause
         the decision to be annulled if the rights of defence of the undertaking concerned have been infringed. In such a case, the
         infringement committed is not remedied by the mere fact that access to the file was made possible during the judicial proceedings
         relating to an action by which annulment of the contested decision is sought. Where access has been granted at that stage,
         the undertaking concerned does not have to show that, if it had had access to the non-disclosed documents, the Commission
         decision would have been different in content, but only that those documents could have been useful for its defence. see paras 125-8.
 The purpose of the obligation to state the reasons on which an individual decision is based is to enable the Court to review
         the legality of the decision and to provide the person concerned with sufficient information to make it possible to ascertain
         whether the decision is well founded or whether it is vitiated by a defect which may permit its legality to be contested.
          With regard to the obligation to state reasons for a decision imposing fines on several undertakings for an infringement of
         the Community competition rules, statements of figures relating to the calculation of those fines, however useful and desirable
         such figures may be, are not essential; in any event, the Commission cannot, by mechanical recourse to arithmetical formulas
         alone, divest itself of its own power of assessment. The fact that it was possible to detect a number of errors in the calculation only once those figures had been provided is
         insufficient for a finding that the statement of reasons in the contested decision is inadequate since, when reviewing such
         a decision, the Community Court may order that all the evidence which it requires be submitted to it in order to enable it
         to carry out a detailed review of the method by which the fine was calculated. see paras 145, 149-JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)October (1)
((Appeal – Agreements and concerted practices – European producers of beams))
In Case C-199/P, 
            
 Corus UK Ltd,  formerly British Steel plc, established in London (United Kingdom), represented by P. Collins and M. Levitt, Solicitors,
            with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
appellant, 
APPEAL against the judgment of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities (Second Chamber, Extended Composition)
            of March in Case T-151/British Steel  v  
             Commission  [1999] ECR II-629, seeking to have that judgment set aside,
            
the other party to the proceedings being: 
             Commission of the European Communities,  represented by J. Currall and W. Wils, acting as Agents, assisted by J. Flynn, Barrister, with an address for service in
            Luxembourg,defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber),,
composed of: M. Wathelet, President of the Chamber, D.A.O. Edward, A. La Pergola, P. Jann (Rapporteur) and S. von Bahr, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: C. Stix-Hackl, Registrar: M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator, 
            
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,after hearing oral argument from the parties at the hearing on January 2002,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on September 2002, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on May 1999, Corus UK Ltd, formerly British Steel plc, brought an appeal under
         Article of the ECSC Statute of the Court of Justice against the judgment of the Court of First Instance of March in Case T-151/British Steel  v  
          Commission  [1999] ECR II-(
         the judgment under appeal), by which the Court of First Instance dismissed in part its action for annulment of Commission Decision 94/215/ECSC of February relating to a proceeding pursuant to Article of the ECSC Treaty concerning agreements and concerted practices
         engaged in by European producers of beams (OJ L 116, p. 1) (
         the contested decision). By that decision, the Commission imposed a fine on the appellant under Article of the ECSC Treaty. 
         
Facts and the contested decision
            
According to the judgment under appeal, the European steel industry underwent, from onwards, a crisis characterised by
         a fall in demand giving rise to problems of excess supply and capacity and low prices. 
         
            
In 1980, after having attempted to manage the crisis by way of unilateral voluntary commitments given by undertakings as regards
         the amount of steel put on the market and minimum prices (
         the Simonet Plan) or by fixing guide and minimum prices (
         the Davignon Plan, the  
         Eurofer I agreement), the Commission declared that there was a manifest crisis within the meaning of Article of the ECSC Treaty
         and imposed mandatory production quotas for, inter alia, beams. That Community system came to an end on June 1988. 
         
            
Long before that date, the Commission had announced in various communications and decisions that the quota system was to be
         abandoned, pointing out that the end of that system would mean a return to a market characterised by free competition between
         undertakings. However, the sector continued to be affected by excess production capacity which, according to expert opinion,
         had to undergo a sufficient and rapid reduction to enable undertakings to meet world competition. 
         
            
From the end of the quota system, the Commission set up a surveillance system involving the collection of statistics on production
         and deliveries, monitoring of market developments and regular consultation with undertakings on the market situation and trends.
         The undertakings in the sector, some of which were members of the Eurofer trade association, thus maintained regular contact
         with DG III (Directorate-General for the  
         Internal Market and Industrial Affairs) of the Commission (
         DG III) by way of consultation meetings. The surveillance system came to an end on June and was replaced by an individual
         and voluntary information scheme. 
         
            
At the beginning of 1991, the Commission carried out a series of inspections in the offices of a number of steel undertakings
         and associations of undertakings in the sector. A statement of objections was sent to them on May 1992. Hearings were held
         at the beginning of 1993. 
         
            
On February 1994, the Commission adopted the contested decision, by which it found that European steel undertakings
         and one of their trade associations had participated in a series of agreements, decisions and concerted practices designed
         to fix prices, share markets and exchange confidential information on the market for beams in the Community, in breach of
         Article 65(1) of the ECSC Treaty. By that decision, it imposed fines on undertakings for infringements committed between
         July and December 1990. 
         The proceedings before the Court of First Instance and the judgment under appeal
            
On April 1994, the present appellant brought an action before the Court of First Instance for annulment of the contested
         decision. 
         
            
By the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance granted the present appellant's application in part and reduced
         the fine imposed on it. 
         Forms of order sought by the parties
            
The appellant claims that the Court should: 
         
─
set aside the judgment under appeal; 
         
─
in so far as the circumstances permit, annul the contested decision; 
         
─
in the alternative, reduce or cancel the fine set by the Court of First Instance, which was imposed on the appellant by Article
            of the contested decision; 
         
─
order the Commission to pay interest, at such rate as is considered by the Court to be fair and just, on such part of the
            fine as is repaid as a result of annulment of the judgment under appeal or of the contested decision, in respect of the period
            from payment of the fine by the appellant on June until repayment by the Commission; and 
         
─
order the Commission to pay the costs.
         
            
The Commission contends that the Court should: 
         
─
dismiss the appeal; 
         
─
order the appellant to pay the costs. 
         
The grounds of appeal
            
The appellant raises six grounds of appeal: 
         
1.
 infringement of the right to a fair hearing within a reasonable period of time; 
         
2.
 infringement of essential procedural requirements when the contested decision was adopted; 
         
3.
 infringement of Article 65(1) of the ECSC Treaty; 
         
4.
 infringement by the Court of First Instance of the rights of the defence in that it failed to censure a breach of the appellant's
         rights of defence during the administrative procedure; 
         
5.
 infringement of Article of the ECSC Treaty as regards the statement of reasons for the fines in the contested decision;
         
         
6.
 infringement of Article of the ECSC Treaty in that the Court of First Instance failed to annul Article of the contested
         decision in so far as it concerns infringements committed prior to July 1988. 
         
            
The paragraphs of the judgment under appeal challenged by each of the grounds of appeal will be indicated as those grounds
         are examined. 
         The appealThe first ground of appeal
         
            
The first ground of appeal alleges infringement of Article of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights
         and Fundamental Freedoms, signed in Rome on November 1950, (
         the ECHR). The appellant claims that the Court of First Instance deprived it of its right to a fair hearing within a reasonable period.
         
         
            
This ground can be divided into three limbs, which it is appropriate to examine separately. 
         The first limb of the first ground of appeal
         
            
The appellant submits that the proceedings before the Court of First Instance were not fair. There was an infringement of
         the principle of equality of arms, notably on account of the late disclosure of numerous documents. Thus, whereas the hearing
         began on March 1998, the documents produced by the Commission following the order of the Court of First Instance of December in Cases T-134/94, T-136/94, T-137/94, T-138/94, T-141/94, T-145/94, T-147/94, T-148/94, T-151/94, T-156/and T-157/NMH Stahlwerke and Others  v  
          Commission  [1997] ECR II-were not made available until January 1998, the method used to calculate the fines was disclosed on
         March 1998, a copy of the minutes of the Commission meeting during which the contested decision was adopted (
         the minutes) was made available to the appellant on March and further documentation was not produced until the hearing. 
         
            
The Commission observes that the documents produced on January were thus available two months before the hearing,
         which gave the appellant ample time to obtain and inspect them, that, while the method of calculating the fines was not disclosed
         until March 1998, it was, however, in amplification of replies already given on January and February 1998, as is
         clear from paragraph of the judgment under appeal, and that, while the definitive minutes were not lodged with the Court
         of First Instance until March and only made available to the appellant the following day, the draft of those minutes
         had already been available for some weeks by virtue of the Court of First Instance's order of February 1998, as is pointed
         out in paragraph of the judgment under appeal. Moreover, the Commission disputes the claim that the appellant experienced
         difficulty as a result of the late disclosure of documents, observes that the appellant does not identify any specific point
         on which it was put at a disadvantage by the matters of which it now complains and points out that the appellant made no application
         to the Court of First Instance for the hearing to be postponed on account of the date of production of any of the material
         to which it refers. 
         
            
In its reply, the appellant challenges the Commission's arguments. It submits, in particular, that the replies provided by
         the Commission in January and February were incomplete and did not enable the lawfulness of the method used to calculate
         the fines to be assessed. With respect to the definitive version of the minutes, it adds that the Commission failed to comply
         with a clear and unambiguous request of the Court of First Instance and did not produce that document until the day before
         the hearing. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
The principle of respect for the rights of the defence is a fundamental principle of Community law. That principle is infringed
         where a judicial decision is based on facts and documents which the parties themselves, or one of them, have not had an opportunity
         to examine and on which they have therefore been unable to comment (Joined Cases 42/and 49/SNUPAT  v  
          High Authority  [1961] ECR 53, at p. 84). 
         
            
First of all, the appellant has not established how the allegedly late production of the documents in question adversely affected
         it, that is to say, how its defence might have been better assured had the documents been available to it earlier. 
         
            
In any event, the documents made available on January following the order in  
          NMH Stahlwerke , cited above, were produced sufficiently in advance of the hearing to allow the appellant to examine them and adopt a position
         on their content. 
         
            
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance held that the method used to calculate the fine
         did not constitute an additional statement of reasons for the contested decision. The document setting out the method consisted
         of a table of one page for each undertaking. It was lodged on March and supplemented the replies already given in
         that regard. In view of the length of the arguments presented during the hearing, which lasted from to March 1998, it
         does not appear that production of that document only four days before the beginning of the hearing adversely affected the
         appellant by depriving it of an opportunity adequately to inspect its content in order to be able to express its views thereon.
         
         
            
Moreover, the draft minutes were made available on January 1998. It was only for the purpose of examining whether the contested
         decision had been authenticated that a true copy of the original of the minutes was produced on March 1998. Having regard
         to the arguments put forward by the parties, which the Court of First Instance summarised in paragraphs to of the
         judgment under appeal, it does not appear that the rights of the defence were adversely affected by the fact that that document
         was produced only a few days before the hearing. 
         
            
As regards the various documents submitted to the Court of First Instance at the hearing, the nature of which is not specified
         by the appellant, with the result that it is impossible to examine their relevance to its rights of defence, the minutes of
         that hearing do not indicate that the appellant objected to their being lodged. 
         
            
It follows that the appellant has failed to establish that the Court of First Instance infringed the principle of the rights
         of the defence by failing to ensure that the appellant had sufficient time in which to inspect the various documents submitted
         and to express its views on them. 
         
            
It follows that the first limb of the first ground of appeal is unfounded. 
         The second limb of the first ground of appeal
         
            
The appellant submits that the Court of First Instance committed errors as regards the examination of witnesses. 
         
            
The appellant claims that it had no opportunity to question the three witnesses heard by the Court of First Instance prior
         to the hearing and that it was given no notice of the statements to be made by them. Furthermore, it was denied the right
         to put questions to those witnesses or otherwise to challenge the evidence given by them. That infringement of the appellant's
         rights was made more serious because, in the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance based its findings to a large
         extent on the evidence given by those witnesses. 
         
            
The Commission contends that the procedure for examining the witnesses was properly conducted. Moreover, the appellant fails
         to identify any provision in the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance which might have been infringed. It notes
         that, in the Community legal system, witnesses are the witnesses of the Community Court and not of the parties. The questions
         to be put to the witnesses are decided upon by the Court of First Instance alone and it is in that Court's discretion to determine
         whether the parties should be given an opportunity to question them. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
As the procedure for examination of witnesses is specifically defined by the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance,
         this limb of the ground of appeal alleging infringement of the appellant's rights of defence can be accepted as being well
         founded only in so far as the appellant establishes that there was an irregularity in that procedure which adversely affected
         its interests. 
         
            
The second and fourth subparagraphs of Article 68(4) of the Rules of Procedure of the Court of First Instance are worded as
         follows: The witness shall give his evidence to the Court of First Instance, the parties having been given notice to attend. After
         the witness has given his main evidence the President may, at the request of a party or of his own motion, put questions to
         him....Subject to the control of the President, questions may be put to witnesses by the representatives of the parties.
         
            
According to the minutes of the hearing which was held before the Court of First Instance on March 1998, the President
         of the Second Chamber, Extended Composition, announced that that Chamber intended to hear a number of witnesses. The minutes
         state that the parties did not submit observations in that regard. The witnesses were examined in an open hearing in the presence
         of all of the parties. 
         
            
The appellant does not show and in no way does it appear that, in this case, the Court of First Instance acted in breach of
         the procedure for examining witnesses. In particular, the appellant fails to specify any question which the President refused
         or omitted to pose and the minutes of the hearing of the witnesses do not show that any request to put such a question was
         made. 
         
            
It is sufficient to state that, at the hearing of oral argument ─ which, as was noted in paragraph of this judgment, lasted
         from to March ─ the appellant did have an opportunity to discuss the statements made by the witnesses which were
         used as evidence. In addition, it does not appear that the appellant applied to the Court of First Instance for leave to examine
         or comment on those statements at an earlier stage. 
         
            
It follows from these findings that the second limb of the first ground of appeal is unfounded. 
         The third limb of the first ground of appeal
         
            
The appellant complains that the duration of the proceedings before the Court of First Instance was excessive. 
         
            
The appellant observes that the period from lodging of the application until delivery of the judgment under appeal was months. That judgment was delivered almost one year after the oral procedure had been closed. As a result of various delays,
         the identity of the President of the Chamber changed and two of the five judges who were present at the hearing did not take
         part in the deliberations. This served to hinder continuity in the conduct of the case and a thorough consideration of the
         issues raised. 
         
            
The Commission contends that, if the duration of the proceedings in this case is compared with that examined by the Court
         in Case C-185/P  
          Baustahlgewebe  v  
          Commission  [1998] ECR I-8417, it must be concluded that the duration of the proceedings before the Court of First Instance in this case
         was not excessive. At the very least, account should be taken of the  
         exceptional circumstances within the meaning of the  
          Baustahlgewebe  judgment, such as the new issues raised in relation to access to documents and the number of procedural documents required.
         
         
            
The Commission also submits that the change of President of the Chamber was not unusual as it is an annual event. Similarly,
         the fact that two of the judges did not take part in the deliberations is not out of the ordinary and was merely the result
         of the expiry of their mandates. 
         
            
The appellant maintains that the overall duration of the proceedings was excessive and that no objective justification for
         the delays can be advanced. In particular, the months which the Court of First Instance spent examining the small number
         of documents classified by the Commission as internal cannot be justified. Furthermore, it submits that the Commission's arguments
         are disingenuous since it itself caused many of the delays. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
The general principle of Community law that everyone is entitled to a fair hearing, and in particular the right to legal process
         within a reasonable period, is applicable in the context of proceedings brought against a Commission decision imposing fines
         on an undertaking for infringement of competition law (
          Baustahlgewebe , cited above, paragraph 21, and Joined Cases C-238/P, C-244/P, C-245/P, C-247/P, C-250/P, C-251/P, C-252/P and C-254/P  
          Limburgse Vinyl Maatschappij and Others  v  
          Commission  [2002] ECR I-8375, paragraph 179). 
         
            
The reasonableness of a period is to be appraised in the light of the circumstances specific to each case and, in particular,
         the importance of the case for the person concerned, its complexity and the conduct of the applicant and of the competent
         authorities (
          Baustahlgewebe , paragraph 29, and  
          Limburgse Vinyl Maatschappij and Others , cited above, paragraph 187). 
         
            
The Court has held in that regard that this list of criteria is not exhaustive and that the assessment of the reasonableness
         of a period does not require a systematic examination of the circumstances of the case in the light of each of them, where
         the duration of the proceedings appears justified in the light of one of them. The purpose of those criteria is to determine
         whether the time taken in the handling of a case is justified. Thus, the complexity of the case or the dilatory conduct of
         the applicant may be deemed to justify a duration which is prima facie too long. Conversely, the time taken may be regarded
         as longer than is reasonable in the light of just one criterion, in particular where its duration is the result of the conduct
         of the competent authorities. Where appropriate, the duration of a procedural stage may be regarded as reasonable from the
         outset if it appears to be consistent with the average time taken in handling a case of its type (
          Limburgse Vinyl Maatschappij and Others , paragraph 188). 
         
            
In the present case, the proceedings before the Court of First Instance commenced with the lodging on April of the
         application bringing the present appellant's action for annulment of the contested decision and were concluded on March
         1999, the date of delivery of the judgment under appeal. They thus lasted almost five years. 
         
            
Such a duration is, prima facie, considerable. However, it should be noted that undertakings brought actions for annulment
         of the same decision in four languages of procedure. 
         
            
As was pointed out in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance had to rule on a variety
         of claims regarding access to the documents relating to the administrative procedure. The Commission having lodged, on November 1994, a file containing documents relating to the contested decision, submitting that the undertakings in
         question should not be given access to the documents containing business secrets or to the Commission's own internal documents,
         the Court of First Instance had to hear the parties on that issue, examine all the documents and decide to which documents
         each of the applicants might have access. 
         
            
By order of June in Cases T-134/94, T-136/94, T-137/94, T-138/94, T-141/94, T-145/94, T-147/94, T-148/94, T-151/94,
         T-156/and T-157/NMH Stahlwerke and Others  v  
          Commission  [1996] ECR II-537, the Court of First Instance ruled on the applicants' right of access to the documents in the Commission's
         file emanating, first, from the applicants themselves and, second, from third parties not involved in the proceedings which
         the Commission had, in the interests of those parties, classified as confidential. 
         
            
By order of December in  
          NMH Stahlwerke and Others  v  
          Commission , cited above, the Court of First Instance ruled on the applicants' requests for access to the documents classified by the
         Commission as  
         internal. 
         
            
The various actions brought by the undertakings affected by the contested decision were joined for the purposes of measures
         of inquiry and the oral procedure. As is explained in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, a number of measures
         of inquiry were ordered by the Court of First Instance in order to prepare that procedure. In that connection, the Court of
         First Instance addressed various written questions to the parties and ordered the production of documents and the hearing
         of witnesses. 
         
            
The oral procedure was closed at the end of the hearing on March 1998. 
         
            
The judgment under appeal was delivered on March 1999, that is to say, on the same day as the other judgments ruling
         on the actions brought against the contested decision. 
         
            
It follows from the above findings that the duration of the proceedings leading to the judgment under appeal can be explained,
         inter alia, by the number of undertakings which participated in the concerted practice at issue and brought actions against
         the contested decision, which made it necessary to examine those different actions simultaneously, by the legal issues relating
         to access to the Commission's voluminous file, by the in-depth examination of the file by the Court of First Instance and
         by the linguistic constraints imposed by that Court's Rules of Procedure. 
         
            
It cannot validly be claimed that the Court of First Instance remained inactive for several months even though only a small
         number of documents had to be examined. It is sufficient to refer to paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, in
         which the Court of First Instance explained the procedure necessary to organise access to the Commission's documents. 
         
            
Contrary to what the appellant claims, responsibility for delays in conducting the proceedings cannot be attributed to the
         Commission. Having been asked to do so by letter of the Registry of the Court of First Instance of October 1994, the Commission
         lodged its file at the Registry on November 1994. Moreover, the Commission cannot be held responsible for the legal difficulties
         relating to access to certain documents, which were for the most part new and which the Court of First Instance had to resolve
         by orders following an examination of the documents which had been the subject of challenge. In addition, it does not appear
         that the Commission was excessively late in producing the other documents requested by the Court of First Instance. 
         
            
In view of the factors set out in paragraph of this judgment, the period of just under one year which elapsed between closure
         of the oral procedure and delivery of the judgment cannot be regarded as excessive. 
         
            
It follows from all of the above findings that the duration of the proceedings before the Court of First Instance is justified
         in the light of the particular complexity of the case. 
         
            
As regards the change of President of the Chamber of the Court of First Instance hearing the case and the fact that two judges
         were prevented from taking part in the deliberations, the appellant has not established any infringement of the Rules of Procedure
         of the Court of First Instance. 
         
            
The third limb of the first ground of appeal is therefore unfounded. 
         
            
It follows from these findings that the first ground of appeal is unfounded. 
         The second ground of appeal
         
            
The second ground of appeal alleges infringement of essential procedural requirements when the contested decision was adopted.
         
         
            
Essentially, the appellant submits, first, that the Court of First Instance erred in law in holding, in paragraph of the
         judgment under appeal, that there were no substantive differences between the versions C(94)321/and C(94)321/of the contested
         decision and the versions of that decision notified to the appellant. 
         
            
Second, the appellant argues that the reasons given by the Court of First Instance for its findings as regards authentication
         of the contested decision are inadequate and contradictory. In particular, the fact that the photocopy of the minutes was
         produced to the Commission's agent, and then by him to the Court of First Instance, in the same cardboard box as the copies
         of documents C(94)321/and C(94)321/3, can in no way serve as a basis for the assumption by the Court of First Instance that
         those documents had been annexed to the original version of the minutes in accordance with the requirements of Article of the Commission's Rules of Procedure as laid down in Commission Decision 93/492/Euratom, ECSC, EEC of February (OJ
         L 230, p. 15). Similarly, the Court of First Instance erred when, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, it accepted
         certification of the photocopy by the Secretary-General of the Commission as proof that the minutes had been signed. According
         to the appellant, a photocopy cannot serve as proof of any matter relating to the authenticity of the document which it reproduces;
         only production of the original version of the minutes, it argues, could have established that those minutes satisfied the
         requirements of the Rules of Procedure. 
         
            
Third, the appellant takes the view that the Court of First Instance ought to have verified the date of authentication because
         it cannot be assumed that authentication took place on the date on which the minutes were adopted. 
         
            
The Commission contends that the ground of appeal is inadmissible inasmuch as it challenges findings of fact and, in the alternative,
         that it is unfounded. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
First of all, it should be pointed out that, as is clear from Article 32d(1) CS and Article of the ECSC Statute of the
         Court of Justice, an appeal lies on a point of law only. Therefore, the Court of First Instance has sole jurisdiction to find
         and appraise the relevant facts and to assess the evidence, except where those facts and that evidence have been distorted
         (see, to that effect, Case C-136/P  
          Commission  v  
          Brazzelli Lualdi and Others  [1994] ECR I-1981, paragraphs and 66;  
          Limburgse Vinyl Maatschappij and Others , paragraph 194; and Case C-312/P  
          Commission  v  
          Camar and Tico  [2002] ECR I-11355, paragraph 69). 
         
            
The appellant is here challenging the assessment of evidence by the Court of First Instance. The second ground of appeal challenges
         the following paragraphs of the judgment under appeal: 
         
─
paragraph 146, in which the Court of First Instance assumed that documents C(94)321/and C(94)321/were annexed to the minutes;
            
         
─
paragraph 147, in which the Court of First Instance took the view that it had not been established that there was any substantive
            difference between the notified version of the contested decision and that annexed to the minutes; 
         
─
paragraph 148, in which the Court of First Instance ruled that documents C(94)321/and C(94)321/had to be regarded as having
            been authenticated by the signatures of the President and the Secretary-General of the Commission on the first page of the
            minutes; 
         
─
paragraph 149, in which the Court of First Instance decided that the certification of authenticity by the titular Secretary-General
            of the Commission provided sufficient proof for legal purposes that the original version of the minutes bore the original
            signatures of the President and the Secretary-General of the Commission; and 
         
─
paragraph 151, in which the Court of First Instance held that the minutes had been properly signed by the President and the
            Secretary-General of the Commission on February 1994. 
         
            
With respect to the need to request production of the original of the minutes, it is for the Community Court to decide, in
         the light of the circumstances of the case and in accordance with the provisions of the Rules of Procedure on measures of
         inquiry, whether it is necessary for a document to be produced. As regards the Court of First Instance, it follows from Article
         read in conjunction with Article 65(b) of its Rules of Procedure that a request for production of documents is a measure
         of inquiry which the Court may order at any stage of the proceedings (Case C-286/P  
          Commission  v  
          ICI  [2000] ECR I-2341, paragraphs and 50). 
         
            
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance examined the photocopy of the minutes which had
         been submitted to it and concluded that the fact that the first page of that document bore the stamp  
         certified to be a true copy, Secretary-General Carlo Trojan and that this stamp bore the original signature of Mr Trojan, the titular Secretary-General of the Commission, was sufficient
         to establish that the photocopy was a true copy of the original. 
         
            
As was pointed out in paragraph of this judgment, the Court of First Instance has sole jurisdiction to assess the probative
         value of a document, as it did in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, and its decision on this issue cannot, in principle,
         be the subject of review by the Court. 
         
            
Given that this copy of the minutes was available to the Court of First Instance, which it accepted as being a certified true
         copy of the original, it was under no obligation whatsoever to adopt a further measure for taking evidence in order to obtain
         the original if it formed the view that such a measure was unnecessary to establish the truth (see, to that effect,  
          Limburgse Vinyl Maatschappij and Others , paragraph 404). 
         
            
It follows that the second ground of appeal is in part inadmissible and in part unfounded. 
         The third ground of appeal
         
            
The third ground of appeal alleges infringement of Article 65(1) of the ECSC Treaty. It can be divided into two limbs: the
         first alleges an error in the legal assessment of the evidence and the second alleges misinterpretation of Article 65(1).
         
         The first limb of the third ground of appeal
         
            
In the appellant's view, the legal appraisal of the evidence on which the Court of First Instance based its finding that the
         appellant had engaged in agreements and concerted practices to fix prices and exchange information in breach of Article 65(1)
         of the ECSC Treaty is vitiated by the fact that it did not take into account its own subsequent findings regarding the purpose,
         context and subject-matter of the discussions in which the undertakings concerned had taken part in connection with the monitoring
         of the sector introduced after the period of manifest crisis had come to an end. 
         
            
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance stated that, when preparing meetings with the Commission,
         the undertakings had to meet beforehand and exchange their views on the economic situation of the market and future trends,
         particularly in relation to prices. Such meetings were, moreover, necessary to the success of the system of monitoring the
         sector. Furthermore, it appears from the testimony given by  Mr Kutscher, a former DG III official heard by the Court of First
         Instance as a witness, that, in a favourable economic situation, parallel increases in prices may arise without any agreement
         being necessary. Therefore, in the appellant's view, the judgment under appeal is based on contradictory and inadequate reasoning.
         
         
            
The Commission contends that the Court of First Instance meticulously examined each piece of evidence relating to the various
         infringements and observes that the appellant does not allege distortion of the sense of that evidence. 
         
            
According to the Commission, it is wrong to claim that the fact that meetings were held with it precludes a finding that the
         appellant was involved in anti-competitive practices. First, that argument can relate only to the infringements allegedly
         committed within the Eurofer Committee, called the  
         Poutrelles Committee (
         the Poutrelles Committee), and not to price-fixing and market-sharing agreements. Second, the Commission refers to paragraphs and to of
         the judgment under appeal, from which it is clear that the activities of which the undertakings concerned were accused were
         entirely separate from the information meetings with the Commission. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
It is appropriate to observe that the appellant invokes no argument calling into question the findings made by the Court of
         First Instance in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal. In those paragraphs, the Court of First Instance demonstrated
         that the undertakings concerned had concealed from the Commission the existence and content of the discussions adversely affecting
         competition which they had held and of the agreements which they had concluded. In paragraph of the judgment under appeal,
         it stated that, in any event, the provisions of Article 65(4) of the ECSC Treaty have an objective content and are binding
         on both undertakings and the Commission, which cannot exempt those undertakings. 
         
            
More specifically, the appellant does not challenge paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, in which the Court
         of First Instance took the view that it had not been established that the DG III officials were aware of the price-fixing
         agreements. 
         
            
Paragraph of the judgment under appeal, on which the appellant bases its argument that the reasoning given in that judgment
         is contradictory, is contained in the part of that judgment in which the Court of First Instance examines the economic impact
         of the infringements with a view to determining whether the fine was fixed at a disproportionate amount. 
         
            
Thus, in that part of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance examined one of the criteria normally applied
         in assessing the seriousness of an infringement, while stating, in paragraph 650, that an infringement of Article 65(1) of
         the ECSC Treaty may be found and a fine imposed under Article 65(5) even in the absence of anti-competitive effects. As it
         stated in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the effect which an anti-competitive practice has is therefore not a
         conclusive criterion for assessing the proper amount of a fine. Factors relating to the intentional aspect may be more significant
         than those relating to the effects, particularly where they relate to infringements which are intrinsically serious, such
         as price-fixing and market-sharing, factors which are present in this case. 
         
            
The finding set out in paragraph of the judgment under appeal cannot be read in isolation but must be placed in the context
         of the argument developed by the Court of First Instance. That line of argument led to the conclusion, in paragraph 658, that,
         in light of the Commission's conduct, it was unnecessary to determine the effects of the infringements committed in this case
         by simply comparing the situation resulting from the anti-competitive agreements with that which would have existed had there
         been no contact whatever between the undertakings. The Court of First Instance took the view that it was more relevant to
         compare the situation resulting from those agreements with the situation envisaged and accepted by DG III, in which the undertakings
         were supposed to meet and engage in general discussions, particularly in regard to their forecasts on future prices. 
         
            
The Court of First Instance therefore did not contradict itself by taking into consideration the Commission's conduct in order
         to assess the economic effects of the infringements while stating that that conduct had no bearing on the fact that the undertakings
         concerned had been fully aware that the practices complained of were anti-competitive. 
         
            
It follows that the first limb of the third ground of appeal is unfounded. 
         The second limb of the third ground of appeal
         
            
In the appellant's view, the Court of First Instance's interpretation of Article 65(1) of the ECSC Treaty is based on contradictory
         reasoning and a misunderstanding of the context in which that article is to be applied. 
         
            
The appellant complains that the Court of First Instance's reasoning is tautological. Having found, solely on the basis of
         the evidence, that the infringements of Article 65(1) of the ECSC Treaty had been established, the Court of First Instance
         concluded that the appellant's arguments concerning the interpretation of that article were irrelevant. Thus, it denied the
         relevance of Articles to and of the ECSC Treaty to that interpretation. In the appellant's view, the Court of First
         Instance ought to have considered the question of the interpretation of Article 65(1) of that Treaty before examining whether
         the infringements had been established. 
         
            
The appellant goes on to argue that the Court of First Instance misinterpreted the concept of  
         normal competition in that it failed to take account of either the effect which pursuit of the different objectives of the Treaty may have on
         the content of that concept or the impact of Articles to of the ECSC Treaty. 
         
            
The grounds of the judgment under appeal are, the appellant submits, contradictory in that regard as the Court of First Instance,
         in paragraph of that judgment, took account of the ambiguity introduced by the Commission into the scope of the concept
         of  
         normal competition when fixing the level of the fines but failed to do so when interpreting Article of the ECSC Treaty. 
         
            
As a result of its misinterpretation of the concept of  
         normal competition, the Court of First Instance wrongly found, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the appellant had engaged
         in concerted practices relating to prices on the United Kingdom market even though the appellant's conduct was a result of
         the monitoring system set up by the Commission. 
         
            
The Court of First Instance was, the appellant argues, also wrong to hold that it had committed a separate infringement of
         Article 65(1) of the ECSC Treaty by participating in an information exchange system within the Poutrelles Committee, even
         though that Court had failed to demonstrate that this constituted a separate breach of Article 65(1) by drawing a coherent
         distinction between the allegedly anti-competitive effects of the price-fixing and market-sharing agreements, on the one hand,
         and the information exchange system, on the other. 
         
            
Furthermore, the Court of First Instance failed, in its assessment, to take account of the negotiations which it had been
         necessary to hold in the context of the monitoring system set up by the Commission. 
         
            
Moreover, the Court of First Instance's assessment of the structure of the market in question is based on inadequate reasoning,
         which is set out entirely in paragraph of the judgment under appeal. In that paragraph, the Court of First Instance stated
         that the market was oligopolistic, without carrying out an economic evaluation of its structure. That structure is very different
         from that which is considered to be an oligopoly in the practice of the Commission under Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/of December on the control of concentrations between undertakings (OJ L 395, p. 1), in Commission Decision 92/157/EEC
         of February relating to a proceeding pursuant to Article of the EEC Treaty (IV/31.and 31.─ UK Agricultural
         Tractor Registration Exchange) (OJ L 68, p. 19) or in Germany's  
          Gesetz gegen Wettbewerbsbeschränkungen  (Law prohibiting restraints of competition). 
         
            
The Commission refers to paragraph of the judgment under appeal, in which the Court of First Instance set out the approach
         it would be taking in its examination of the action, which consisted of ascertaining the correctness of the facts before reviewing
         whether the legal characterisation of those facts in the contested decision was sound in law. It submits that such an approach
         entails a stringent review and did not lead the Court of First Instance to draw conclusions in the first stage of that examination
         which made the outcome of the second stage a foregone conclusion. 
         
            
The Commission argues that the appellant is distorting the clear sense of paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal,
         in which the Court of First Instance concluded not that the concept of  
         normal competition should be adjusted, but merely that the Commission had exaggerated the economic impact of the price-fixing agreements established
         in the contested decision. 
         
            
With regard to Articles to of the ECSC Treaty, the Commission observes that the Court of First Instance found, in paragraph
         of the judgment under appeal, that the issue of discussions between the undertakings with a view to providing the Commission
         with information was irrelevant. The Court of First Instance pointed out that that had not been the purpose of the agreements
         and concerted practices in question, that those discussions had not formed part of the Commission's complaint and that such
         discussions on market trends did not necessarily entail commission of the infringements confirmed in the contested decision.
         The Court of First Instance was therefore right to hold that the activities of the undertakings concerned should be treated
         as infringements of Article 65(1) of the ECSC Treaty and that they were not covered by the concept of  
         normal competition. 
         
            
As regards the information exchange system, the Commission states that the Court of First Instance was careful to demonstrate,
         in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, that this system had restricted competition in the form of independent
         decision-making by the undertakings participating in the exchange and, in paragraph 396, that it had tended to partition markets
         along the lines of traditional flows of trade. It is therefore incorrect to claim that the Court of First Instance failed
         to show that this constituted a separate infringement. 
         
            
The Commission takes the view that the argument disputing the oligopolistic structure of the market in question is inadmissible
         as it was raised for the first time in the appeal. Furthermore, it observes that the Court of First Instance referred to the
         judgment in Case 13/Geitling Ruhrkohlen-Verkaufsgesellschaft and Others  v  
          High Authority  [1962] ECR 83, in which the Court held that the oligopolistic structure of a market rendered it all the more important that
         residual competition on that market be protected. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
The second limb of the third ground of appeal is composed of a variety of criticisms of the judgment under appeal. 
         
            
First of all, some of the arguments raised in connection with this limb of the third ground of appeal have already received
         a response in connection with the examination of the first limb of that ground. These concern the criticisms of the judgment
         under appeal by which the appellant complains that the Court of First Instance failed to take account of the conduct of DG
         III when finding that there had been infringements of Article 65(1) of the ECSC Treaty and that that Court contradicted itself
         in finding that there had been an infringement of Article while at the same time taking account, for the purpose of fixing
         the fine, of the ambiguity created by the Commission. 
         
            
It is appropriate to examine in turn the arguments alleging, first, erroneous grounds for the judgment under appeal, second,
         misinterpretation of the concept of  
         normal competition and, third, an error in law in the finding that there had been a separate infringement. 
         
            
With respect, first, to the allegation that the Court of First Instance erred in the grounds of the judgment under appeal
         in holding that there had been infringements before even considering the question of how Article 65(1) of the ECSC Treaty
         was to be interpreted, suffice it to state that, in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First
         Instance outlined how it intended to respond to the numerous pleas and arguments raised by the appellant with regard to infringement
         of Article 65(1). In paragraph 156, it stated that it would examine the correctness of the facts allegedly constituting the
         infringements before determining whether the legal classification of those facts was sound in law. 
         
            
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance concluded that the findings of fact in the contested
         decision were well founded, that it had been established that there had actually been agreements and concerted practices and
         that the appellant's participation in those agreements and concerted practices had been proven. 
         
            
It follows that, when the Court of First Instance ruled on those findings of fact, it did not decide that there had been infringements
         before even examining the question of how to interpret Article 65(1) of the ECSC Treaty. It merely considered the factual
         evidence before reviewing, in a second step, the classification of the conduct found to have occurred. 
         
            
Second, with respect to the alleged misinterpretation of the concept of  
         normal competition, the Court of First Instance examined, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, the context of Article 65(1)
         of the ECSC Treaty. In paragraphs to 309, it also examined whether Article of that Treaty was relevant to the assessment,
         in the light of Article 65(1), of the conduct alleged against the appellant. In paragraph of the judgment under appeal,
         it examined Articles to of the ECSC Treaty and concluded, in paragraph 311, that none of the articles referred to in
         this paragraph allowed the undertakings to breach the prohibition in Article 65(1) by concluding agreements or engaging in
         concerted practices relating to price-fixing such as those at issue in the present case. 
         
            
The Court finds that all of the reasons set out by the Court of First Instance in that regard were correct in law. The argument
         alleging misinterpretation of the concept of  
         normal competition is therefore unfounded. 
         
            
Third, according to the case-law relating to the tractor market (Case T-34/Fiatagri and New Holland Ford  v  
          Commission  [1994] ECR II-905, Case T-35/John Deere  v  
          Commission  [1994] ECR II-957, Case C-7/P  
          John Deere  v  
          Commission  [1998] ECR I-3111, and Case C-8/P  
          New Holland Ford  v  
          Commission  [1998] ECR I-3175), in which the Court of First Instance and the Court of Justice first examined an agreement on the exchange
         of information in the context of the EC Treaty and the general findings of which can be applied to the ECSC Treaty, such an
         agreement is incompatible with the rules on competition if it reduces or removes the degree of uncertainty as to the operation
         of the market in question with the result that competition between undertakings is restricted (see, in particular, Case C-7/P  
          John Deere , cited above, paragraph 90). 
         
            
The criteria of coordination and cooperation necessary for determining the existence of a concerted practice, far from requiring
         an actual  
         plan to have been worked out, are to be understood in the light of the concept inherent in the provisions of the EC and ECSC Treaties
         on competition, according to which each trader must determine independently the policy which he intends to adopt on the common
         market and the conditions which he intends to offer to his customers (see Case C-7/P  
          John Deere , paragraph 86, and the case-law cited therein). 
         
            
While it is true that this requirement of independence does not deprive traders of the right to adapt themselves intelligently
         to the existing or anticipated conduct of their competitors, it does, however, strictly preclude any direct or indirect contact
         between such traders, the object or effect of which is to create conditions of competition which do not correspond to the
         normal conditions of the market in question, regard being had to the nature of the products or services offered, the size
         and number of the undertakings and the volume of the said market (Case C-7/P  
          John Deere , paragraph 87, and the case-law cited therein). 
         
            
In paragraphs to of that  
          John Deere  judgment, the Court confirmed the general premiss on which the Court of First Instance based its reasoning, namely that:
         
         
─
in principle, where there is a truly competitive market, transparency between traders is likely to lead to intensification
            of competition between suppliers, since the fact that in such a situation a trader takes into account information on the operation
            of the market, made available to him under the information exchange system, in order to adjust his conduct on the market,
            is not likely, having regard to the atomised nature of the supply, to reduce or remove for the other traders all uncertainty
            about the foreseeable nature of his competitors' conduct; 
         
─
however, on a highly concentrated oligopolistic market, the exchange of market information is liable to enable undertakings
            to be aware of the market positions and strategies of their competitors and thus to impair appreciably the competition which
            exists between traders. 
         
            
In paragraph of its  
          John Deere  judgment, the Court also noted that the Court of First Instance had taken account of the detailed and confidential nature
         of the information exchanged, of the frequency of its exchange and of the fact that it was intended only for the undertakings
         participating in the exchange, to the exclusion of their competitors and of consumers. 
         
            
The finding that, in the present case, the beams market was oligopolistic in structure is an assessment of fact which, for
         the reasons set out in paragraph of this judgment, cannot be subject to review by the Court in appeal proceedings. 
         
            
In light of the case-law referred to in paragraphs to of this judgment and given the various findings made by the
         Court of First Instance in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, from which it is clear that the information
         exchange systems in question reduced the degree of uncertainty as to the operation of the market, the Court of First Instance
         was right to conclude, in paragraph of that judgment, that those systems clearly affected the participants' decision-making
         independence. Similarly, having regard to the findings made in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, the Court
         of First Instance was entitled to hold, in paragraph of that judgment, that the decision-making independence of the undertakings
         participating in those systems had been appreciably reduced. 
         
            
The Court of First Instance was therefore right to conclude that the system for exchanging information constituted a separate
         infringement. 
         
            
It follows from all of the foregoing that the second limb of the third ground of appeal is unfounded. 
         
            
Consequently, the third ground of appeal is unfounded. 
         The fourth ground of appeal
         
            
The fourth ground of appeal alleges that the Court of First Instance erred in law when examining and rejecting, in paragraphs
         to of the judgment under appeal, the arguments alleging that the Commission had infringed the appellant's rights of
         defence during the administrative procedure. 
         
            
According to the appellant, the case-law concerning rights of access to the file, as established in Case T-30/Solvay  v  
          Commission  [1995] ECR II-1775, Case T-31/Solvay  v  
          Commission  [1995] ECR II-1821, Case T-32/Solvay  v  
          Commission  [1995] ECR II-1825, Case T-36/ICI  v  
          Commission  [1995] ECR II-and Case T-37/ICI  v  
          Commission  [1995] ECR II-1901, requires that the following be taken into consideration: 
         
─
the nature of the allegations made by the Commission against the undertaking concerned; 
         
─
the principle that it is not for the Commission to determine which documents are or might be relevant to the undertaking's
            defence against those allegations; 
         
─
the principle of equality of arms, which requires that the undertaking must have access to the same information as the Commission.
            
         
            
The appellant submits that, in the present case, several documents and testimonies concerning the role of DG III were made
         available only during the judicial proceedings. Those documents were, the appellant argues, relevant to its defence during
         the administrative procedure. 
         
            
The appellant also argues that the Court of First Instance's finding that the Commission's investigation into its own involvement
         satisfied the applicable procedural requirements is vitiated by an error of law. In particular, the Court of First Instance
         contradicted itself in holding that the documents relating to the Commission's internal investigation were irrelevant to the
         appellant's defence during the administrative procedure even though it had ordered production of those documents during the
         judicial proceedings and relied on them at several points in the judgment under appeal. 
         
            
The appellant goes on to submit that, contrary to what the Court of First Instance held in paragraph of the judgment under
         appeal, the procedural rights of undertakings are not sufficiently guaranteed by the possibility open to them of bringing
         an action before that Court. 
         
            
In that connection, the appellant claims that there is a contradiction between paragraph of the judgment under appeal,
         in which the Court of First Instance rejected the appellant's argument that the Commission was aware of and tolerated the
         harmonisation of the structure and the prices of extras, and paragraph 558, in which, relying on a document drawn up by the
         Commission, it stated that the Commission had indeed been aware of the practice of harmonising  
         extras. According to the appellant, the Court of First Instance could have assessed the issue only by ordering measures of inquiry
         and by examining all the relevant documents and not just some of them. 
         
            
The Commission contends that the case-law relied on by the appellant relates to documents which are in the Commission's possession
         whereas the documents referred to by the appellant in its appeal are internal documents of the Commission, that is to say,
         documents which the Commission is under no obligation to forward to undertakings which are the subject of an investigation.
         
         
            
The appellant has failed to establish how the arguments which it adduced during the administrative procedure might have been
         reinforced had it had access to the documents in question and, more particularly, has failed to indicate which documents could
         have helped it in putting its views across. 
         
            
As regards the documents relating to its internal investigation, the Commission submits that there is no inconsistency between
         the Court of First Instance's finding that the documents in question did not have to be disclosed during the administrative
         procedure and the fact that it ordered their production during the judicial proceedings. Those documents were not evidence
         on which the Commission intended to rely against any of the undertakings concerned. Moreover, the Court of First Instance
         held that the Commission had taken proper account of those undertakings' observations during the investigation. 
         
            
As regards the harmonisation of extras, the Commission takes the view that the appellant is attempting to have the Court review
         facts already assessed by the Court of First Instance. Furthermore, in the light of the latter's careful analysis of the evidence
         and consideration of the legal arguments presented, the Commission claims that the fact that the Court of First Instance did
         not order further measures of enquiry in that regard cannot be treated as constituting an infringement of the rights of the
         defence. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
Access to the file in competition cases is intended, in particular, to enable the addressees of statements of objections to
         acquaint themselves with the evidence in the Commission's file so that, on the basis of that evidence, they can express their
         views effectively on the conclusions reached by the Commission in its statement of objections (Case C-51/P  
          Hercules Chemicals  v  
          Commission  [1999] ECR I-4235, paragraph and the case-law cited therein, and  
          Limburgse Vinyl Maatschappij and Others , paragraph 315). 
         
            
The right of access to the Commission's file is therefore designed to ensure effective exercise of the rights of the defence
         (see  
          Hercules Chemicals , cited above, paragraph 76). Those rights are not only fundamental principles of Community law but are also enshrined in
         Article of the ECHR (
          Limburgse Vinyl Maatschappij and Others , paragraph 316). 
         
            
Failure to respect the right of access to the Commission's file during the procedure prior to adoption of a decision can,
         in principle, cause the decision to be annulled if the rights of defence of the undertaking concerned have been infringed
         (
          Hercules Chemicals , paragraph 77, and  
          Limburgse Vinyl Maatschappij and Others , paragraph 317). 
         
            
In such a case, the infringement committed is not remedied by the mere fact that access to the file was made possible during
         the judicial proceedings relating to an action by which annulment of the contested decision is sought. Where access has been
         granted at that stage, the undertaking concerned does not have to show that, if it had had access to the non-disclosed documents,
         the Commission decision would have been different in content, but only that those documents could have been useful for its
         defence (see, to that effect,  
          Hercules Chemicals , paragraphs 78, and 81, and  
          Limburgse Vinyl Maatschappij and Others , paragraph 318). 
         
            
In the present case, the documents referred to by the appellant in connection with its fourth ground of appeal are not part
         of the file compiled by the Commission for the purpose of investigating whether competition rules had been breached but rather
         internal documents of the Commission, which are by their very nature confidential. 
         
            
Despite the confidential nature of those documents, the Court of First Instance rightly examined whether the refusal to release
         them was justified and whether it prejudiced the appellant's rights of defence. It thus properly examined whether the documents
         in question could have been useful to the appellant's defence. 
         
            
In paragraph of the judgment under appeal, the Court of First Instance held that the internal documents of the Commission
         clearly contained no exonerating evidence. It does not appear from any of the documents referred to by the appellant in its
         appeal that the Court of First Instance erred in law or distorted the facts or evidence in concluding that there was no exonerating
         evidence in those documents. Those documents describe general trends on the steel market but in no way show that the DG III
         officials were aware of or even encouraged the unlawful practices of which the appellant was accused. 
         
            
Contrary to the appellant's contention, it is not possible to draw from the adoption by the Court of First Instance of a measure
         of inquiry any conclusion whatsoever as to whether the documents in question might have been useful to the appellant's defence
         during the administrative procedure. Moreover, the various citations from those documents in the judgment under appeal in
         no way demonstrate that they could have been useful for its defence. 
         
            
In any event, the Court of First Instance also found, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that the undertakings
         concerned had been in a position to comment on the allegedly exonerating documents in their possession in their reply to the
         statement of objections. That finding has not been challenged by the appellant. 
         
            
Given that, as the Advocate General rightly pointed out in paragraphs to of her Opinion, the appellant could have obtained
         the information in the documents in question by consulting other sources, including its own documentation, it cannot legitimately
         claim that access to the Commission's documents was necessary or even useful to its defence during the administrative procedure.
         
         
            
It follows that the appellant's argument that its rights of defence were infringed as a result of its being denied access
         to the Commission's file during the administrative procedure is unfounded. 
         
            
With respect to the appellant's argument concerning the agreements on the harmonisation of the structure and the prices of
         extras, suffice it to state that this argument relates to the assessment of evidence by the Court of First Instance and that,
         as was pointed out in paragraph of this judgment, such an assessment is not, in principle, subject to review by the Court.
         
         
            
As regards the need for the Court of First Instance to order production of other documents, the Court refers to the principle
         set out in paragraph of this judgment. Since the documents which the Court of First Instance considered to be of probative
         value were available to it, it was under no obligation whatsoever to adopt further measures for taking evidence if it formed
         the view that such measures were unnecessary to establish the truth. 
         
            
Consequently, the fourth ground of appeal is in part inadmissible and in part unfounded. 
         The fifth ground of appeal
         
            
The fifth ground of appeal, which can be divided into two limbs, alleges misapplication of Article of the ECSC Treaty as
         regards the statement of reasons for the level of the fines in the contested decision. 
         The first limb of the fifth ground of appeal
         
            
By the first limb of the fifth ground of appeal, the appellant takes issue with paragraphs and of the judgment under
         appeal. It submits that the Court of First Instance erred in law in holding that the absence in the contested decision of
         specific information relating to the calculation of the fine did not constitute a breach of the duty to state reasons under
         Article of the ECSC Treaty which could justify cancellation, in whole or in part, of the fine imposed. 
         
            
The Commission points out that the appellant is not challenging paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, which,
         in themselves, provide the basis for the Court of First Instance's finding, the other paragraphs of that judgment concerning
         the statement of reasons for the fine having to be considered supererogatory. It follows that, even if the Court were to rule
         that those other paragraphs were erroneous, it could not overturn that judgment so long as it did not consider those paragraphs
         to be essential stages in the Court of First Instance's reasoning. 
         
            
The Commission observes that the Court of First Instance held that it was desirable but not legally necessary that information
         on the calculation of the fine be contained in the decision imposing that fine. It also states that, following the contested
         decision, it adopted guidelines for the calculation of fines. 
         
            
In its reply, the appellant submits that, as is clear from paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, it was the
         additional information provided by the Commission which made it possible to identify the errors committed by it in calculating
         the fine imposed on the appellant. It maintains that the Court of First Instance erred in law in holding that there had been
         no breach of the duty to state reasons for the level of the fine in the contested decision. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
The first paragraph of Article of the ECSC Treaty provides that  
         [d]ecisions, recommendations and opinions of the Commission shall state the reasons on which they are based and shall refer
         to any opinions which were required to be obtained.
         
            
It is settled case-law that the purpose of the obligation to state the reasons on which an individual decision is based is
         to enable the Court to review the legality of the decision and to provide the person concerned with sufficient information
         to make it possible to ascertain whether the decision is well founded or whether it is vitiated by a defect which may permit
         its legality to be contested (Case 32/Sisma  v  
          Commission  [1987] ECR 1645, paragraph 8). 
         
            
In the present case, the Court of First Instance was correct in law to take the view, in paragraph of the judgment under
         appeal, that the contested decision contained, in recitals to 312, and of its grounds, an adequate and relevant
         statement of the factors taken into account in assessing the general gravity of the various infringements alleged. 
         
            
The grounds of the contested decision refer, in recital 300, to the gravity of the infringements and state the factors taken
         into consideration in fixing the fine. Account was thus taken, in recital 301, of the economic situation of the steel industry,
         in recitals to 304, of the economic impact of the infringements, in recitals to 307, of the fact that at least some
         of the undertakings were aware that their conduct was or could have been contrary to Article of the ECSC Treaty, in recitals
         to 312, of misunderstandings which might have arisen during the period of the crisis regime and, in recital 316, of the
         duration of the infringements. The contested decision also sets out in detail the participation of each undertaking in each
         infringement. 
         
            
It must be concluded that the information contained in the contested decision enabled the undertaking concerned to ascertain
         the reasons for the adopted measure in order to assert its rights and allows the Community judicature to review the legality
         of that decision. It follows that the Court of First Instance did not infringe Article of the ECSC Treaty in finding that
         adequate reasons had been given in the contested decision with regard to the calculation of the level of the fines. 
         
            
With regard to statements of figures relating to the calculation of fines, it is appropriate to point out that, however useful
         and desirable such figures may be, they are not essential to compliance with the duty to state reasons for a decision imposing
         fines; in any event, the Commission cannot, by mechanical recourse to arithmetical formulas alone, divest itself of its own
         power of assessment (Case C-291/P  
          Sarrió  v  
          Commission  [2000] ECR I-9991, paragraphs to 77, and  
          Limburgse Vinyl Maatschappij and Others , paragraph 464). 
         
            
The fact that it was possible to detect a number errors in the calculation only once those figures had been provided is insufficient
         for a finding that the statement of reasons in the contested decision is inadequate since, when reviewing such a decision,
         the Community Court may order that all the evidence which it requires be submitted to it. It is common ground that, in the
         present case, the Court of First Instance requested and received from the Commission all the figures which it required to
         allow it to carry out a detailed review of the method by which the fine was calculated. 
         
            
It follows that the first limb of the fifth ground of appeal is unfounded. 
         The second limb of the fifth ground of appeal
         
            
By the second limb of the fifth ground of appeal, the appellant submits that there is a contradiction between paragraph of the judgment under appeal, in which the Court of First Instance stated that  
         there can be no question ... of any possible misunderstanding as to the scope of Article 65(1) of the Treaty, and paragraphs and 659, in which it acknowledged that DG III introduced a degree of ambiguity into the meaning of the
         concept of  
         normal competition as used in the ECSC Treaty. The appellant argues that the Court of First Instance ought to have made a further reduction
         in the fine in the light of its finding that the Commission had introduced a degree of ambiguity into the interpretation of
         Article 65(1). The refusal by the Court of First Instance to concede that the appellant could rely on extenuating circumstances
         was based on contradictory reasoning which justifies annulment of the judgment under appeal. 
         
            
The Commission takes the view that there is no contradiction in the judgment under appeal as regards the interpretation of
          
         normal competition in view of the Court of First Instance's finding that the undertakings concerned were careful to conceal the true nature
         and extent of their discussions from the Commission and in view of the fact that those undertakings could have approached
         DG IV (Directorate-General for  
         Competition) of the Commission had they had the slightest doubts as to the legality of those discussions. A further reduction in the
         fine could not therefore have been justified on that account. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
This limb of the fifth ground concerns questions which have already been answered in connection with the consideration of
         the first limb of the third ground in paragraphs to of this judgment. 
         
            
It follows that the fifth ground of appeal must be rejected as unfounded. 
         The sixth ground of appeal
         
            
The appellant submits that the Court of First Instance failed properly to exercise the jurisdiction to review and declare
         void the contested decision which is conferred on it by Article of the ECSC Treaty. It failed to annul Article of that
         decision, according to which the appellant had infringed Article 65(1) of the ECSC Treaty during the period prior to July
         1988, even though it had found, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that  
         the Commission has failed to establish that the applicant is guilty of any infringement connected with the activities of the
         Poutrelles Committee prior to July 1988. 
         
            
The Commission points out that the only infringement prior to July of which the appellant was actually accused in the
         contested decision was participation in the agreement to increase prices in Germany and France which is at issue in recital
         of the grounds of the contested decision. However, the Court of First Instance held, in paragraph of the judgment
         under appeal, that the appellant's participation in that agreement had not been proven to the requisite legal standard. 
         
            
The Commission contends that, in any event, no fine was imposed on the appellant in respect of infringements prior to July
         1988. 
         
            
In its reply, the appellant submits that the reasons given by the Commission cannot justify a refusal to annul Article of
         the contested decision in so far as it concerns the agreement to increase prices in Germany and France. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
As the Advocate General rightly pointed out in paragraph of her Opinion, the infringement period referred to in Article
         of the contested decision does not include the period prior to July 1988. It is undisputed that no fine was imposed on
         the appellant in respect of that period. 
         
            
It follows that the Court of First Instance could not have annulled Article of the contested decision with respect to pricing
         agreements prior to July 1988. 
         
            
Suffice it to state that recital in the grounds of the contested decision had no effect on the operative part of that
         decision and that, therefore, the Court of First Instance was not required to annul it specifically. The appellant's interests
         were adequately safeguarded by the Court of First Instance's finding, in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that
         the appellant's participation in the agreement to fix prices in Germany and France had not been proven to the requisite legal
         standard. 
         
            
It follows that the Court of First Instance did not err in law in failing to annul Article of the contested decision in
         respect of the period prior to July 1988. 
         
            
The sixth ground of appeal is therefore unfounded. 
         
            
It follows from all of the above findings that the appeal must be dismissed. 
         
Costs
            
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, which is applicable to the appeal procedure by virtue of Article of those
         Rules, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party's pleadings.
         Since the Commission has applied for costs to be awarded against the appellant and since that party has been unsuccessful
         in all of its grounds of appeal, it must be ordered to pay the costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Fifth Chamber)
hereby:  
         
1.
 Dismisses the appeal; 
            
2.
 Orders Corus UK Ltd to pay the costs.
            
Wathelet
Edward 
La Pergola 
Jann
von Bahr
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on October 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
M. Wathelet  
Registrar
President of the Fifth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: English.
Top  
 