
Case C-456/Agip Petroli SpA
v
Capitaneria di porto di Siracusa and Others
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Tribunale amministrativo regionale per la Sicilia)
(Maritime cabotage – Regulation (EEC) No 3577/– Law applicable to the manning of vessels over gt carrying out island cabotage – Meaning of ‘voyage which follows or precedes’ a voyage to or from another State)
Summary of the Judgment
Transport – Maritime transport – Freedom to provide services – Maritime cabotage 
(Council Regulation No 3577/92, Art. 3(2) and (3))
In respect of cargo vessels over gt carrying out island cabotage, Article 3(3) of Regulation No 3577/applying the principle
         of freedom to provide services to maritime transport within Member States (maritime cabotage) provides that all matters relating
         to manning are to be the responsibility of the flag State when the voyage concerned follows or precedes a voyage to or from
         another State. In this respect, a ‘voyage which follows or precedes the cabotage voyage’, as set out in that provision, means
         in principle any voyage to or from another State, whether or not the vessel has cargo on board. However, sham voyages without
         cargo on board carried out to circumvent Regulation No 3577/cannot be permitted. Such an abuse can be found to exist only
         if, first, notwithstanding that technically the conditions laid down by Article 3(3) of the regulation apply, the result of
         the international voyage in ballast is that the shipowner benefits, in respect of all matters relating to manning, from the
         application of the law of the flag State, frustrating the aim of Article 3(2) of the regulation, which is to allow the application
         of the law of the host State to all matters relating to manning in the case of island cabotage. Second, there must also be
         objective evidence to show that the essential aim of the international voyage in ballast is to avoid the application of Article
         3(2) of Regulation No 3577/92, in favour of Article 3(3).
      
(see para. 25, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Maritime cabotage – Regulation (EEC) No 3577/– Law applicable to the manning of vessels over gt carrying out island cabotage – Meaning of ‘voyage which follows or precedes’ a voyage to or from another State)
In Case C-456/04,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Tribunale amministrativo regionale per la Sicilia (Italy),
         made by decision of July 2004, received at the Court on October 2004, in the proceedings
      
Agip Petroli SpA
v
Capitaneria di porto di Siracusa,
Capitaneria di porto di Siracusa – Sezione staccata di Santa Panagia,
Ministero delle Infrastrutture e dei Trasporti,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, J. Makarczyk, R. Schintgen, P. Kūris and J. Klučka (Rapporteur),
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: H. von Holstein, Deputy Registrar,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on November 2005,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Agip Petroli SpA, by R. Longanesi Cattani, G. Pitruzzella and A. Cariola, avvocati,
–        the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by G.Albenzio, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Greek Government, by E.-M. Mamouna, acting as Agent,
–        the French Government, by A. Hare, acting as Agent,
–        the Norwegian Government, by A. Eide, acting as Agent, assisted by  C. Galtung, Attorney General for civil affairs,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by K. Simonsson, acting as Agent, assisted by G. Conte and E. Boglione, avvocati,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on December 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 3(3) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 3577/of December applying the principle of freedom to provide services to maritime transport within Member States (maritime
         cabotage) (OJ L 364, p. 7, the ‘regulation’).
      
The reference was made in the context of a dispute between Agip Petroli SpA (‘Agip Petroli’) and the Capitaneria di porto
         di Siracusa (Port of Syracuse Harbour Office), the Capitaneria di porto di Siracusa – Sezione staccata di Santa Panagia (Port
         of Syracuse Harbour Office – Santa Panagia Division) (the ‘Harbour Office’) and the Ministero delle Infrastrutture e dei Trasporti
         (Department of Infrastructure and Transport), concerning a decision by which the Harbour Office refused a Greek-registered
         tanker permission to carry out island cabotage between Magnisi and Gela.
      
 Legal context
The third, fourth, seventh and eighth recitals in the preamble to the regulation read as follows:
      
‘... the abolition of restrictions on the provision of maritime transport services within Member States is necessary for the
         establishment of the internal market; ... the internal market will comprise an area in which the free movement of goods, persons,
         services and capital is ensured;
      
... therefore freedom to provide services should be applied to maritime transport within Member States;
…
... in order to avoid distortion of competition, Community shipowners exercising the freedom to provide cabotage services
         should comply with all the conditions for carrying out cabotage in the Member State in which their vessels are registered;
         ... Community shipowners operating ships registered in a Member State who do not have the right to carry out cabotage in that
         State should nevertheless be beneficiaries of this regulation during a transitional period;
      
... the implementation of this freedom should be gradual and not necessarily provided for in a uniform way for all services
         concerned, taking into account the nature of certain specific services and the extent of the effort that certain economies
         in the Community showing differences in development will have to sustain;’.
      
Article 1(1) of the regulation provides:
      
‘As from January 1993, freedom to provide maritime transport services within a Member State (maritime cabotage) shall apply
         to Community shipowners who have their ships registered in, and flying the flag of a Member State, provided that these ships
         comply with all conditions for carrying out cabotage in that Member State …’.
      
Article of the regulation provides:
      
‘For the purposes of this regulation:
1.       “maritime transport services within a Member State (maritime cabotage)” shall mean services normally provided for remuneration
         and shall in particular include:
      
…
(c)      island cabotage: the carriage of passengers or goods by sea between:
–        ports situated on the mainland and on one or more of the islands of one and the same Member State,
–        ports situated on the islands of one and the same Member State;
–        …’
Under Article of the regulation:
      
‘1.      For vessels carrying out mainland cabotage and for cruise liners, all matters relating to manning shall be the responsibility
         of the State in which the vessel is registered (flag State), except for ships smaller than gt, where host State conditions
         may be applied.
      
2.      For vessels carrying out island cabotage, all matters relating to manning shall be the responsibility of the State in which
         the vessel is performing a maritime transport service (host State).
      
3.      However, from January 1999, for cargo vessels over gt carrying out island cabotage, when the voyage concerned follows
         or precedes a voyage to or from another State, all matters relating to manning shall be the responsibility of the State in
         which the vessel is registered (flag State).
      
…’
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
It is apparent from the order for reference that Agip Petroli chartered the Greek-registered tanker Theodoros IV to ship a cargo of crude oil from Magnisi to Gela, both in Sicily. In order to justify the derogation from the legislation
         of the host State, the Italian Republic, and the application instead of the legislation of the flag State, the Hellenic Republic,
         Agip Petroli relied on Article 3(3) of the regulation. In its application for permission to carry out this island cabotage,
         that company stated that the vessel had subsequently to make a voyage directly to a foreign State without cargo on board (‘voyage
         in ballast’).
      
By decision of December 2001, the Harbour Office refused the Theodoros IV the said permission on the ground that the crew of the vessel included, contrary to Article of the Codice delle navigazione
         (Italian Shipping Code), sailors who were nationals of the Philippines. 
      
In its decision, the Harbour Office justified the application of Italian law, having regard to Circular No TMA3/CA/of
         January of the Ministero dei Trasporti et della Navigazione (Department of Transport and Shipping), according to which
         Article 3(3) of the regulation, providing for the application, by way of exception, of the law of the flag State, applies
         only to cases in which ‘the voyage which follows or precedes the cabotage … is functionally and commercially autonomous, that
         is to say, the vessel has cargo on board destined for or coming from a foreign port’. That provision could not, consequently,
         be invoked if ‘the ship has already completed or will complete after the voyage of island cabotage … a voyage in ballast or
         a voyage with a cargo of goods which, in terms of quality and quantity, cannot render the voyage autonomous … ’.
      
Agip Petroli brought an action against that decision before the referring court, which takes the view that two interpretations
         of Article 3(3) of the regulation are possible. According to that court, the need to prevent circumvention of Article 3(2)
         of the regulation by means of consecutive sham cabotage voyages argues in favour of a restrictive interpretation. However,
         there is nothing in the wording of these provisions to indicate that their scope is limited to voyages with cargo on board.
         
      
Under these circumstances, the Tribunale amministrativo regionale per la Sicilia (Regional Administrative Court of Sicily)
         decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following question to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Does “voyage which follows or precedes the cabotage voyage” in Article 3(3) of [the regulation] mean only a voyage which
         is “functionally and commercially autonomous, that is to say, with cargo on board destined for or coming from a foreign port”,
         as stated in the measures at issue in the [main proceedings], or does it also include a voyage without cargo on board (that
         is, a “voyage in ballast”)?’
      
 On the question referred for a preliminary ruling
By its question, the referring court asks in substance whether, in the area of maritime transport of goods within Member States,
         ‘voyage which follows or precedes’ the cabotage voyage (the ‘international voyage’) in Article 3(3) of the regulation means
         only voyages with cargo on board or whether it also includes voyages in ballast.
      
As a preliminary point, it should be recalled that the regulation’s objective of liberalisation, as described in the third
         and fourth recitals in the preamble in particular, and which is to abolish restrictions on the provision of maritime transport
         services within Member States, has not yet been fully achieved. One of the limits to the liberalisation provided for by the
         regulation concerns island cabotage. While Articles and 3(1) of the regulation specify that, in principle, the law of the
         flag State applies, Article 3(2) of the regulation lays down an exception in respect of island cabotage, providing that, for
         vessels carrying out that type of transport, all matters relating to manning come under the law of the host State. The principle
         of the application of the law of the flag State to the composition of the crew is however laid down in Article 3(3) of the
         regulation, when the island cabotage is preceded or followed by an international voyage carried out by a cargo vessel over
         gt.
      
As regards the meaning of ‘international voyage’, it should be noted at the outset that Article 3(2) of the regulation only
         requires that the cabotage voyage be preceded or followed by an international voyage, without giving any guidance as to what
         is meant by ‘voyage’ or as to the presence or not of cargo on vessels over gt.
      
Under these circumstances, and as the regulation contains no definition of ‘voyage’ and nothing to indicate that the Community
         legislator intended to allow other factors to be taken into account, such as the requirement that there be cargo on board
         or that the international voyage be functionally and commercially autonomous, it must be understood as covering, in principle,
         all voyages whether or not the vessel has cargo on board.
      
This interpretation is moreover in accordance with the objective of the regulation, which is to implement freedom to provide
         services for maritime cabotage under the conditions and subject to the exceptions which the regulation lays down (see, in
         particular, Case C-205/99Analir and Others [2001] ECR I-1271, paragraph 19). In fact, it allows the full application of Article 3(3) of the regulation which, by stipulating
         for its part the application of the law of the flag State, is directly in line with that objective.
      
Moreover, this interpretation is also supported by the fact that, in the area of maritime transport, it is not uncommon for
         voyages in ballast to take place. 
      
However, in spite of that finding, it is not possible to accept sham voyages in ballast carried out to circumvent Article
         of the regulation and the objective of the regulation itself, as recalled at paragraph of this judgment.
      
It should be noted in this respect that, according to settled case-law, Community law cannot be relied on for abusive or fraudulent
         ends (see, in particular, Case C- 367/Kefalas and Others [1998] ECR I-2843, paragraph 20; Case C-373/Diamantis [2000] ECR I-1705, paragraph 33, and Case C-255/Halifax and Others [2006] ECR I-0000, paragraph 68). 
      
The scope of Community law must in no case be extended to cover abuses on the part of a trader, that is to say, activities
         which are not carried out in the context of normal commercial transactions, but only with the aim of circumventing the rules
         of Community law (see to this effect, in particular, Case 125/Cremer [1977] ECR 1593, paragraph 21; Case C-8/General Milk Products [1993] ECR I-779, paragraph 21, and Halifax, paragraph 69).
      
The national courts may, consequently, on the basis of objective evidence, take account of abuse on the part of the persons
         concerned in order, where appropriate, to deny them the benefit of the provision of Community law on which they seek to rely.
         In that respect, they must nevertheless take into account the objectives pursued by that provision (see Diamantis, paragraph 34, and the case-law cited).
      
Consequently, shipowners cannot be allowed to have set up artificially an international voyage in ballast in order that Article
         3(3) of the regulation, and therefore the legislation of the flag State, instead of Article 3(2) of the regulation, and therefore
         the legislation of the host State, be applicable.
      
Such an abuse can be found to exist only if, first, notwithstanding that technically the conditions laid down by Article 3(3)
         of the regulation apply, the result of the international voyage in ballast is that the shipowner benefits, for all matters
         relating to manning, from the application of the law of the flag State, frustrating the aim of Article 3(2) of the regulation,
         which is to allow the application of the law of the host State to all matters relating to manning in the case of island cabotage.
         Second, there must also be objective evidence to show that the essential aim of the international voyage in ballast is to
         avoid the application of Article 3(2) of the regulation, in favour of Article 3(3) (see, to this effect, Halifax, paragraph 86).
      
It is for the national court, however, to verify in accordance with the rules of evidence of national law, provided that the
         effectiveness of Community law is not undermined, whether action constituting an abusive practice has taken place in the case
         before it (Case C-515/Eichsfelder Schlachtbetrieb [2005] ECR I-0000, paragraph 40, and Halifax, paragraph 76).
      
Having regard to the foregoing considerations, the reply to the question referred must be that an international voyage, as
         referred to in Article 3(3) of the regulation, means in principle any voyage to or from another State, whether or not the
         vessel has cargo on board. However, sham voyages without cargo on board carried out to circumvent the rules laid down in the
         regulation cannot be permitted. Such an abuse can be found to exist only if, first, notwithstanding that technically the conditions
         laid down by Article 3(3) of the regulation apply, the result of the international voyage in ballast is that the shipowner
         benefits, for all matters relating to manning, from the application of the law of the flag State, frustrating the aim of Article
         3(2) of the regulation, which is to allow the application of the law of the host State to all matters relating to manning
         in the case of island cabotage. Second, there must also be objective evidence to show that the essential aim of the international
         voyage in ballast is to avoid the application of Article 3(2) of Regulation (EEC) No 3577/92, in favour of Article 3(3).
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
A ‘voyage which follows or precedes’ the cabotage voyage, as referred to in Article 3(3) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 3577/of December applying the principle of freedom to provide services to maritime transport within Member States (maritime
            cabotage), means in principle any voyage to or from another State, whether or not the vessel has cargo on board. However,
            sham voyages without cargo on board carried out to circumvent Regulation (EEC) No 3577/cannot be permitted. Such an abuse
            can be found to exist only if, first, notwithstanding that technically the conditions laid down by Article 3(3) of the regulation
            apply, the result of the international voyage in ballast is that the shipowner benefits, in respect of all matters relating
            to manning, from the application of the law of the flag State, frustrating the aim of Article 3(2) of the regulation, which
            is to allow the application of the law of the host State to all matters relating to manning in the case of island cabotage.
            Second, there must also be objective evidence to show that the essential aim of the international voyage in ballast is to
            avoid the application of Article 3(2) of Regulation (EEC) No 3577/92, in favour of Article 3(3).
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 