
Case C-105/Lammers & Van Cleeff NV 
v
Belgische Staat 
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
rechtbank van eerste aanleg te Antwerpen)
(Freedom of establishment – Free movement of capital – Tax legislation – Corporation tax – Interest paid by a subsidiary on funds lent by the parent company established in another Member State – Reclassification of the interest as taxable dividends – No such reclassification where interest payments are made to a resident company)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment
(Art. EC)
2.        Freedom of movement for persons – Freedom of establishment – Tax legislation – Corporation tax 
(Arts EC and EC)
1.        The mere fact that a resident company is granted a loan by a related company which is established in another Member State
         cannot be the basis of a general presumption of abusive practices and justify a measure which compromises the exercise of
         a fundamental freedom guaranteed by the Treaty. Conversely, a national measure restricting freedom of establishment may be
         justified on the ground of prevention of abusive practices where it specifically targets wholly artificial arrangements which
         do not reflect economic reality and are designed to circumvent the legislation of the Member State concerned and, in particular,
         to escape the tax normally due on the profits generated by activities carried out on national territory. 
      
(see paras 26-28)
2.        Articles EC and EC preclude national legislation under which interest payments made by a company resident in a Member
         State to a director which is a company established in another Member State are reclassified as dividends and are, on that
         basis, taxable, where, at the beginning of the taxable period, the total of the interest-bearing loans is higher than the
         paid-up capital plus taxed reserves, whereas, in the same circumstances, where those interest payments are made to a director
         which is a company established in the same Member State, those payments are not reclassified as dividends and are, on that
         basis, not taxable.
      
Such a difference in treatment between resident companies according to the place of establishment of the company which, as
         director, has granted them a loan constitutes an obstacle to the freedom of establishment if it makes it less attractive for
         companies established in other Member States to exercise that freedom and they may, in consequence, refrain from managing
         a company in the Member State which enacts that measure, or even refrain from acquiring, creating or maintaining a subsidiary
         in that Member State. 
      
Even if the application of a limit such as the limits laid down under that legislation seeks to combat abusive practices,
         it goes in any event beyond what is necessary to attain that objective, since it also affects situations in which the transaction
         concerned cannot be regarded as a purely artificial arrangement. If interest payments made to non‑resident companies are reclassified
         as dividends as soon as they exceed such a limit, it cannot be ruled out that that reclassification will also apply to interest
         paid on loans granted on an arm’s length basis. 
      
(see paras 23, 32-34, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
January (*)
      
(Freedom of establishment – Free movement of capital – Tax legislation – Corporation tax – Interest paid by a subsidiary on funds lent by the parent company established in another Member State – Reclassification of the interest as taxable dividends – No such reclassification where interest payments are made to a resident company)
In Case C‑105/07,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the rechtbank van eerste aanleg te Antwerpen (Belgium), made
         by decision of January 2007, received at the Court on February 2007, in the proceedings
      
NV Lammers & Van Cleeff
v
Belgische Staat,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, G. Arestis (Rapporteur), R. Silva de Lapuerta, J. Malenovský and T. von
         Danwitz, Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        NV Lammers & Van Cleeff, by D. Merckx, advocaat,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by R. Lyal and A. Weimar, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles EC, EC, EC, EC, EC and EC.
         
      
The reference has been made in the context of proceedings between NV Lammers & Van Cleeff, the company seat of which is in
         Belgium (‘the Belgian subsidiary’), and the Belgische Staat (Belgian State) concerning payment of corporation tax for the
         assessment years and 1997. 
      
 Legal context
Article 18(1), point 3, of the Income Tax Code 1992, consolidated by the Royal Decree of April (Belgisch Staatsblad of July 1992, p. 17120), in the version in force at the time of the facts in the main proceedings (‘the ITC 1992’), provided:
         
      
‘Dividends shall include:
…
3.      interest on loans where one of the following limits is exceeded and to the extent of that excess:
–        either the limit set out in Article 55, 
–        or the total of the interest-bearing loans is higher than the paid-up capital plus taxed reserves at the beginning of the
         taxable period.’
      
Article 18(2) of the ITC provided: 
      
‘Loan includes any claim, whether or not represented by securities, of a director of a capital company against that company,
         or of a partner of a partnership against that partnership, and any claim, against those firms, of his spouse or of his children
         if the director, partner or his spouse are legally entitled to the income of the children, except for:
      
1.      bonds issued by a public call for savings;
2.      claims against cooperative companies recognised by the National Council of cooperatives; 
3.      claims of directors and partners which are companies referred to in Article 179.’ 
Article of the ITC was worded as follows:
      
‘Resident companies and, from January 1995, the communal savings banks referred to in Article of the New Communal Law
         shall be subject to corporation tax.’ 
      
Article of the ITC provides inter alia that interest on bonds, loans, claims, deposits and other financial instruments
         equivalent to loans is to be treated as professional expenses only to the extent to which it does not exceed an amount corresponding
         to the market rate having regard to the particular factors specific to the assessment of the risk connected with the transaction
         and, in particular, the financial situation of the debtor and the duration of the loan. 
      
 The main proceedings and the question referred 
The Belgian subsidiary was established on July 1991. On that date, and in accordance with the applicable statutory provisions,
         three directors were appointed, namely the two shareholders of the Belgian subsidiary and the parent company BV Lammers &
         Van Cleeff, established in the Netherlands. 
      
Pursuant to a claim of the parent company BV Lammers & Van Cleeff against the Belgian subsidiary, the subsidiary paid interest
         to it. In accordance with the second indent of Article 18(1), point 3, of the ITC 1992, that interest was considered by the
         Belgian tax authorities in part to be dividends and was assessed as such. 
      
The Belgian subsidiary then lodged objections against the assessments at issue before the Director of Direct Taxation, Antwerp
         II. By decision of June the latter upheld the disputed assessments. On September the Belgian subsidiary brought
         an action before the rechtbank van eerste aanleg te Antwerpen (Court of First Instance, Antwerp) for the annulment of that
         decision. 
      
In its order for reference, the rechtbank states that it follows from Article 18(2), point 3, of the ITC that interest
         payments are not reclassified as dividends and thus are not taxable if made to a director which is a Belgian company, whereas
         those interest payments are reclassified as dividends, and thus taxable, if made to a director which is a foreign company.
         
      
In those circumstances, the rechtbank van eerste aanleg te Antwerpen decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following
         question to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Do Articles EC, EC, EC, EC, EC and EC preclude Belgian national statutory rules, as set out in the then
         applicable Articles 18(1), point 3, and 18(2), point 3, of the Income Tax Code 1992, whereby interest payments were not reclassified
         as dividends, and were therefore not taxable, if those interest payments were made to a director which was a Belgian company,
         whereas in the same circumstances those interest payments were reclassified as dividends, and therefore taxable, if they were
         made to a director which was a foreign company?’ 
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling 
As a preliminary point, it must be remembered that, according to settled case-law, although direct taxation falls within their
         competence, Member States must none the less exercise that competence consistently with Community law and avoid any discrimination
         on grounds of nationality (see, inter alia, Joined Cases C-397/and C-410/Metallgesellschaft and Others [2001] ECR I-1727, paragraph 37; Case C‑324/Lankhorst-Hohorst [2002] ECR I‑11779, paragraph 26; and Case C‑524/Test Claimants in the Thin Cap Group Litigation [2007] ECR I‑2107, paragraph 25). 
      
The national court refers in its question to Articles EC, EC, EC, EC, EC and EC. 
      
In this respect, it must be stated that it follows from the case‑law that the general prohibition of all discrimination on
         grounds of nationality laid down by Article EC applies independently only to situations governed by Community law for which
         the EC Treaty lays down no specific rules of non-discrimination. The Treaty lays down in Articles EC and EC, in particular,
         such specific rules in relation to freedom of establishment and the free movement of capital (see, inter alia, Metallgesellschaft and Others, paragraphs and 39, and Case C‑443/Hollmann [2007] ECR I‑0000, paragraphs and 29). 
      
In so far as the rechtbank is putting a question to the Court as to the interpretation of both Article EC on freedom of
         establishment and Article EC on the free movement of capital, the Court must determine whether legislation of a Member
         State such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which provides for taxation of interest payments, as dividends, of a
         resident company only if they are made to a director or to a partner which is a non‑resident company, is liable to fall within
         the scope of those freedoms. 
      
In this instance, it is apparent from the case‑file that the interest payments made by the Belgian subsidiary were reclassified
         as dividends because they relate to a loan granted by a non‑resident parent company which is a director of that subsidiary.
         
      
It is therefore necessary to examine the rules at issue, first, from the perspective of the Treaty provisions on freedom of
         establishment. 
      
Freedom of establishment, which Article EC grants to Community nationals and which includes the right for them to take
         up and pursue activities as self-employed persons and to set up and manage undertakings, under the conditions laid down for
         its own nationals by the law of the Member State where such establishment is effected, entails, in accordance with Article
         EC, for companies or firms formed in accordance with the law of a Member State and having their registered office, central
         administration or principal place of business within the European Community, the right to exercise their activity in the Member
         State concerned through a subsidiary, branch or agency (see, inter alia, CaseC‑307/Saint‑Gobain ZN [1999] ECR I-6161, paragraph 35; Case C‑196/Cadbury Schweppes and Cadbury Schweppes Overseas [2006] ECR I‑7995, paragraph 41; and Test Claimants in the Thin Cap Group Litigation, paragraph 36). 
      
In the case of companies, their registered office for the purposes of Article EC serves, in the same way as nationality
         in the case of individuals, as the connecting factor with the legal system of a State. Acceptance of the proposition that
         the Member State in which a subsidiary seeks to establish itself may freely apply different treatment merely by reason of
         the fact that the registered office of its parent company is situated in another Member State would deprive Article EC
         of all meaning (see, to that effect, Case C‑330/91Commerzbank [1993] ECR I‑4017, paragraph 13; Metallgesellschaft and Others, paragraph 42; and Test Claimants in the Thin Cap Group Litigation, paragraph 37). Freedom of establishment thus aims to guarantee the benefit of national treatment in the host Member State,
         by prohibiting any discrimination based on the place in which companies have their seat (see, to that effect, Saint‑Gobain ZN, paragraph 35, and Test Claimants in the Thin Cap Group Litigation, paragraph 37). 
      
In the present case, the national legislation at issue in the main proceedings introduces, as regards the taxation of interest
         paid by a resident company in respect of a claim to a director which is a company, a difference in treatment according to
         whether or not the latter company has its seat in Belgium. 
      
It follows from that legislation that interest payments made by a company to a director which is a resident company are not
         reclassified as dividends and are, on that basis, not taxable, even if they exceed one of the two limits laid down in Article
         18(1), point 3, of the ITC 1992. By contrast, where they exceed one of those limits, the interest payments made by a company
         to a director which is a non‑resident company are reclassified as dividends and are, on that basis, taxable. Companies managed
         by a director which is a non‑resident company are therefore subject to tax treatment which is less advantageous than that
         accorded to companies managed by a director which is a resident company. 
      
Similarly, in relation to groups of companies within which a parent company takes on management tasks in one of its subsidiaries,
         such legislation introduces a difference in treatment between resident subsidiaries according to whether or not their parent
         company has its seat in Belgium, thereby making subsidiaries of a non‑resident parent company subject to treatment which is
         less favourable than that accorded to the subsidiaries of a resident parent company. 
      
A difference in treatment between resident companies according to the place of establishment of the company which, as director,
         has granted them a loan constitutes an obstacle to the freedom of establishment if it makes it less attractive for companies
         established in other Member States to exercise that freedom and they may, in consequence, refrain from managing a company
         in the Member State which enacts that measure, or even refrain from acquiring, creating or maintaining a subsidiary in that
         Member State (see, to that effect, Lankhorst-Hohorst, paragraph 32; Test Claimants in the Thin Cap Group Litigation, paragraph 61; and Case C‑231/Oy AA [2007] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 39). 
      
It follows that the difference in treatment to which, under national legislation such as that at issue in the main proceedings,
         resident companies are subject depending on the place in which their director is established, amounts to a restriction on
         freedom of establishment which is prohibited, in principle, by Articles EC and EC. 
      
Such a restriction is permissible only if it pursues a legitimate objective which is compatible with the Treaty and is justified
         by overriding reasons of public interest. It is further necessary, in such a case, that its application be appropriate to
         ensuring the attainment of the objective thus pursued and not go beyond what is necessary to attain it (see, inter alia, Case
         C‑446/Marks & Spencer [2005] ECR I‑10837, paragraph 35, and Cadbury Schweppes and Cadbury Schweppes Overseas, paragraph 47). 
      
In this respect, it must be pointed out that, according to established case-law, a national measure restricting freedom of
         establishment may be justified where it specifically targets wholly artificial arrangements designed to circumvent the legislation
         of the Member State concerned (Test Claimants in the Thin Cap Group Litigation, paragraph and the case‑law cited). 
      
The mere fact that a resident company is granted a loan by a related company which is established in another Member State
         cannot be the basis of a general presumption of abusive practices and justify a measure which compromises the exercise of
         a fundamental freedom guaranteed by the Treaty (Test Claimants in the Thin Cap Group Litigation, paragraph and the case‑law cited). 
      
In order for a restriction on the freedom of establishment to be justified on the ground of prevention of abusive practices,
         the specific objective of such a restriction must be to prevent conduct involving the creation of wholly artificial arrangements
         which do not reflect economic reality, with a view to escaping the tax normally due on the profits generated by activities
         carried out on national territory (Test Claimants in the Thin Cap Group Litigation, paragraph and the case‑law cited). 
      
At paragraph of its judgment in Test Claimants in the Thin Cap Group Litigation, the Court held that legislation of a Member State may be justified by the need to combat abusive practices where it provides
         that interest paid by a resident subsidiary to a non-resident parent company is to be treated as a distribution only if, and
         in so far as, it exceeds what those companies would have agreed upon on an arm’s-length basis, that is to say, the commercial
         terms which those parties would have accepted if they had not formed part of the same group of companies. 
      
The fact that a resident company has been granted a loan by a non‑resident company on terms which do not correspond to those
         which would have been agreed upon at arm’s length constitutes, for the Member State in which the borrowing company is resident,
         an objective element which can be independently verified in order to determine whether the transaction in question represents,
         in whole or in part, a purely artificial arrangement, the essential purpose of which is to circumvent the tax legislation
         of that Member State. In that regard, the question is whether, had there been an arm’s-length relationship between the companies
         concerned, the loan would not have been granted or would have been granted for a different amount or at a different rate of
         interest (Test Claimants in the Thin Cap Group Litigation, paragraph 81). 
      
In the present case, it is apparent from the order for reference that the interest payments made by the Belgian subsidiary
         on a loan granted by a non‑resident company which is a director were reclassified as dividends because the limit laid down
         in the second indent of Article 18(1), point 3, of the ITC had been exceeded, that is to say, at the beginning of the
         taxable period the total of the interest-bearing loans was higher than the paid‑up capital plus taxed reserves.
      
It is clear that, even if the application of such a limit seeks to combat abusive practices, it goes in any event beyond what
         is necessary to attain that objective. 
      
As the Commission of the European Communities stated in its submissions, the limit laid down in the second indent of Article
         18(1), point 3, of the ITC also affects situations in which the transaction concerned cannot be regarded as a purely
         artificial arrangement. If interest payments made to non‑resident companies are reclassified as dividends as soon as they
         exceed such a limit, it cannot be ruled out that that reclassification will also apply to interest paid on loans granted on
         an arm’s length basis. 
      
Consequently, the answer to the question submitted must be that Articles EC and EC must be interpreted as precluding
         national legislation, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, under which interest payments made by a company resident
         in a Member State to a director which is a company established in another Member State are reclassified as dividends and are,
         on that basis, taxable, where, at the beginning of the taxable period, the total of the interest‑bearing loans is higher than
         the paid-up capital plus taxed reserves, whereas, in the same circumstances, where those interest payments are made to a director
         which is a company established in the same Member State, those payments are not reclassified as dividends and are, on that
         basis, not taxable. 
      
Since the Treaty provisions on freedom of establishment thus preclude national legislation such as that at issue in the main
         proceedings, it is not necessary to examine whether the Treaty provisions on the free movement of capital also preclude that
         legislation.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the referring court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
Articles EC and EC preclude national legislation, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, under which interest
            payments made by a company resident in a Member State to a director which is a company established in another Member State
            are reclassified as dividends and are, on that basis, taxable, where, at the beginning of the taxable period, the total of
            the interest-bearing loans is higher than the paid-up capital plus taxed reserves, whereas, in the same circumstances, where
            those interest payments are made to a director which is a company established in the same Member State, those payments are
            not reclassified as dividends and are, on that basis, not taxable. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 