
ORDER OF THE COURT (Seventh Chamber)
June (*)
      
(Appeals — Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice — Article — Competition — Agreements, decisions and concerted practices — European tin stabilisers and epoxidised soya bean oil and esters markets — Fines — Gravity of the infringement — Principle of effective judicial protection — Appeal manifestly inadmissible or manifestly unfounded)
In Case C‑291/P,
APPEAL under Article of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union, brought on June 2014,
Faci SpA, established in Carasco (Italy), represented by S. Piccardo, avvocato, and S. Crosby, Solicitor,
      
applicant,
the other party to the proceedings being:
European Commission, represented by F. Castilla Contreras, J. Norris-Usher and F. Ronkes Agerbeek, acting as Agents, with an address for service
         in Luxembourg,
      
defendant at first instance,
THE COURT (Seventh Chamber),
composed of J.-C. Bonichot, President of the Chamber, J. L. da Cruz Vilaça (Rapporteur) and C. Lycourgos, Judges,
Advocate General: N. Wahl,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the decision taken, after hearing the Advocate General, to give a decision by reasoned order in accordance
         with Article of the Rules of Procedure of the Court,
      
makes the following
Order
By its appeal, Faci SpA (‘Faci’) requests the Court to set aside the judgment of the General Court of the European Union in
         Faci v Commission (T‑46/10, EU:T:2014:138, ‘the judgment under appeal) by which that Court dismissed its action for annulment of Commission
         Decision C(2009) final of November relating to a proceeding under Article EC and Article of the EEA Agreement
         (Case COMP/— Heat Stabilisers) (‘the decision at issue’) and, in the alternative, either to cancel or substantially
         reduce the fine imposed on it.
      
 Legal context
 Regulation (EC) No 1/Under the heading ‘Fines’, Article 23(2) and (3) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1/of December on the implementation
         of the rules on competition laid down in Articles [EC] and [EC] (OJ L 1, p. 1) states:
      
‘2.      The Commission may by decision impose fines on undertakings and associations of undertakings where, either intentionally or
         negligently:
      
(a)      they infringe Article [EC] or Article [EC], …
…
3.      In fixing the amount of the fine, regard shall be had both to the gravity and to the duration of the infringement.’
 The Guidelines on the method of setting fines
Paragraphs to and of the Guidelines on the method of setting fines imposed pursuant to Article 23(2)(a) of Regulation
         No 1/(OJ C 210, p. 2, ‘the Guidelines on the method of setting fines’) state:
      
‘19.      The basic amount of the fine will be related to a proportion of the value of sales, depending on the degree of gravity of
         the infringement, multiplied by the number of years of infringement.
      
20.      The assessment of gravity will be made on a case-by-case basis for all types of infringement, taking account of all the relevant
         circumstances of the case.
      
21.      As a general rule, the proportion of the value of sales taken into account will be set at a level of up to 30% of the value
         of sales.
      
22.       In order to decide whether the proportion of the value of sales to be considered in a given case should be at the lower end
         or at the higher end of that scale, the Commission will have regard to a number of factors, such as the nature of the infringement,
         the combined market share of all the undertakings concerned, the geographic scope of the infringement and whether or not the
         infringement has been implemented.
      
23.      Horizontal price-fixing, market-sharing and output-limitation agreements …, which are usually secret, are, by their very nature,
         among the most harmful restrictions of competition. As a matter of policy, they will be heavily fined. Therefore, the proportion
         of the value of sales taken into account for such infringements will generally be set at the higher end of the scale.
      
…
35.       In exceptional cases, the Commission may, upon request, take account of the undertaking’s inability to pay in a specific social
         and economic context. It will not base any reduction granted for this reason in the fine on the mere finding of an adverse
         or loss-making financial situation. A reduction could be granted solely on the basis of objective evidence that imposition
         of the fine as provided for in these Guidelines would irretrievably jeopardise the economic viability of the undertaking concerned
         and cause its assets to lose all their value.’
      
 Background to the dispute 
By the decision at issue, the Commission found that a certain number of undertakings had infringed Article EC and Article of the Agreement on the European Economic Area of May (OJ L 1, p. 3) by participating in two groups of agreements
         and anticompetitive concerted practices covering the territory of the European Economic Area and concerning both the tin stabiliser
         sector and the epoxidised soybean oil and esters sector (‘the ESBO/esters sector’).
      
The decision at issue states that the undertakings concerned participated in those infringements during various periods between
         February and March 2000, in respect of the tin stabilisers sector, and, between September and September
         2000, in respect of the ESBO/esters sector.
      
Faci, which is a company governed by Italian law operating in the United Kingdom and Spain and whose seat is located in Carasco
         (Italy), produces and sells in particular epoxidised soybean oil and esters.
      
Article of the decision at issue holds Faci liable for having participated, from November to September 2000, in
         a complex of agreements and concerted practices in the ESBO/esters sector across the European Economic Area and consisting
         in fixing prices, in allocating markets through sales quotas, in allocating customers and in exchanging commercially sensitive
         information, in particular on customers, production and sales.
      
Under Article of the decision at issue, a fine of EUR was imposed on Faci.
      
 The procedure before the General Court and the judgment under appeal
By application lodged at the Registry of the General Court on January 2010, Faci applied for the annulment of the decision
         at issue and, in the alternative, the annulment or substantial reduction of the fine that had been imposed on it.
      
In support of its action, Faci raised five pleas in law, of which only the first, the first part of the second and the fourth
         are relevant for the purposes of the present appeal. The General Court listed them in paragraphs to of the judgment
         under appeal as follows:
      
‘In its first plea in law, [Faci] identifies a number of manifest errors of assessment, in that the Commission found that it
         had colluded to fix prices, allocate markets through sales quotas and allocate customers on the [epoxidised soybean oil and
         esters] market.
      
In its second plea, [Faci] claims that there was an infringement of the principle of equal treatment. That plea consists of
         two parts, the first relating to the calculation of the amount of the fine …
      
…
In its fourth plea in law, the applicant contests the reduction granted to another undertaking affected by the [decision at
         issue]. That plea consists of two parts, the first relating to the principle of equal treatment and the second relating to
         the duty to state reasons.’
      
By the judgment under appeal, the General Court dismissed the action in its entirety.
      
 Forms of order sought
Faci requests the Court:
      
–        to set aside the judgment under appeal; 
–        in the alternative to annul or substantially reduce the fine imposed on it; or
–        to send the case back to the General Court for re-assessment; and 
–        to order the Commission to pay the costs of the proceedings.
The Commission requests the Court:
      
–        to dismiss the appeal; and
–        to order Faci to pay the costs of the proceedings.
 The appeal
Under Article of the Court’s Rules of Procedure, where the appeal is, in whole or in part, manifestly inadmissible or
         manifestly unfounded, the Court may at any time, acting on a proposal from the Judge-Rapporteur and after hearing the Advocate
         General, decide by reasoned order to dismiss that appeal in whole or in part. 
      
That article must be applied in the present case.
      
In support of its appeal, Faci raises two grounds of appeal, the first based on an infringement of the Guidelines on
         the method of setting fines, of Article of Regulation No 1/and the principle of proportionality of penalties set out
         in Article of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (‘the Charter’) and the second based on an infringement
         of the principle of effective judicial protection laid down in Article of the Charter.
      
Since those grounds of appeal are closely connected, it is appropriate to consider them together.
      
 Arguments of the parties
By its grounds of appeal, Faci submits in essence, in the first place, that by not satisfactorily examining all of the relevant
         circumstances for the purpose of assessing the gravity of the infringement at issue, the General Court infringed the Guidelines on the method of setting fines, Article of Regulation No 1/and the principle of effective judicial protection
         provided for in Article of the Charter. As a result, there was an infringement of the principle of proportionality of penalties
         stated in Article of the Charter and an excessive fine was imposed on Faci.
      
In that regard, Faci criticises the General Court for having dismissed, in paragraphs to 98, to and to of the judgment under appeal, its arguments that the infringement at issue was much less serious in phase three of the cartel,
         namely from November to September 2000, without conducting a detailed assessment of the radical change in nature of the
         infringement which took place before that phase began.
      
According to Faci, the General Court should have conducted a comparative analysis of the nature of the cartel during the course
         of the second and third phases. According to the evidence in the Commission’s file, such a comparison would indeed have revealed
         that the cartel was in a position to control and manipulate the market during the second phase, namely from March to
         November 1996. However, the cartel could not have functioned during the third phase, in essence, because the most important
         participants left the cartel and the system for ensuring its enforcement was discontinued. 
      
Faci submits that, by failing to examine the role of each undertaking participating in the cartel with reference to the evolution
         of the cartel over time, the General Court imputed to Faci anticompetitive activities established during the second phase
         of the cartel even though Faci had participated only in the third phase of the cartel and had submitted, in the alternative,
         that, in any event, it had committed less serious infringements than the other participants. 
      
As a result, the General Court confirmed the percentage of the value of sales used by the Commission for calculating the basic
         amount of the fine imposed on Faci although in relation to Faci that percentage was excessive since it did not sufficiently
         reflect the difference between its conduct and that of the undertakings which participated in the second phase of the cartel.
         
      
As far as the termination of the enforcement mechanism is concerned, Faci submits that the General Court erred in not taking
         account, in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal, of recital of the decision at issue, where the Commission
         stated that the cartel’s enforcement had not been taken into consideration in setting the fines that it imposed on Faci.
      
Faci also submits that, in paragraphs 65, 90, 91, and of the judgment under appeal, the General Court failed to assess
         correctly the evidence that Faci adduced in order to demonstrate the difference between the second and third phases of the
         cartel, in particular, the ‘Reagens notes’ and the ‘Akcros memorandum’, which show that price fixing and market allocation
         had come to an end. 
      
Faci also criticises the General Court for having dismissed its arguments to the effect that quotas had not been allocated
         during the third phase of the cartel on the sole basis of the considerations set out in paragraph of the judgment under
         appeal and without considering the necessity of an enforcement mechanism for the cartel in operating a quota system of sales.
         
      
Faci also observes that the General Court examined the cartel with sole reference to its object. However, the Commission stated
         in recital of the decision at issue that the behaviour at issue had the object and effect of restricting competition.
         Arguing that the effects of the cartel on competition by themselves constitute aggravating circumstances, Faci criticises
         the General Court for having implicitly recognised that its conduct was less serious without, however, reducing the fine.
      
In the second place, Faci claims that the General Court infringed the principle of effective judicial protection provided
         for in Article of the Charter by not reviewing, for the reasons stated in paragraphs and of the judgment under
         appeal, the legality of the reduction in the fine granted to Baerlocher for inability to pay on the basis of paragraph of the Guidelines on the method of setting fines.
      
In this regard, Faci observes, first, that mistakes made in the granting of such a reduction are capable of distorting competition
         and infringing the principle of non-discrimination, thereby justifying a reduction in the fines imposed on those parties that
         were discriminated against. Second, Faci submits that the General Court erred in stating that Faci claimed that it should
         benefit from a reduction by virtue of paragraph of the Guidelines on the method of setting fines whereas in fact Faci
         only sought to obtain compensation for the consequential loss from such a distortion of competition resulting from the reduction
         in the fine granted to Baerlocher, if that reduction proved to have been unlawful.
      
The Commission submits that both grounds of appeal raised by Faci are inadmissible and, in any event, unfounded. 
      
 Findings of the Court
As a preliminary point, to the extent that Faci submits that the evidence in the Commission’s file indicates that the cartel
         could not have functioned during the third phase, it must be held that Faci is seeking to challenge the General Court’s findings
         of fact in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal.
      
It must be pointed out that, pursuant to Article 256(1) TFEU and the first paragraph of Article of the Statute of the Court
         of Justice of the European Union, appeals are to be limited to points of law. The General Court has exclusive jurisdiction
         to find and assess the relevant facts and assess the evidence. The assessment of the facts and the evidence does not therefore,
         save where it distorts those facts and evidence, constitute a point of law which is, as such, subject upon appeal to review
         by the Court (judgment in ICF v Commission, C‑467/P, EU:C:2014:2274, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
Furthermore, according to the established case-law of the Court, such a distortion must be obvious from the documents on the
         Court’s file, without there being any need to carry out a new assessment of the facts and the evidence (see, in particular,
         judgments in JCB Service v Commission, C‑167/P, EU:C:2006:594, paragraph 108, and YKK and Others v Commission, C‑408/P, EU:C:2014:2153, paragraph 44).
      
Given that the above arguments of Faci are not supported by evidence capable of establishing that the General Court obviously
         distorted the facts and evidence, those arguments must be held manifestly inadmissible.
      
As for Faci’s submissions that, in paragraphs 65, 90, 91, and of the judgment under appeal, the General Court failed
         to assess certain evidence correctly, in particular, the ‘Reagens notes’ and the ‘Akcros memorandum’, those submissions must
         be dismissed as manifestly inadmissible for the same reasons as those stated in paragraphs to of the present order.
         
      
The same is true of Faci’s submission, in connection with paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that it cannot be concluded
         from the facts as stated by the General Court that quotas had been allocated during the third phase of the cartel.
      
As regards the other arguments upon which Faci grounds its appeal, it is appropriate, in the first place, to assess the grounds
         of appeal by which Faci claims in essence that the General Court erred in law by not satisfactorily taking account of all
         of the relevant circumstances for the purpose of assessing the gravity of the infringement at issue during the third phase
         of the cartel.
      
In that regard, it must be noted at the outset that, in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal, the General Court
         considered whether the Commission had established to the requisite legal standard that the meetings which Faci attended during
         the third phase of the cartel had as their object the fixing of prices and the allocation of markets by means of sales quotas
         and the allocation of customers, which the General Court termed as ‘the first aspect of the infringement’. For that purpose,
         the General Court assessed the evidence adduced concerning each year of that phase.
      
Following that assessment, the General Court, first, came to the conclusion in paragraphs to of the judgment under appeal
         that the Commission’s evidence clearly showed that the first aspect of the infringement at issue was continued during the
         relevant period. In particular, the General Court noted in that regard in paragraph of the judgment under appeal that the
         meetings during the third phrase of the cartel which Faci ‘admits having attended, did not take a different turn, in respect
         of their anti-competitive object, from the previous meetings over several years’. In paragraphs to of the judgment
         under appeal, the General Court, second, considered several arguments put forward by Faci and decided that those arguments
         could not overturn that conclusion. 
      
As a result, the General Court cannot be criticised for having erred in its assessment of the specific nature of the infringement
         at issue during the third phrase of the cartel. As is clear from the preceding considerations, the General Court carried out
         a detailed and reasoned analysis of the evidence adduced by the Commission referring specifically to the third phase of the
         cartel, in such a way as to ascertain whether the Commission was wrong in finding that Faci had participated in anticompetitive
         arrangements aiming at fixing prices and at allocating markets and customers through sales quotas.
      
In that regard, contrary to Faci’s submissions, the General Court cannot be criticised in that context for not having conducted
         a comparative analysis of the characteristics of the cartel during the second and third phases. Given the scope of the decision
         at issue, which finds Faci liable for having participated in anticompetitive arrangements solely during the third phase of
         the cartel, it is indisputable, as the General Court correctly pointed out in paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that
         an assessment of the characteristics of the cartel before that phase was not relevant in the present case.
      
It cannot be disputed either that, having concluded that the Commission had established to the requisite legal standard that
         Faci had participated in the abovementioned arrangements during the third phase of the cartel, the General Court did not in
         any way attribute infringements committed during the previous phase to Faci, so that the General Court cannot be criticised
         for confirming a fine for which the basic amount established by the Commission would, on that ground, be excessive in relation
         to Faci.
      
It should also be pointed out in that regard that it follows from paragraph of the Guidelines on the method of setting
         fines that horizontal price-fixing, market-sharing and output-limitation agreements are, by their very nature, among the most
         harmful restrictions of competition and they will therefore be heavily fined. 
      
It follows from the foregoing that Faci’s submissions according to which the General Court did not properly take account of
         the change in nature of the infringement at issue during the third phase of the cartel must be rejected as manifestly unfounded.
      
As for the ground of appeal by which Faci claims that the General Court should have taken account of the non-implementation
         of the cartel for the purpose of assessing the amount of the fine imposed on Faci, that ground of appeal must be dismissed
         as manifestly unfounded.
      
Thus, recital of the decision at issue, according to which the implementation of the cartel was not taken into consideration
         in setting the fines for Faci, must be understood in the light of all the Commission’s considerations in that regard. It follows,
         in particular from recitals and of the decision at issue, the latter expressly referring to recital 707, that the
         Commission found that the cartel had been rigorously implemented until and that that fact should not be taken into account
         in relation to Faci.
      
Therefore, the General Court cannot be criticised for having only held in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal
         that it was apparent from the decision at issue that the cartel had been less rigorously enforced during the third phase.
      
As for Faci’s ground of appeal relating to the non-reduction of the fine, even though, Faci alleges, the General Court limited
         its assessment to that of the anticompetitive object of the cartel, whereas the Commission also took into account its anticompetitive
         effects, which in themselves constitute aggravating circumstances, that ground of appeal must be dismissed as manifestly unfounded.
         
      
It is sufficient to point out, in that regard, that the argument at issue is based upon the premiss that the Commission assessed
         the actual anticompetitive effects of the cartel and concluded that that actual influence of the infringement at issue on
         competition was an aggravating circumstance when calculating the amount of the fines. However, it is apparent from recitals
         and to of the decision at issue that that was not the case, since the Commission emphasised that it was not necessary
         to show the actual anticompetitive effects of the infringement in the present case and since the only aggravating circumstance
         found by the Commission was that of recidivism.
      
It is appropriate, in the second place, to assess the grounds of appeal by which Faci submits, in essence, that the reasons
         stated in paragraphs and of the judgment under appeal are vitiated by errors of law which led the General Court not
         to review the legality of the reduction in the fine granted by the Commission to Baerlocher on grounds of inability to pay
         under paragraph of the Guidelines on the method of setting fines.
      
In that regard, it must be stated at the outset that paragraph of the judgment under appeal does not by any means concern
         the above reduction. To the extent that Faci’s argument can be construed as, in fact, directed at paragraph of that judgment,
         it must be pointed out that it is apparent from the paragraph which precedes it, introduced by the expressions ‘in any event,
         even were the view to be taken that’, that the reasoning developed by the General Court in those paragraphs is included in
         that judgment for the sake of completeness. According to settled case-law of the Court, in an appeal, complaints directed
         against a ground included in a judgment of the General Court purely for the sake of completeness must be immediately dismissed
         as ineffective, since they cannot lead to the judgment under appeal being set aside (see, to that effect, judgment in Commission v Deutsche Post, C‑399/P, EU:C:2010:481, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In addition, it is common ground, as evidenced by paragraph of the judgment under appeal, that during those proceedings
         Faci withdrew one of its heads of claim by which it claimed that the General Court should either annul the reduction of the
         fine granted by the Commission to Baerlocher, or substantially lower the amount of that reduction.
      
In those circumstances, the General Court was, without erring in law, able to find in paragraph of the judgment under
         appeal that, by claiming that the granting of the reduction at issue was contrary to the principle of equal treatment, Faci
         sought, in essence, to obtain a similar reduction of the fine imposed upon it, despite the fact that Faci did not submit such
         a request to the Commission under paragraph of the Guidelines on the method of setting fines, which might have also
         allowed Faci to benefit from a reduction for inability to pay. 
      
It follows that the General Court cannot be criticised for not having reviewed the legality of the reduction in the fine granted
         to Baerlocher on such a basis. The ground of appeal raised by Faci must, therefore, be dismissed as manifestly unfounded in
         that regard.
      
In the light of all of the foregoing considerations, the present appeal must be dismissed in its entirety as partly manifestly
         inadmissible and partly manifestly unfounded.
      
 Costs
Under Article 138(1) of the Rules of Procedure, which applies to appeal proceedings pursuant to Article 184(1) thereof, the
         unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. 
      
Since the Commission has applied for costs to be awarded against Faci and the latter has been unsuccessful, Faci must be ordered
         to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Seventh Chamber) hereby orders:
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
2.     Faci SpA shall pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 