
Case C-250/Turbon International GmbH
v
Oberfinanzdirektion Koblenz
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Hessisches Finanzgericht, Kassel)
(Common Customs Tariff – Tariff headings – Classification in the Combined Nomenclature of ink cartridges compatible with Epson Stylus Color printers – Inks (heading 3215) – Parts and accessories of machines of heading (heading 8473)
Summary of the Judgment
Common Customs Tariff – Tariff headings – Ink cartridge without an integrated print head for use in only one particular type
            of printer – Classification under subheading of the Combined Nomenclature
Annex I to Regulation No 2658/on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff, as amended by
         Regulation No 1734/96, must be interpreted as meaning that an ink cartridge without an integrated print head consisting of
         plastic casing, foam, a metal screen, seals, tape seal, labels, ink and packing material, which, as regards both the cartridge
         and the ink, can only be used in a printer of a particular type, must be classified, pursuant to general rule 3(b) for the
         interpretation of the Combined Nomenclature, under subheading of the Combined Nomenclature. 
      
Even if the ink cartridge in question is constructed in such a way that the printer does not function in the absence of that
         cartridge, the fact remains that the ink contained in the cartridge is the most important factor for the purpose of using
         the goods at issue. The ink cartridge is inserted into the printer not in order to make the printer itself function but specifically
         to supply it with ink. Therefore, the ink must be regarded as determining the essential character of the cartridge. 
      
In that respect, the tariff classification of ink cartridges with an integrated print head, composed of other materials, under
         heading does not necessarily determine the tariff classification of the ink cartridge in question.
      
(see paras 23-25, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Common Customs Tariff – Tariff headings – Classification in the Combined Nomenclature of ink cartridges compatible with Epson Stylus Color printers – Inks (heading 3215) – Parts and accessories of machines of heading (heading 8473))
In Case C-250/05,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Hessisches Finanzgericht, Kassel (Germany), made by decision
         of April 2005, received at the Court on June 2005, in the proceedings
      
Turbon International GmbH, as universal successor in title to Kores Nordic Deutschland GmbH,
      
v
Oberfinanzdirektion Koblenz,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, R. Schintgen, J. Klučka, R. Silva de Lapuerta and L.
         Bay Larsen, Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: K. Sztranc-Sławiczek, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on June 2006,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Turbon International GmbH, as universal successor in title to Kores Nordic Deutschland GmbH, by D. Quednau and J. Metzner,
         Steuerberater,
      
–        the United Kingdom Government, by R. Caudwell, C. White and T. Harris, acting as Agents, and by  O. Thomas, Barrister,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by J. Hottiaux, acting as Agent, and by  B. Wägenbauer, Rechtsanwalt,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on June 2006,
gives the following
Judgment
The reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of headings and of the Combined Nomenclature
         (the ‘CN’), set out in Annex I to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/of July on the tariff and statistical nomenclature
         and on the Common Customs Tariff (OJ L 256, p. 1), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1734/of September
         (OJ L 238, p. 1).
      
That question arose in proceedings between Turbon International GmbH (‘Turbon International’), established in Hattingen, acting
         as universal successor in title to Kores Nordic Deutschland GmbH, and the Oberfinanzdirektion Koblenz concerning the tariff
         classification of ink cartridges without an integrated print head for use in Epson Stylus Color inkjet printers.
      
 Legal context
 The CN
The CN, established by Regulation No 2658/87, is designed to meet the requirements of both the Common Customs Tariff and the
         external trade statistics of the Community. It is based on the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System (hereinafter
         the ‘HS’) drawn up by the Customs Cooperation Council, now the World Customs Organisation, established by the International
         Convention concluded at Brussels on June and approved on behalf of the Community by Council Decision 87/369/EEC of
         April (OJ L 198, p. 1).
      
In the version applicable at the material time in the main proceedings, which is the version in Annex I to Regulation No 1734/96,
         the CN included inter alia, in section VI, Chapter 32, entitled ‘Tanning or dyeing extracts; tannins and their derivatives;
         dyes, pigments and other colouring matter; paints and varnishes; putty and other mastics; inks’, the heading 3215, entitled
         ‘Printing ink, writing or drawing ink and other inks, whether or not concentrated or solid’, and subheadings and
         80, entitled ‘Writing and drawing ink’ and ‘Other’ respectively.
      
In section XVI, Chapter 84, entitled ‘Nuclear reactors, boilers, machinery and mechanical appliances; parts thereof’, the
         CN contained, inter alia, heading 8471, entitled ‘Automatic data processing machines and units thereof; magnetic or optical
         readers, machines for transcribing data onto data media in coded form and machines for processing such data, not elsewhere
         specified or included’, and subheading 40, entitled ‘Printers’. It also included heading 8473, entitled ‘Parts and
         accessories (other than covers, carrying cases and the like) suitable for use solely or principally with the machines or apparatus
         of heading Nos to 8472’ and subheading 90, entitled ‘Other’. 
      
The general rules for the interpretation of the CN, which are set forth in Part I of Title I A thereof  provide, inter alia:
      
‘Classification of goods in the [CN] shall be governed by the following principles:
1.      The titles of sections, chapters and sub-chapters are provided for ease of reference only; for legal purposes, classification
         shall be determined according to the terms of the headings and any relative section or chapter notes and, provided such headings
         or notes do not otherwise require, according to the following provisions.
      
2.      (a) ...
(b)      Any reference in a heading to a material or substance shall be taken to include a reference to mixtures or combinations of
         that material or substance with other materials or substances. Any reference to goods of a given material or substance shall
         be taken to include a reference to goods consisting wholly or partly of such material or substance. The classification of
         goods consisting of more than one material or substance shall be according to the principles of rule 3.
      
3.       When by application of rule 2(b) or for any other reason, goods are prima facie classifiable under two or more headings, classification
         shall be effected as follows:
      
(a)      the heading which provides the most specific description shall be preferred to headings providing a more general description.
         However, when two or more headings each refer to part only of the materials or substances contained in mixed or composite
         goods or to part only of the items in a set put up for retail sale, those headings are to be regarded as equally specific
         in relation to those goods, even if one of them gives a more complete or precise description of the goods;
      
(b)      mixtures, composite goods consisting of different materials or made up of different components, and goods put up in sets for
         retail sale, which cannot be classified by reference to 3(a), shall be classified as if they consisted of the material or
         component which gives them their essential character in so far as this criterion is applicable;
      
...’
 The explanatory notes to the HS
Under Article 6(1) of the HS Convention of June 1983, a committee entitled the Harmonised System Committee, composed of
         representatives of each contracting party, was set up under the auspices of the Customs Cooperation Council. That Committee’s
         task consists in particular of proposing amendments to that convention and preparing explanatory notes, classification opinions
         and other advice on the interpretation of the HS.
      
According to paragraph VIII of the HS explanatory note relating to general rule 3(b), ‘the factor which determines essential
         character will vary as between different kinds of goods. It may, for example, be determined by the nature of the material
         or component, its bulk, quantity, weight or value, or by the role of a constituent material in relation to the use of the
         goods’.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
By By the judgment in Case C-276/Turbon International [2002] ECR I‑1389, the Court ruled that Annex I to Regulation No 2658/87, as amended by Regulation No 1734/96, had to be
         interpreted as meaning that an ink cartridge without integrated print head, consisting of plastic casing, foam, a metal screen,
         seals, tape seal, labels, ink and packing material, which, as regards both the cartridge and the ink, could only be used in
         a printer with the same characteristics as Epson Stylus Color inkjet printers, was to be classified under subheading of the CN.
      
It is apparent from the decision of the referring court that, following that judgment, Turbon International challenged before
         the referring court that part of the Court of Justice’s reasoning set out in paragraph of that judgment, according to which
         the mechanical and electronic functioning of the printer is not dependent on the presence of an ink cartridge such as that
         at issue in the main proceedings. Turbon International maintains that such a premiss is factually inaccurate and that the
         Court wrongly inferred from this that an ink cartridge such as that at issue in the main proceedings cannot be regarded as
         ‘part’ of a printer within the meaning of CN heading 8473.
      
Whilst hearing the evidence at the hearing, the referring court was given a demonstration of how an Epson Stylus Color printer
         operated under various operating conditions.
      
According to that court, that demonstration confirmed the statements of Turbon International, namely that, when connected
         to a computer, a printer which contains no or only one cartridge does not respond to the ‘print’ command issued from that
         computer. In that situation, data are not transferred from the computer to the printer and the print head does not move from
         side to side nor is any paper drawn into the printer. The printer is, as it were, dead. 
      
The referring court adds that if, on the other hand, the cartridges are inserted in the printer, irrespective of whether they
         are full or empty, the printer initialises itself as soon as they have been inserted, that is to say, it executes an internal
         mechanical process by which it ensures that there is no longer any air between the print head inside the printer and the cartridges
         in the ink delivery system. The data are transferred from the computer to the printer and the print head starts to move. Furthermore,
         even if empty ink cartridges are used, the printer still draws in the paper. The difference is, however, that if empty ink
         cartridges are used, the paper emerges without any print on it. 
      
ThTaking account of those findings, the referring court asks whether the ink cartridges concerned should in fact be treated
         as part of a printer and therefore be classified under heading of the CN.
      
As it formed the view that the resolution of the dispute before it depended on the interpretation of headings and of the CN, the Hessisches Finanzgericht (Hesse Finance Court), Kassel, decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following
         question to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘In [Turbon International] it was held that Annex I to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/... as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1734/... had to be interpreted as meaning that an ink cartridge without integrated print head, consisting of plastic casing, foam,
         a metal screen, seals, tape seal, labels, ink and packing material, which, as regards both the cartridge and the ink, could
         only be used in a printer with the same characteristics as Epson Stylus Color inkjet printers, is to be classified under subheading
         of the CN. Contrary to that ruling, should not the ink cartridge described above in fact be classified as a part
         or accessory of a printer under CN heading because the mechanical and electronic functioning of the printer is dependent
         upon the presence of a cartridge of that kind?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
It is settled case‑law that, in the interests of legal certainty and for ease of verification, the decisive criterion for
         the classification of goods for customs purposes is in general to be sought in their objective characteristics and properties
         as defined in the wording of the relevant heading of the CN. The explanatory notes drawn up by the Commission  of the European
         Communities as regards the CN and by the World Customs Organisation as regards the HS are an important aid to the interpretation
         of the scope of the various tariff headings but do not have legally binding force (see Case C-14/Anagram International [2006] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 20)
      
It is also apparent from the case-law of the Court of Justice that the word ‘part’, within the meaning of heading of
         the CN, implies a whole for whose operation the part is essential (C-339/Peacock [2000] ECR I-8947, paragraph 21).
      
In the present case, the circumstances of the case communicated by the referring court reveal that the cartridge itself is
         necessary for the printer to function. It is therefore capable of being regarded as a part and, accordingly, classified in
         subheading of the CN.  
      
However,However, as the Advocate General observes in points to of her Opinion, the ink contained in the cartridge cannot be
         regarded as part of a printer. An ink cartridge, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, is thus made up of two elements
         which, when considered separately, may each be classified under one heading, namely subheadings or of
         the CN, but neither of those headings covers the goods as a whole.
      
Since the product at issue is composed of different materials and neither of the two subheadings mentioned above is more specific
         than the other, the sole provision to which recourse may be had for the purpose of classifying the goods is general rule 3(b)
         (see, to that effect, Case 253/Sportex [1988] ECR 3351, paragraph 7).
      
UnderUnder that general rule, in carrying out the tariff classification of goods it is necessary to identify, from among the materials
         of which they are composed, the one which gives them their essential character. This may be done by determining whether the
         goods would retain their characteristic properties if one or other of their constituents were removed from them (Sportex, paragraph 8; see also, to that effect, C-288/VauDe Sport [2001] ECR I-3683, paragraph 25, and Turbon International, paragraph 26).
      
In the same way, as stated by paragraph VIII of the explanatory note to the HS on general rule 3(b), the factor which determines
         the essential character of the goods may, depending on the type of goods, be determined for example, by the nature of the
         material or component, its bulk, quantity, weight or value, or the role of a constituent material in relation to the use of
         the goods.
      
Even if an ink cartridge, such as that at issue in the main proceedings, is constructed in such a way that the printer does
         not function in the absence of that cartridge, the fact remains that the ink contained in the cartridge is the most important
         factor for the purpose of using the goods at issue. In fact, the ink cartridge is not inserted in the printer in order to
         make the printer itself function but specifically to supply it with ink.  Therefore, the ink must be regarded as determining
         the essential character of an ink cartridge, such as that at issue in the main proceedings. 
      
That interpretation is not affected by the argument of the defendant in the main proceedings, according to which ink cartridges
         with an integrated print head are classified under heading of the CN. Since such ink cartridges are composed of materials
         other than those at issue in the main proceedings, the tariff classification of the former does not necessarily determine
         the tariff classification of the latter. 
      
The answer to the question referred must therefore be that Annex I to Regulation No 2658/87, as amended by Regulation No 1734/96,
         must be interpreted as meaning that an ink cartridge without an integrated print head consisting of plastic casing, foam,
         a metal screen, seals, tape seal, labels, ink and packing material, which, as regards both the cartridge and the ink, can
         only be used in a printer with the same characteristics as Epson Stylus Color inkjet printers, must be classified under subheading
         of the CN.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
Annex Annex I to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff,
            as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1734/of September 1996, must be interpreted as meaning that an ink cartridge
            without an integrated print head consisting of plastic casing, foam, a metal screen, seals, tape seal, labels, ink and packing
            material, which, as regards both the cartridge and the ink, can only be used in a printer with the same characteristics as
            Epson Stylus Color inkjet printers, must be classified under subheading of the Combined Nomenclature.
[Signatures]
*Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 