
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
July (*)
      
(Reference for a preliminary ruling — Geneva Convention of July relating to the Status of Refugees — Article — Third country national who has entered the territory of a Member State after passing through another Member State — Use of the services of people smugglers — Unauthorised entry and stay — Presentation of a forged passport — Criminal penalties — Lack of jurisdiction of the Court)
In Case C‑481/13,
REQUEST for a preliminary ruling under Article TFEU from the Oberlandesgericht Bamberg (Germany), made by decision of
         August 2013, received at the Court on September 2013, in the criminal proceedings against
      
Mohammad Ferooz Qurbani,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of L. Bay Larsen (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, M. Safjan, J. Malenovský, A. Prechal and K. Jürimäe, Judges,
Advocate General: E. Sharpston,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the written procedure, 
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Mr Qurbani, by M. Koch, Rechtsanwalt,
–        the Staatsanwaltschaft Würzburg, by D. Geuder, Leitender Oberstaatsanwalt,
–        the German Government, by T. Henze and A. Wiedmann, acting as Agents,
–        the Netherlands Government, by M. Bulterman and J. Langer, acting as Agents,
–        the Austrian Government, by C. Pesendorfer, acting as Agent,
–        the European Commission, by W. Bogensberger and M. Condou-Durande, acting as Agents,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion, 
gives the following
Judgment
This request for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article of the Convention relating to the Status of
         Refugees, which was signed in Geneva on July and entered into force on April (United Nations Treaty Series, Vol. 189, p. 150, No (1954) (‘the Geneva Convention’)), as supplemented by the Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees
         of January 1967, which entered into force on October 1967. 
      
The request has been made in criminal proceedings brought against Mr Qurbani for forgery of documents, illegal entry, unauthorised
         stay and unauthorised stay without a passport.
      
 Legal context
 International law
The Geneva Convention 
According to Article of the Geneva Convention, entitled ‘Refugees unlawfully in the country of refuge’: 
      
‘1.      The Contracting States shall not impose penalties, on account of their illegal entry or presence, on refugees who, coming
         directly from a territory where their life or freedom was threatened in the sense of article 1, enter or are present in their
         territory without authorization, provided they present themselves without delay to the authorities and show good cause for
         their illegal entry or presence.
      
2.      The Contracting States shall not apply to the movements of such refugees restrictions other than those which are necessary
         and such restrictions shall only be applied until their status in the country is regularized or they obtain admission into
         another country. The Contracting States shall allow such refugees a reasonable period and all the necessary facilities to
         obtain admission into another country.’
      
 EU law
Directive 2004/83/EC 
According to Article of the Council Directive 2004/83/EC of April on minimum standards for the qualification and
         status of third country nationals or stateless persons as refugees or as persons who otherwise need international protection
         and the content of the protection granted (OJ L 304, p. 12): 
      
‘...
4.      Member States may revoke, end or refuse to renew the status granted to a refugee by a governmental, administrative, judicial
         or quasi-judicial body, when: 
      
(a)      there are reasonable grounds for regarding him or her as a danger to the security of the Member State in which he or she is
         present; 
      
(b)      he or she, having been convicted by a final judgement of a particularly serious crime, constitutes a danger to the community
         of that Member State. 
      
5.      In situations described in paragraph 4, Member States may decide not to grant status to a refugee, where such a decision has
         not yet been taken.
      
6.      Persons to whom paragraphs or apply are entitled to rights set out in or similar to those set out in Articles 3, 4, 16,
         22, and and of the Geneva Convention in so far as they are present in the Member State.’ 
      
 German law 
Paragraph 267(1) of the Strafgesetzbuch (Criminal Code) provides: 
      
‘A person who for the purpose of deception in legal transactions produces a counterfeit document, forges a genuine document
         or uses a counterfeit or a forged document, shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or a fine.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Mr Qurbani is an Afghan national who, having used the services of a people smuggler, entered Greece after passing through
         Iran and Turkey.
      
On August 2010, Mr Qurbani left Greece to travel, by plane, to Munich (Germany), under a forged Pakistani passport obtained
         from another people smuggler. 
      
Mr Qurbani was arrested at Munich airport, after the authorities responsible for carrying out checks recognised that his passport
         was forged.
      
Mr Qurbani immediately indicated that he wished to apply for refugee status. 
      
On August 2010, Mr Qurbani was brought to the Bundesamt für Migration und Flüchtlinge (Federal Office for Migration and
         Refugees) where he submitted a formal application to that end.
      
According to the information provided by the referring court, the proceedings relating to that application for asylum are
         still pending. 
      
On April 2011, the Staatsanwaltschaft Würzburg (Public Prosecution Service, Würzburg) applied under a simplified procedure
         to the Amtsgericht Würzburg (Local Court, Würzburg) for a penal order against Mr Qurbani in respect of (i) unauthorised entry,
         unauthorised stay and unauthorised stay without a passport and (ii) forgery of documents. The order made by the Amtsgericht
         was the subject of a challenge by Mr Qurbani before that court itself. 
      
By judgment of February 2013, the Amtsgericht acquitted Mr Qurbani of all those charges.
      
According to that court, the right of asylum, enshrined in the German Constitution, precludes Mr Qurbani being convicted of
         unauthorised stay and unauthorised stay without a passport, while the exemption from penalties provided for in Article of the Geneva Convention applies to the offences of unauthorised entry and forgery of documents.
      
The Staatsanwaltschaft Würzburg brought an appeal on a point of law (Revision) before the Oberlandesgericht Bamberg (Higher Regional Court, Bamberg), pleading, in essence, that Article of the Geneva
         Convention does not apply to the present case, since Mr Qurbani did not enter German territory directly from the State of
         persecution but passed through a Member State other than the Republic of Germany, in this case, the Hellenic Republic. The
         Staatsanwaltschaft also argued that Article concerns only unauthorised entry and cannot deprive the German authorities
         of the possibility of punishing offences connected to that entry. 
      
In those circumstances, the Oberlandesgericht Bamberg, which has doubts as to the interpretation of Article of the Geneva
         Convention, decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary
         ruling:
      
‘(1)      Does the personal ground for exemption from penalties in Article of the [Geneva Convention] also include, beyond its wording,
         forgery of documents, which took place on presentation of a forged passport to a police officer on the occasion of entry by
         air into [Germany], when the forged passport is not in fact necessary to apply for asylum in that State? 
      
(2)      Does the use of people smugglers preclude reliance on Article of the [Geneva Convention]?
(3)      Is the factual requirement in Article of the [Geneva Convention], of coming “directly” from a territory where the life
         or freedom of the person concerned was threatened, to be interpreted as meaning that that condition is also satisfied if the
         person concerned first entered another Member State (here: [the Hellenic Republic]) from where he continued to another Member
         State (here: the Federal Republic of Germany) in which he seeks asylum?’
      
 The jurisdiction of the Court of Justice
By its questions, the referring court asks, in essence, whether Article of the Geneva Convention must be interpreted as
         precluding a person, on the one hand, from being punished, under criminal law, in the Member State in which he seeks asylum,
         for offences connected with his unauthorised entry into that Member State’s territory, such as, in particular, unauthorised
         entry with the assistance of people smugglers and use of a forged identity document, and, on the other, from relying on the
         exemption from penalties provided for in that article, where the person concerned has entered that Member State’s territory
         after passing through another Member State of the European Union. 
      
It must be observed at the outset that the present request for a preliminary ruling raises the question of the Court’s jurisdiction.
         
      
In that regard, the German and Netherlands governments together with the European Commission contend that the Court has no
         jurisdiction to reply to the questions referred as such, since they would result in the Court interpreting directly Article of the Geneva Convention.
      
In those circumstances, it should be noted that, in light of the fact that the Geneva Convention does not contain a clause
         conferring jurisdiction on the Court, the Court can interpret the provisions of that convention, in the present case Article thereof, as requested only if the performance by it of such tasks is covered by Article TFEU (TNT Express Nederland, C‑533/08, EU:C:2010:243, paragraph 58).
      
It is settled case-law that the power, resulting from Article TFEU, to provide interpretations by way of preliminary rulings
         extends only to rules which are part of EU law (TNT Express Nederland, EU:C:2010:243, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In the case of international agreements, it is settled that such agreements concluded by the European Union form an integral
         part of its legal order and can therefore be the subject of a request for a preliminary ruling. On the other hand, the Court
         does not, in principle, have jurisdiction to interpret, in preliminary ruling proceedings, international agreements concluded
         between Member States and non-member countries (TNT Express Nederland, EU:C:2010:243, paragraphs and and the case-law cited).
      
It is only where and in so far as the European Union has assumed the powers previously exercised by the Member States in the
         field to which an international convention not concluded by the European Union applies and, therefore, the provisions of the
         convention have the effect of binding the European Union that the Court has jurisdiction to interpret such a convention (TNT Express Nederland, EU:C:2010:243, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
In the present case, although several pieces of EU legislation have been adopted in the field to which the Geneva Convention
         applies as part of the implementation of a Common European Asylum System, it is undisputed that the Member States have retained
         certain powers falling within that field, in particular relating to the subject-matter covered by Article of that convention.
         Therefore, the Court does not have jurisdiction to interpret directly Article 31, or any other article, of that convention.
         
      
The fact that Article TFEU provides that the common policy on asylum must be in accordance with the Geneva Convention and
         that Article of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union makes clear that the right to asylum is to be guaranteed
         with due respect for that convention and the Protocol relating to the status of refugees of January is not such as
         to call into question the finding in paragraph above that the Court does not have jurisdiction.
      
In addition, as previously held at paragraph of the judgment in B and D (C‑57/and C‑101/09, EU:C:2010:661), although it is true that it is clearly in the interests of the European Union that,
         in order to forestall future differences of interpretation, the provisions of international agreements which have been taken
         over by national law and by EU law should be given a uniform interpretation, irrespective of the circumstances in which they
         are to apply, it must be noted that Article of the Geneva Convention has not been taken over in a piece of EU legislation,
         a number of provisions of EU law referring to that article. 
      
In this connection, the Commission points out, in its written observations, that Article 14(6) of Directive 2004/refers
         to Article of the Geneva Convention.
      
Although in Bolbol (C‑31/EU:C:2010:351) and Abed El Karem El Kott and Others (C‑364/11, EU:C:2012:826) the Court did indeed accept that it had jurisdiction to interpret the provisions of the Geneva Convention
         to which EU law made a renvoi, it must be noted that the present request for a preliminary ruling contains no mention of any rule of EU law which makes
         a renvoi to Article of the Geneva Convention and, in particular, no mention of Article 14(6) of Directive 2004/83. The point should
         also be made that the present request contains nothing which suggests that the latter provision is relevant in the case in
         the main proceedings.
      
It follows from all the foregoing that it has not been established in the present case that the Court has jurisdiction to
         interpret Article of the Geneva Convention.
      
In those circumstances, it must be held that the Court does not have jurisdiction to reply to the questions referred for a
         preliminary ruling by the Oberlandesgericht Bamberg.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable. 
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
The Court of Justice of the European Union does not have jurisdiction to reply to the questions referred for a preliminary
            ruling by the Oberlandesgericht Bamberg (Germany), by decision of August in Case C‑481/13.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 