
Case C-176/Commission of the European Communities
v
Council of the European Union
(Action for annulment – Articles EU, 31(e) EU, EU and EU – Framework Decision 2003/80/JHA – Protection of the environment – Criminal penalties – Community competence – Legal basis – Article EC)
Opinion of Advocate General Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer delivered on May Judgment of the Court (Grand Chamber), September Summary of the Judgment
Environment — Protection — Community competence — Criminal penalties — Framework Decision 2003/on the protection of the
            environment through criminal law — Appropriate legal basis — Article EC – Decision based on Title VI of the Treaty on
            European Union — Infringement of Article EU 
(Arts EC, EC and 280(4) EC; Art. EU; Council Framework Decision 2003/80, Arts to 7)
Framework Decision 2003/on the protection of the environment through criminal law, being based on Title VI of the Treaty
         on European Union, encroaches upon the powers which Article EC confers on the Community, and, accordingly, the entire
         framework decision being indivisible, infringes Article EU. Articles to of that framework decision, which entail partial
         harmonisation of the criminal laws of the Member States, in particular as regards the constituent elements of various criminal
         offences committed to the detriment of the environment, could have been properly adopted on the basis of Article EC in
         so far as, on account of both their aim and their content, their principal objective is the protection of the environment,
         which constitutes one of the essential objectives of the Community.
      
In this regard, while it is true that, as a general rule, neither criminal law nor the rules of criminal procedure fall within
         the Community’s competence, this does not, however, prevent the Community legislature, when the application of effective,
         proportionate and dissuasive criminal penalties by the competent national authorities is an essential measure for combating
         serious environmental offences, from taking measures which relate to the criminal law of the Member States which it considers
         necessary in order to ensure that the rules which it lays down on environmental protection are fully effective. That competence
         of the Community legislature in relation to the implementation of environmental policy cannot be called into question by the
         fact that Articles EC and 280(4) EC reserve to the Member States, in the spheres of customs cooperation and the protection
         of the Community’s financial interests respectively, the application of national criminal law and the administration of justice.
      
(see paras 41-42, 47-48, 51-53)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
September (*)
      
(Action for annulment – Articles EU, 31(e) EU, EU and EU – Framework Decision 2003/80/JHA – Protection of the environment – Criminal penalties – Community competence – Legal basis – Article EC)
In Case C-176/03,
APPLICATION for annulment pursuant to Article EU brought on April 2003,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by M. Petite, J.‑F. Pasquier and W. Bogensberger, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
supported by:
European Parliament, represented by G. Garzón Clariana, H. Duintjer Tebbens and A. Baas, and M. Gómez-Leal, acting as Agents, with an address
         for service in Luxembourg,
      
intervener,
v
Council of the European Union,  represented by J.‑C. Piris, J. Schutte and K. Michoel, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant,
supported by:
Kingdom of Denmark, represented by J. Molde, acting as Agent,
      
Federal Republic of Germany, represented by W.‑D. Plessing and A. Dittrich, acting as Agents,
      
Hellenic Republic, represented by E.‑M. Mamouna and M. Tassopoulou, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
Kingdom of Spain, represented by N. Díaz Abad, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
French Republic, represented by G. de Bergues, F. Alabrune and E. Puisais, acting as Agents, 
      
Ireland, represented by D. O’Hagan, acting as Agent, and P. Gallagher, E. Fitzsimons SC and E. Regan BL, with an address for service
         in Luxembourg,
      
Kingdom of the Netherlands, represented by H.G. Sevenster and C. Wissels, acting as Agents,
      
Portuguese Republic, represented by L. Fernandes and A. Fraga Pires, acting as Agents, 
      
Republic of Finland, represented by A. Guimaraes-Purokoski, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg, 
      
Kingdom of Sweden, represented by A. Kruse, K. Wistrand and A. Falk, acting as Agents,
      
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, represented by C. Jackson, acting as Agent, and R. Plender QC, 
      
interveners,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President,  P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas,  R. Silva de Lapuerta and A. Borg Barthet,  Presidents
         of Chambers,  R. Schintgen  (Rapporteur),  N. Colneric,  S. von Bahr, J. N. Cunha Rodrigues, G. Arestis, M. Ilešič and J. Malenovský,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,
Registrar:   K. Sztranc, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on April 2005,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2005,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application the Commission of the European Communities is seeking annulment of Council Framework Decision 2003/80/JHA
         of January on the protection of the environment through criminal law (OJ L 29, p. 55; ‘the framework decision’).
      
 Legal framework and background
On January 2003, on the initiative of the Kingdom of Denmark, the Council of the European Union adopted the framework decision.
Based on Title VI of the Treaty on European Union, in particular Articles EU, 31(e) EU and 34(2)(b) EU, as worded prior
         to the entry into force of the Treaty of Nice, the framework decision constitutes, as is clear from the first three recitals
         in its preamble, the instrument by which the European Union intends to respond with concerted action to the disturbing increase
         in offences posing a threat to the environment.
      
The framework decision lays down a number of environmental offences, in respect of which the Member States are required to
         prescribe criminal penalties. 
      
Thus, Article of the framework decision, entitled ‘Intentional offences’, provides:
‘Each Member State shall take the necessary measures to establish as criminal offences under its domestic law 
(a)      the discharge, emission or introduction of a quantity of substances or ionising radiation into air, soil or water which causes
         death or serious injury to any person;
      
(b)      the unlawful discharge, emission or introduction of a quantity of substances or ionising radiation into air, soil or water
         which causes or is likely to cause their lasting or substantial deterioration or death or serious injury to any person or
         substantial damage to protected monuments, other protected objects, property, animals or plants;
      
(c)      the unlawful disposal, treatment, storage, transport, export or import of waste, including hazardous waste, which causes or
         is likely to cause death or serious injury to any person or substantial damage to the quality of air, soil, water, animals
         or plants;
      
(d)      the unlawful operation of a plant in which a dangerous activity is carried out and which, outside the plant, causes or is
         likely to cause death or serious injury to any person or substantial damage to the quality of air, soil, water, animals or
         plants;
      
(e)      the unlawful manufacture, treatment, storage, use, transport, export or import of nuclear materials or other hazardous radioactive
         substances which causes or is likely to cause death or serious injury to any person or substantial damage to the quality of
         air, soil, water, animals or plants;
      
(f)      the unlawful possession, taking, damaging, killing or trading of or in protected wild fauna and flora species or parts thereof,
         at least where they are threatened with extinction as defined under national law;
      
(g)      the unlawful trade in ozone-depleting substances,
when committed intentionally.’
Article of the framework decision, entitled ‘Negligent offences’, provides:
‘Each Member State shall take the necessary measures to establish as criminal offences under its domestic law, when committed
         with negligence, or at least serious negligence, the offences enumerated in Article 2.’
      
Article of the framework decision states that each Member State is to take the necessary measures to ensure that participating
         in or instigating the conduct referred to in Article is punishable.
      
Article 5(1) of the framework decision provides that the penalties thus laid down must be ‘effective, proportionate and dissuasive’
         including, ‘at least in serious cases, penalties involving deprivation of liberty which can give rise to extradition’. Article
         5(2) adds that the criminal penalties ‘may be accompanied by other penalties or measures’.
      
Article of the framework decision governs the liability, as the result of an act or omission, of legal persons and Article
         sets out the sanctions to which they are to be subject, which ‘include criminal or non-criminal fines and may include other
         sanctions’.
      
Finally, Article of the framework decision concerns jurisdiction and Article deals with prosecutions brought by a Member
         State which does not extradite its own nationals.
      
The Commission objected in the various Council bodies to the legal basis relied on by the Council to require the Member States
         to impose criminal penalties on persons committing environmental offences. In its submission, the correct legal basis in that
         respect was Article 175(1) EC and it had indeed put forward, on March 2001, a proposal for a Directive of the European
         Parliament and of the Council on the protection of the environment through criminal law (OJ C E, p. 238, ‘the proposed
         directive’), based on Article EC, the annex to which listed the Community law measures to which the offences set out in
         Article of the proposal relate.
      
On April 2002, the European Parliament expressed its view on both the proposed directive, at first reading, and on the draft
         framework decision.
      
It concurred with the Commission’s view of the scope of the Community’s competence, whilst calling on the Council (i) to use
         the framework decision as a measure complementing the directive that would take effect in relation to the protection of the
         environment through criminal law solely in respect of judicial cooperation  and (ii) to refrain from adopting the framework
         decision before adoption of the proposed directive (see texts adopted by the Parliament on April bearing references
         A5‑0099/(first reading) and A5‑0080/2002).
      
The Council did not adopt the proposed directive, but the fifth and seventh recitals to the framework decision are worded
         as follows:
      
‘(5)      The Council considered it appropriate to incorporate into the present Framework decision a number of substantive provisions
         contained in the proposed Directive, in particular those defining the conduct which Member States have to establish as criminal
         offences under their domestic law.
      
…
(7)      The Council has considered this proposal but has come to the conclusion that the majority required for its adoption by the
         Council cannot be obtained. The said majority considered that the proposal went beyond the powers attributed to the Community
         by the Treaty establishing the European Community and that the objectives could be reached by adopting a Framework-Decision
         on the basis of Title VI of the Treaty on European Union. The Council also considered that the present Framework Decision,
         based on Article of the Treaty on European Union, is a correct instrument to impose on the member States the obligation
         to provide for criminal sanctions. The amended proposal submitted by the Commission was not of a nature to allow the Council
         to change its position in this respect.’
      
The Commission appended the following statement to the minutes of the Council meeting at which the framework decision was
         adopted:
      
‘The Commission takes the view that the Framework Decision is not the appropriate legal instrument by which to require Member
         States to introduce sanctions of a criminal nature at national level in the case of offences detrimental to the environment.
      
As the Commission pointed out on several occasions within Council bodies, it considers that in the context of the competences
         conferred on it for the purpose of attaining the objectives stated in Article of the Treaty establishing the European Community,
         the Community is competent to require the Member States to impose sanctions at national level – including criminal sanctions
         if appropriate – where that proves necessary in order to attain a Community objective.
      
This is the case for environmental matters which are the subject of Title XIX of the Treaty establishing the European Community.
Furthermore, the Commission points out that its proposal for a Directive on the protection of the environment through criminal
         law has not been appropriately examined under the codecision procedure.
      
If the Council adopts the Framework Decision despite this Community competence, the Commission reserves all the rights conferred
         on it by the Treaty.’
      
 The action
By order of the President of the Court of September 2003, the Kingdom of Denmark, the Federal Republic of Germany, the
         Hellenic Republic, the Kingdom of Spain, the French Republic, Ireland, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Portuguese Republic,
         the Republic of Finland, the Kingdom of Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, on the one hand,
         and the Parliament, on the other, were granted leave to intervene in support of the form of order sought by the Council and
         the Commission respectively.
      
By order of March 2004, the President of the Court dismissed the application brought by the European Economic and Social
         Committee for leave to intervene in support of the form of order sought by the Commission.
      
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission challenges the Council’s choice of Article EU, in conjunction with Articles EU and 31(e) EU, as the legal
         basis for Articles to of the framework decision. It submits that the purpose and content of the latter are within the
         scope of the Community’s powers on the environment, as they are stated in Article 3(1) EC and Articles to EC.
      
Although it does not claim that the Community legislature has a general competence in criminal matters, the Commission submits
         that the legislature is competent, under Article EC, to require the Member States to prescribe criminal penalties for
         infringements of Community environmental‑protection legislation if it takes the view that that is a necessary means of ensuring
         that the legislation is effective. The harmonisation of national criminal laws, in particular of the constituent elements
         of environmental offences to which criminal penalties attach, is designed to be an aid to the Community policy in question.
      
The Commission recognises that there is no precedent in this area. It relies, however, in support of its argument, on the
         case-law of the Court concerning the duty of loyal cooperation and the principles of effectiveness and equivalence (see, inter
         alia, Case 50/Amsterdam Bulb [1977] ECR 137, paragraph 33, Case C‑186/Nunes and de Matos [1999] ECR I‑4883, paragraphs and 14, and the order of July in Case C‑2/IMM Zwartveld and Others [1990] ECR I‑3365, paragraph 17).
      
Likewise, a number of regulations adopted in the sphere of fisheries and transport policy either require the Member States
         to bring criminal proceedings or impose restrictions on the types of penalties which those States may impose. The Commission
         refers, in particular, to two Community measures which require the Member States to introduce penalties which are necessarily
         criminal in nature, although that qualification has not been expressly employed (see Article of Council Directive 91/308/EEC
         of June on prevention of the use of the financial system for the purpose of money laundering (OJ L 166, p. 77)
         and Articles to of Council Directive 2002/90/EC of November defining the facilitation of unauthorised entry, transit
         and residence (OJ L 328, p. 17)).
      
In addition, the Commission submits that the framework decision must in any event be annulled in part on the ground that Articles
         5(2), and thereof leave the Member States free to prescribe penalties other than criminal penalties, even to choose between
         criminal and other penalties, which  undeniably falls within the Community’s competence.
      
However, the Commission does not maintain that the framework decision as a whole should have been the subject-matter of a
         directive. In particular, it does not dispute that Title VI of the Treaty on European Union is the appropriate legal basis
         for the provisions of the decision which deal with jurisdiction, extradition and prosecutions of persons who have committed
         offences. However, given that those provisions are incapable of existing independently, it must apply for annulment of the
         framework decision in its entirety.
      
The Commission also puts forward a ground of challenge alleging abuse of process. In that regard, it relies on the fifth and
         seventh recitals in the preamble to the framework decision, which show that the choice of an instrument under Title VI of
         the Treaty was based on considerations of expediency, since the proposed directive had failed to obtain the majority required
         for its adoption because a majority of Member States had refused to recognise that the Community had the necessary powers
         to require the Member States to prescribe criminal penalties for environmental offences.
      
The Parliament concurs with the Commission’s arguments. It submits, more specifically, that the Council confused the Community’s
         power to adopt the proposed directive and the power, not claimed by the Community, to adopt the framework decision in its
         entirety. The matters upon which the Council relies in support of its argument are, in reality, considerations of expediency
         concerning the choice of whether or not to impose solely criminal penalties, considerations which should have been dealt with
         in the legislative procedure on the basis of Articles EC and EC.
      
The Council and the Member States which have intervened in these proceedings, with the exception of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
         submit that, as the law currently stands, the Community does not have power to require the Member States to impose criminal
         penalties in respect of the conduct covered by the framework decision.
      
Not only is there no express conferral of power in that regard, but, given the considerable significance of criminal law for
         the sovereignty of the Member States, there are no grounds for accepting that this power can have been implicitly transferred
         to the Community at the time when specific substantive competences, such as those exercised under Article EC, were conferred
         on it.
      
Articles EC and EC, which expressly reserve to the Member States the application of national criminal law and the
         administration of justice, confirm that interpretation.
      
That interpretation is also borne out by the fact that the Treaty on European Union devotes a specific title to judicial cooperation
         in criminal matters (see Articles EU, EU and 31(e) EU), which expressly confers on the European Union competence in
         criminal matters, in particular as regards the determination of the constituent elements of the relevant offences and penalties.
         The Commission’s position is therefore contradictory, since it amounts, on the one hand, to claiming that the authors of the
         Treaty on European Union and the EC Treaty intended to confer by implication on the Community competence in criminal matters
         and, on the other, to disregarding the fact that the same authors expressly attributed such a competence to the European Union.
         
      
None of the judgments or secondary legislation to which the Commission refers lends support to its argument.
First, the Court has never obliged the Member States to adopt criminal penalties. According to its case-law, it is certainly
         the responsibility of the Member States to ensure that infringements of Community law are penalised under conditions, both
         procedural and substantive, which are analogous to those applicable to infringements of national law of a similar nature and
         importance, and the penalty must, moreover, be effective, dissuasive and proportionate to the infringement; furthermore, the
         national authorities must proceed with respect to infringements of Community law with the same diligence as that which they
         bring to bear in implementing corresponding national laws (see, in particular, Case 68/Commission v Greece [1989] ECR 2965, paragraphs and 25). However, the Court has not held, either expressly or by implication, that the Community
         is competent to harmonise the criminal laws applicable in the Member States. It has rather held that the choice of penalties
         is a matter for the Member States.
      
Second, legislative practice is in keeping with that interpretation. The various pieces of secondary legislation restate the
         traditional form of words, by virtue of which ‘effective, proportionate and dissuasive sanctions’ are to be prescribed (see,
         for example, Article of Directive 2002/90), but do not call into question the freedom of the Member States to choose between
         proceeding under administrative or criminal law. On the rare occasions when the Community legislature has specified that the
         Member States are to bring criminal or administrative proceedings, it has merely stated expressly the choice which was open
         to them in any event.
      
Furthermore, whenever the Commission has proposed to the Council that a Community measure having implications for criminal
         matters be adopted, the Council has detached the criminal part of that measure so that it may be dealt with in a framework
         decision (see Council Regulation (EC) No 974/of May on the introduction of the euro  (OJ L 139, p. 1), which
         had to be supplemented by Council Framework Decision 2000/383/JHA of May on increasing protection by criminal penalties
         and other sanctions against counterfeiting in connection with the introduction of the euro (OJ L 140, p. 1); see also
         Directive 2002/90, supplemented by Council Framework Decision 2002/946/JHA of November on the strengthening of the
         penal framework to prevent the facilitation of unauthorised entry, transit and residence (OJ L 328, p. 1)).
      
In this instance, regard being had to both its purpose and content, the framework decision concerns the harmonisation of criminal
         law. The mere fact that it seeks to combat environmental offences is not such as to found the Community’s competence. In fact,
         the framework decision supplements Community law on environmental protection.
      
In addition, the Council contends that the plea alleging abuse of process is based on an incorrect reading of the preamble
         to the framework decision.
      
The Kingdom of the Netherlands, whilst supporting the form of order sought by the Council, adopts a slightly more qualified
         argument than the Council. It contends that, in exercising the powers conferred on it by the EC Treaty, the Community may
         require the Member States to provide for the possibility of punishing certain conduct under national criminal law, provided
         that the penalty is inseparably linked to the relevant substantive Community provisions and that it can actually be shown
         that imposing penalties under criminal law in that way is necessary for the achievement of the objectives of the Treaty in
         the area concerned (see Case C‑240/Germany  v Commission [1992] ECR I‑5383). That could be the case if the enforcement of a harmonising rule based, for example, on Article EC
         gave rise to a need for criminal penalties.
      
Conversely, if it is apparent from the content and nature of the proposed measure that it is intended essentially to bring
         about a general harmonisation of criminal laws and that the system of penalties is not inseparably linked to the area of Community
         law concerned, Articles EU, 31(e) EU and 34(2)(b) EU are the correct legal basis for the measure. That is the case in this
         instance. It is clear from the purpose and content of the framework decision that it is intended, generally, to secure harmonisation
         of criminal laws in the Member States. The fact that rules adopted under the EC Treaty may be concerned is not decisive.
      
 Findings of the Court
Article EU provides that nothing in the Treaty on European Union is to affect the EC Treaty. That requirement is also found
         in the first paragraph of Article EU, which introduces Title VI of the Treaty on European Union.
      
It is the task of the Court to ensure that acts which, according to the Council, fall within the scope of Title VI of the
         Treaty on European Union do not encroach upon the powers conferred by the EC Treaty on the Community (see Case C‑170/Commission  v Council [1998] ECR  I-2763, paragraph 16).
      
It is therefore necessary to ascertain whether Articles to of the framework decision affect the powers of the Community
         under Article EC inasmuch as those articles could, as the Commission maintains, have been adopted on the basis of the
         last-mentioned provision.
      
On that point, it is common ground that  protection of the environment constitutes one of the essential objectives of the
         Community (see Case 240/ADBHU [1985] ECR 531, paragraph 13, Case 302/Commission v Denmark [1988] ECR 4607, paragraph 8, Case C‑213/Outokumpu [1998] ECR I‑1777, paragraph 32). In that regard, Article EC states that the Community has as its task to promote ‘a high
         level of protection and improvement of the quality of the environment’ and, to that end, Article 3(1)(l) EC provides for the
         establishment of a ‘policy in the sphere of the environment’.
      
Furthermore, in the words of Article EC ‘[e]nvironmental protection requirements must be integrated into the definition
         and implementation of the Community policies and activities’, a provision which emphasises the fundamental nature of that
         objective and its extension across the range of those policies and activities.
      
Articles EC to EC comprise, as a general rule, the framework within which Community environmental policy must be carried
         out. In particular, Article 174(1) EC lists the objectives of the Community’s action on the environment and Article EC
         sets out the procedures to be followed in order to achieve those objectives. The Community’s powers are, in general, exercised
         in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article EC, following consultation of the Economic and Social Committee
         and the Committee of the Regions. However, in relation to certain spheres referred to in Article 175(2) EC, the Council takes
         decisions alone, acting unanimously on a proposal from the Commission after consulting the Parliament and the two abovementioned
         bodies.
      
As the Court has previously held, the measures referred to in the three indents of the first subparagraph of Article 175(2)
         EC all imply the involvement of the Community institutions in areas such as fiscal policy, energy policy or town and country
         planning policy, in which, apart from Community policy on the environment, either the Community has no legislative powers
         or unanimity within the Council is required (Case C‑36/Spain  v Council [2001] ECR I‑779, paragraph 54).
      
Moreover, it must be borne in mind that, according to the Court’s settled case-law, the choice of the legal basis for a Community
         measure must rest on objective factors which are amenable to judicial review, including in particular the aim and the content
         of the measure (see, inter alia, Case C-300/Commission  v Council [1991] ECR I-2867, ‘Titanium dioxide’, paragraph 10, and Case C‑336/Huber [2002] ECR I‑7699, paragraph 30).
      
As regards the aim of the framework decision, it is clear both from its title and from its first three recitals that its objective
         is the protection of the environment. The Council was concerned ‘at the rise in environmental offences and their effects which
         are increasingly extending beyond the borders of the States in which the offences are committed’, and, having found that those
         offences constitute ‘a threat to the environment’ and ‘a problem jointly faced by the Member States’, concluded that ‘a tough
         response’ and ‘concerted action to protect the environment under criminal law’ were called for.
      
As to the content of the framework decision, Article establishes a list of particularly serious environmental offences,
         in respect of which the Member States must impose criminal penalties. Articles to of the decision do indeed entail partial
         harmonisation of the criminal laws of the Member States, in particular as regards the constituent elements of various criminal
         offences committed to the detriment of the environment. As a general rule, neither criminal law nor the rules of criminal
         procedure  fall within the Community’s competence (see, to that effect, Case 203/Casati [1981] ECR 2595, paragraph 27, and Case C‑226/Lemmens [1998] ECR I‑3711, paragraph 19).
      
However, the last-mentioned finding does not prevent the Community legislature, when the application of effective, proportionate
         and dissuasive criminal penalties by the competent national authorities is an essential measure for combating serious environmental
         offences, from taking measures which relate to the criminal law of the Member States which it considers necessary in order
         to ensure that the rules which it lays down on environmental protection are fully effective.
      
It should also be added that in this instance, although Articles to of the framework decision determine that certain conduct
         which is particularly detrimental to the environment is to be criminal, they leave to the Member States the choice of the
         criminal penalties to apply, although, in accordance with Article 5(1) of the decision, the penalties must be effective, proportionate
         and dissuasive.
      
The Council does not dispute that the acts listed in Article of the framework decision include infringements of a considerable
         number of Community measures, which were listed in the annex to the proposed directive. Moreover, it is apparent from the
         first three recitals to the framework decision that the Council took the view that criminal penalties were essential for combating
         serious offences against the environment.
      
It follows from the foregoing that, on account of both their aim and their content,  Articles to of the framework decision
         have as their main purpose the protection of the environment and they could have been properly adopted on the basis of Article
         EC.
      
That finding is not called into question by the fact that Articles EC and 280(4) EC reserve to the Member States, in the
         spheres of customs cooperation and the protection of the Community’s financial interests respectively, the application of
         national criminal law and the administration of justice. It is not possible to infer from those provisions that, for the purposes
         of the implementation of environmental policy, any harmonisation of criminal law, even as limited as that resulting from the
         framework decision, must be ruled out even where it is necessary in order to ensure the effectiveness of Community law.
      
In those circumstances, the entire framework decision, being indivisible, infringes Article EU as it encroaches on the
         powers which Article EC confers on the Community.
      
There is therefore no need to examine the Commission’s argument that the framework decision should in any event be annulled
         in part in so far as Articles 5(2), and leave the Member States free also to provide for penalties other than criminal
         penalties, even to choose between criminal penalties and other penalties, matters allegedly falling undeniably within the
         Community’s competence.
      
In the light of all the foregoing, the framework decision must be annulled.
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Council has been unsuccessful,
         the Council must be ordered to pay the costs. Pursuant to the first paragraph of Article 69(4), the interveners in these proceedings
         must bear their own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby:
1.      Annuls Council Framework Decision 2003/80/JHA of January on the protection of the environment through criminal law;
2.      Orders the Council of the European Union to pay the costs;
3.      Orders the Kingdom of Denmark, the Federal Republic of Germany, the Hellenic Republic, the Kingdom of Spain, the French Republic,
            Ireland, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Portuguese Republic, the Republic of Finland, the Kingdom of Sweden, the United
            Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the European Parliament to bear their own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 