
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-160/Friedrich Skalka
v
Sozialversicherungsanstalt der gewerblichen Wirtschaft
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Oberster Gerichtshof (Austria))
(Social security for migrant workers – Austrian rules on compensatory supplements to retirement pensions – Classification of benefits and lawfulness of the residence requirement under Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71)
Summary of the Judgment
Social security for migrant workers – Special non-contributory benefits – Coordination scheme laid down in Article 10a of
            Regulation No 1408/– Scope – Compensatory supplement to retirement or invalidity pensions granted on the basis of objective
            criteria and not financed by contributions from insured persons – Benefit mentioned in Annex IIa to that regulation – Included
(Council Regulation No 1408/71, Arts 4(2a) and 10a and Annex IIa)
The provisions of Article 10a of Regulation No 1408/71, as amended and updated by Regulation No 118/97, and those of Annex
         IIa to that regulation are to be interpreted as meaning that a compensatory supplement, such as the Austrian compensatory
         supplement, mentioned in Annex IIa, which tops up a retirement pension or an invalidity pension and is intended to ensure
         a minimum means of subsistence for its recipient where the pension is insufficient, the granting of which is dependent on
         objective criteria defined by law and which is never financed from contributions made by the insured persons, falls within
         the scope of that regulation and therefore constitutes a special non-contributory benefit within the meaning of Article 4(2a)
         of that regulation. Accordingly the situation of a person who, after June 1992, the date of entry into force of Regulation
         No 1247/which inserted Articles 4(2a) and 10a into Regulation No 1408/71, fulfils the conditions for the grant of that
         benefit is governed with effect from January 1995, the date of the Republic of Austria’s accession to the European Union,
         solely by the coordinating provisions laid down by Article 10a. 
      
(see paras 26, 29, 31, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)April 2004(1)
(Social security for migrant workers  –  Austrian rules on compensatory supplements to retirement pensions  –  Classification of benefits and lawfulness of the residence requirement under Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71)
 In Case C-160/02,
             REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Oberster Gerichtshof (Austria) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings
            pending before that court between
            
Friedrich Skalka
and
Sozialversicherungsanstalt der gewerblichen Wirtschaft,
 on the interpretation of Articles 4(2a) and 10a of, and Annex IIa to, Council Regulation (EEC) No 1408/of June on the application of social security schemes to employed persons, to self-employed persons and to members of their families
            moving within the Community, as amended and updated by Council Regulation (EC) No 118/of December (OJ L 28,
            p. 1),  
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),,
 composed of : J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, President of the Chamber,  J.-P. Puissochet (Rapporteur) and  F. Macken, Judges,
            
 Advocate General:  J. Kokott, Registrar:  M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrator,
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
–
 the Sozialversicherungsanstalt der gewerblichen Wirtschaft,  by P. Bachmann, Rechtsanwalt,
               
–
 the Austrian Government,  by H. Dossi, acting as Agent,
               
–
 the German Government,  by W.-D. Plessing, acting as Agent,
               
–
 the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster, acting as Agent,
               
–
 the Finnish Government, by T. Pynnä, acting as Agent,
               
–
 the United Kingdom Government,  by J.E. Collins, acting as Agent, and E. Sharpston QC,
               
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by G. Braun and H. Michard, acting as Agents,
               
after hearing the oral observations of the Austrian Government, represented by  G. Hesse, acting as Agent, of the United Kingdom
               Government, represented by  C. Jackson, acting as Agent, and by  E. Sharpston, and of the Commission, represented by  G. Braun,
                at the hearing on October 2003,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting of November 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By order of March 2002, received at the Court on April 2002, the Oberster Gerichtshof (Supreme Court) referred for a
         preliminary ruling under Article EC a question on the interpretation of Articles 4(2a) and 10a of, and Annex IIa to, Council
         Regulation (EEC) No 1408/of June on the application of social security schemes to employed persons, to self-employed
         persons and to members of their families moving within the Community, as amended and updated by Council Regulation (EC) No
         118/of December (OJ L 28, p. 1) (‘Regulation No 1408/71’).
         
            
 This question was posed in proceedings between Mr Skalka and the  Sozialversicherungsanstalt der gewerblichen Wirtschaft (Social
         Insurance Institution for Trade and Commerce) (‘the Sozialversicherungsanstalt’) concerning that institution’s refusal to
         grant Mr Skalka the ‘compensatory supplement’ to his retirement pension provided for by the Gewerbliche Sozialversicherungsgesetz
         (Federal Law of October – ‘the GSVG’).
         
Legal background
Community legislation
            
 Article 4(1) of Regulation No 1408/states: 
         ‘This Regulation shall apply to all legislation concerning the following branches of social security: 
         ... 
         (c) old-age benefits; 
         …’ 
         
            
 Under Article 4(2a), the regulation applies to special non-contributory benefits which are provided under legislation or schemes
         other than those referred to in Article 4(1) or excluded under Article 4(4), where such benefits are intended inter alia to
         provide supplementary, substitute or ancillary cover against the risks covered by the branches referred to in Article 4(1)(a)
         to (h).
         
            
 Article 10a(1) of Regulation No 1408/provides:
         ‘Notwithstanding the provisions of Article and Title III, persons to whom this Regulation applies shall be granted the
         special non-contributory cash benefits referred to in Article 4(2a) exclusively in the territory of the Member State in which
         they reside, in accordance with the legislation of that State, provided that such benefits are listed in Annex IIa. Such benefits
         shall be granted by and at the expense of the institution of the place of residence.’
         
            
 In Annex IIa to Regulation No 1408/71, entitled ‘Special non-contributory benefits’, the following is listed at (a) under
         ‘Point K, Austria’:
         ‘Compensatory supplement (Federal Act of September on General Social Insurance – ASVG, Federal Act of October on Social Insurance for Persons engaged in Trade and Commerce – GSVG and Federal Act of October on Social Insurance
         for Farmers – BSVG)’.
         
National legislation
            
 The Austrian pension insurance system is intended to provide the person insured, in old age and in the event of impaired capacity
         for work, with a benefit linked to that person’s standard of living before retirement or invalidity. 
         
            
 If the level of pension benefit is not sufficient to ensure an appropriate way of life, known as the ‘standard rate’, where
         the period of insurance is too short or the basis of assessment applied is too low, Austrian law provides for payment of a
         compensatory supplement.  The compensatory supplement system is governed, in a situation such as that in the main proceedings,
         by the Federal Law of September on General Social Insurance and by the GSVG.  
         
            
 If the pension plus, in accordance with Paragraph of the GSVG, other net income received by the pensioner and any other
         amount to be taken into account falls short of the standard rate, the pensioner is entitled, under Paragraph 149(1) of the
         GSVG, as long as he is habitually resident in Austria, to a compensatory supplement equal to the difference between the standard
         rate and his personal income.
         
            
 That supplement can only be paid to a person receiving a pension under the statutory pension insurance scheme and is a benefit
         ancillary to that pension.  It is calculated automatically by the administration when the pension is claimed without need
         for a separate application and is paid by the insurance institution at the same time as the pension. 
         
            
 The financing of the compensatory supplement is governed by Paragraph of the GSVG.  Paragraph 156(1) provides that, notwithstanding
         the provisions of Paragraph 156(2), the compensatory supplement is to be reimbursed by the Austrian Land in which the head
         office of the social assistance agency which makes the payment to the recipient is situated.  Under Paragraph 156(2), the
         Federation bears part of the costs of the payment of compensatory supplements and its participation in that cost is determined
         by the Finanzausgleichsgesetz (Law on the Equalisation of Financial Burdens). 
         
            
 Compensatory supplement is thus financed entirely by the Federation. 
         
The main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 The claimant in the main proceedings, Mr Skalka, is an Austrian national.  Since May 1990, he has received a disability
         pension paid by the Sozialversicherungsanstalt. Since he reached the age of 60, the same amount of benefit has been paid as
         an early retirement pension based on a long period of insurance. 
         
            
 Mr Skalka has been habitually resident in Tenerife (Spain) since the end of 1990.  On December he applied, on the
         basis of the GSVG, to the Sozialversicherungsanstalt for a compensatory supplement.  On October that institution refused
         his application on the ground that Mr Skalka had his habitual residence abroad and that the benefit in question could not
         be exported.
         
            
 Mr Skalka brought an action to challenge that refusal.  On the substance it was held, at first instance and on appeal, that
         the compensatory supplement was a special non-contributory benefit within the meaning of Article 10a of Regulation No 1408/and could not, according to that article, be granted to a person habitually resident in a Member State other than the Republic
         of Austria.
         
            
 At both instances it was considered that there was no reason to request a preliminary ruling from the Court on the legal classification
         of the benefit under Regulation No 1408/71, on the ground that the judgment of the Court of Justice in Case C-215/Jauch [2001] ECR I-gave a sufficient answer on that point.
         
            
 Mr Skalka, considering that the question should have been referred to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling, appealed
         on a point of law to the Oberster Gerichtshof, which decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following question to the
         Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
         ‘Is Article 10a of Regulation … No 1408/… , in conjunction with Annex IIa, to be interpreted as meaning that the compensatory
         supplement provided for under [the GSVG] falls within its scope and therefore constitutes a special non-contributory benefit
         within the meaning of Article 4(2a) of the regulation, so that only the coordinating provisions laid down by Article 10a of
         the regulation are applicable to a person who, like the claimant, fulfils after June the conditions for the granting
         of that benefit?’
         
The question referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 By its question the referring court asks essentially whether the compensatory supplement provided for by the GSVG, a benefit
         included in Annex IIa to Regulation No 1408/71, constitutes a special non-contributory benefit within the meaning of Article
         4(2a) of that regulation, so that the situation of a person who, like the claimant in the main proceedings, fulfils  after
         June the conditions for the granting of that benefit is governed with effect from January 1995, the date of Austria’s
         accession to the European Union, solely by the coordinating provisions in Article 10a of that regulation and the benefit can
         therefore be paid only to a person habitually resident in Austria.
         
            
 The provisions in Article 10a of Regulation No 1408/derogating from the principle of the exportability of social security
         benefits must be interpreted strictly. That provision can apply only to benefits which satisfy the conditions defined in Article
         4(2a) of Regulation No 1408/71, that is, benefits which are both special and non-contributory and which are listed in Annex
         IIa to that regulation (see Case C-215/Jauch, cited above, paragraph 21).
         
            
 As stated in paragraph above, the compensatory supplement is included in the list of special non-contributory benefits within
         the meaning of Article 4(2a) of Regulation No 1408/71, to which Annex IIa to that regulation applies.
         
            
 It therefore remains to be examined whether, firstly, the benefit in question is special in nature and is intended to provide
         supplementary, substitute or ancillary cover against the risks covered by one or more of the branches of social security referred
         to in Article 4(1) of Regulation No 1408/71, and secondly whether such benefit is non-contributory.
         
Special benefit
            
 For the Sozialversicherungsanstalt, all the governments which lodged observations and the Commission, the special benefits
         which fall under Article 4(2a) are special benefits of a mixed kind. They are characterised by the fact that they are connected
         partly to social security, in that they benefit as of right persons who fulfil the conditions for the grant of the social
         security benefits to which they are linked, and partly to social assistance, in the sense that they are not dependent on periods
         of work or contributions and that they are intended to relieve a clear need. 
         
            
 The Austrian compensatory supplement fulfils the criteria identified by the Court in its judgment in Case 313/Lenoir [1988] ECR 5391. 
         
            
 It ensures the provision of an income supplement to those persons receiving insufficient social security benefit by guaranteeing
         a minimum means of subsistence to those persons whose total income falls below a statutory threshold.  As it is intended to
         guarantee a minimum subsistence income for pensioners, the benefit is by nature social assistance.  Such a benefit is always
         closely linked to the socio-economic situation of the country concerned and its amount, fixed by law, takes account of the
         standard of living in that country.  As a result its purpose would be lost if it were to be granted outside the State of residence.
         
            
 A special benefit within the meaning of Article 4(2a) of Regulation No 1408/is defined by its purpose.  It must either
         replace or supplement a social security benefit and be by its nature social assistance justified on economic and social grounds
         and fixed by legislation setting objective criteria (see to that effect Case C-20/Snares [1997] ECR I-6057, paragraphs 33, and 43, Case C-297/Partridge [1998] ECR I-3467, paragraph 34, and Case C-43/Leclère and Deaconescu [2001] ECR I-4265, paragraph 32).
         
            
 As all the interveners have stated, the Austrian compensatory supplement tops up a retirement pension or an invalidity pension.
          It is by nature social assistance in so far as it is intended to ensure a minimum means of subsistence for its recipient
         where the pension is insufficient.  Its grant is dependent on objective criteria defined by law.  Consequently, it must be
         classified as a ‘special benefit’ within the meaning of Regulation No 1408/71.
         
Non-contributory benefit
            
 For the Sozialversicherungsanstalt, all the governments which have lodged observations and the Commission, the Austrian compensatory
         supplement is non-contributory in nature.
         
            
 The relevant determining criterion is how the benefit is actually financed (see to that effect Jauch, cited above, paragraphs and 33).  The Court must consider whether that financing comes directly or indirectly from social
         contributions or from public resources.
         
            
 In the case of the Austrian compensatory supplement, the costs are borne by a social institution which then receives reimbursement
         in full from the relevant Land, which in turn receives from the Federal budget the sums necessary to finance the benefit.
          At no time do the contributions of insured persons form part of this financing arrangement.
         
            
 Consequently, it is established that the Austrian compensatory supplement must be regarded as being non-contributory within
         the meaning of Article 4(2a) of Regulation No 1408/71.
         
            
 The answer to the question referred for a preliminary ruling by the Oberster Gerichtshof must therefore be that the provisions
         of Article 10a of Regulation No 1408/and those of Annex IIa thereto must be interpreted as meaning that the compensatory
         supplement, within the meaning of the GSVG, falls within the scope of that regulation and therefore constitutes a special
         non-contributory benefit within the meaning of Article 4(2a) of that regulation, so that the situation of a person who, after
         June 1992, fulfils the conditions for the grant of that benefit is governed with effect from January 1995, the date of
         the Republic of Austria’s accession to the European Union, solely by the coordinating provisions laid down by Article 10a.
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the Austrian, German, Netherlands, Finnish and United Kingdom Governments and by the Commission, which
         have submitted observations to the Court, are not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings,
         a step in the action pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court.
         
On those grounds,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
 in answer to the questions referred to it by the Oberster Gerichtshof by order of March 2002, hereby rules:
         
The provisions of Article 10a of Council Regulation (EEC) No 1408/of June on the application of social security
                     schemes to employed persons, self-employed persons and to members of their families moving within the Community, as amended
                     and updated by Council Regulation (EC) No 118/of December 1996, and those of Annex IIa thereto must be interpreted as
                     meaning that the compensatory supplement, within the meaning of the Gewerbliche Sozialversicherungsgesetz (Austrian Federal
                     Law of October on Social Insurance for self-employed persons engaged in trade and commerce), falls within the scope
                     of that regulation and therefore constitutes a special non-contributory benefit within the meaning of Article 4(2a) of that
                     regulation, so that the situation of a person who, after June 1992, fulfils the conditions for the grant of that benefit
                     is governed with effect from January 1995, the date of the Republic of Austria’s accession to the European Union, solely
                     by the coordinating provisions laid down by Article 10a.
                  
Cunha Rodrigues
Puissochet
Macken
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on April 2004.
         
R. Grass
J.N. Cunha Rodrigues
Registrar
President of the Fourth Chamber
 –
            
Language of the case: German.
Top  
 