
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Directive 75/442/EEC – Waste – Domestic waste waters discharged through septic tanks in the countryside – Waste not covered by other legislation – Failure to transpose)
In Case C‑188/08,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on May 2008,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by S. Pardo Quintillán, D. Lawunmi and M. Wilderspin, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Ireland, represented by D. O’Hagan, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
defendant,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of J.‑C. Bonichot (Rapporteur), President of the Fourth Chamber, acting as President of the Second Chamber, C.W.A.
         Timmermans, K. Schiemann, P. Kūris and L. Bay Larsen, Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
By its action, the Commission of the European Communities requests the Court to declare that, by failing fully and correctly
         to transpose into its domestic legislation the requirements of Articles and of Council Directive 75/442/EEC of July
         on waste (OJ L 194, p. 39), as amended by Council Directive 91/156/EEC of March (OJ L 78, p. 32; ‘Directive
         75/442’), relating to the disposal of domestic waste waters in the countryside through septic tanks and other individual waste
         water treatment systems (‘IWWTS’), Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive.
      
 Legal framework
 Community law 
Article of Directive 75/provides:
      
‘For the purposes of this Directive:
(a)      “waste” shall mean any substance or object in the categories set out in Annex I which the holder discards or intends or is
         required to discard.
      
…
(d)      “management” shall mean the collection, transport, recovery and disposal of waste, including the supervision of such operations
         and after-care of disposal sites;
      
…’
Article 2(1) of Directive 75/provides:
      
‘The following shall be excluded from the scope of this Directive:
…
(b)      where they are already covered by other legislation:
…
(iv)      waste waters, with the exception of waste in liquid form;
…’
Article of Directive 75/is worded as follows:
      
‘Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that waste is recovered or disposed of without endangering human
         health and without using processes or methods which could harm the environment, and in particular:
      
–        without risk to water, air, soil and plants and animals,
–        without causing a nuisance through noise or odours,
–        without adversely affecting the countryside or places of special interest.
Member States shall also take the necessary measures to prohibit the abandonment, dumping or uncontrolled disposal of waste.’
Article of Directive 75/provides:
      
‘Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that any holder of waste:
–        has it handled by a private or public waste collector or by an undertaking which carries out the operations listed in Annex
         II A or B, or
      
–        recovers or disposes of it himself in accordance with the provisions of this Directive.’
Article of Directive 75/is worded as follows:
      
‘Establishments or undertakings which carry out the operations referred to in Articles to shall be subject to appropriate
         periodic inspections by the competent authorities.’
      
Directive 75/was subsequently codified by Directive 2006/12/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of April
         on waste (OJ L 114, p. 9).
      
 National law
 The Public Health (Ireland) Act, Section of the Public Health (Ireland) Act, requires the competent authorities to inspect for and abate nuisances
         which could be injurious to health. It applies to ‘any pool, ditch, gutter, watercourse, privy, urinal, cesspool, drain or
         ashpit so foul or in such a state as to be a nuisance or injurious to health’. It confers on those authorities enforcement
         powers, which can be coupled with a daily fine, and power to undertake, themselves, the necessary remedial measures and to
         recover the costs thereof from the owner.
      
 The Local Government (Water Pollution) Acts, and Section 3(1) of the Local Government (Water Pollution) Act, 1977, as amended by the Local Government (Water Pollution) (Amendment)
         Act, (‘the Local Government (Water Pollution) Acts, and 1990’), prohibits water pollution and makes any contravention
         of that prohibition subject to criminal sanctions. Section 3(3) thereof provides a defence to a charge of committing such
         an offence if the accused ‘prove[s] that he took all reasonable care to prevent the entry to waters to which the charge relates
         by providing, maintaining, using, operating and supervising facilities, or by employing practices or methods of operation,
         that were suitable for the purpose of such prevention’.
      
Section 3(5) of the Local Government (Water Pollution) Act, provides for exceptions to the prohibition on pollution under
         section 3(1). Thus, the First Schedule to the Local Government (Water Pollution) Regulations, contains an exemption as
         regards ‘domestic sewage not exceeding five cubic metres in any hour period which is discharged to an aquifer from a septic
         tank or any other disposal unit by means of a percolation area, soaking pit or any other method’.
      
Local authorities have powers of inspection, investigation and enforcement in cases of infringement of section of the Local
         Government (Water Pollution) Acts, and 1990.
      
 The Building Control Acts 1990-and additional provisions
Under the Building Control Acts 1990-new Building Regulations have, since June 1992, governed the construction of new
         buildings. To be considered compliant with those Regulations building projects must comply with the rules contained in Technical Guidance Documents published by the Irish Department of the Environment, Heritage and Local Government.
      
Part H of the Building Regulations and Technical Guidance Document H include requirements for septic tanks. Part H of the
         regulations requires a septic tank to be:
      
‘(a)      of adequate capacity and so constructed that it is impermeable to liquids;
(b)      adequately ventilated; and
(c)      so sited and constructed that –
(i)      it is not prejudicial to the health of any person,
(ii)      it does not pollute, so as to endanger public health, any water (including ground water) which is used as a source of supply
         for human consumption, 
      
…’
Technical Guidance Document H refers to Standard S.R. of of the National Standards Authority of Ireland entitled, ‘Recommendations
         for Domestic Effluent Treatment and Disposal from a Single Dwelling House’. That is the standard in Ireland in respect of
         septic tanks. It was brought to the notice of local authorities by Circular No 1/of January from the Department
         of the Environment, Heritage and Local Government. In addition, Standard I.S. EN 12566‑3:has, since its entry into force
         on July 2009, governed ‘proprietary’ systems.
      
Part D of the Building Regulations provides that works must be carried out in a workmanlike manner and materials used must
         be suitable for the purpose for which they are used. Innovative materials or systems, such as waste water treatment systems,
         must have approval from the Irish Agrément Board or ‘equivalent’ certification from an approval body in a Member State.
      
The local Building Control Authorities are responsible for enforcement of the Building Regulations.
      
 The Planning and Development Acts 2000-Under the Planning and Development Acts 2000-prior planning permission is required for the installation of any new IWWTS.
         That may be granted only if the project complies with the corresponding development plan (section 34(2)(a)(i) of the Planning
         and Development Act 2000).
      
The Department of the Environment, Heritage and Local Government subsequently published Circular SP 5/of July 2003.
         It addresses three subjects: the quality and use of information in development plans; the assessment of sites and of the design,
         installation and maintenance of septic tanks; and the necessity for suitable follow-up mechanisms (inspections, databases,
         tests). So far as the assessment of sites and of the design of septic tanks is concerned, that circular envisages the replacement,
         in Technical Guidance Document H, of Standard S.R.6:by an updated version of the Manual on Treatment Systems for Single
         Houses, published in by the Environmental Protection Agency (‘the EPA Manual’).
      
The following have also been adopted:
      
–        the Sustainable Rural Housing Guidelines of 2005, adopted under section of the Planning and Development Act 2000, which
         were amended by the Development Plan and Development Management Guidelines 2007. Paragraph 4.of the guidelines repeats
         the recommendations of Circular SP 5/03. Those recommendations also note the importance of providing new developments with
         proper waste water treatment and disposal facilities;
      
–        development plans and local area plans, which provide the framework for the grant of planning permissions. Development plans
         must include the objectives of section 10(2) of the Act, that is to say, in particular, the conservation and protection of
         the environment under paragraph (c), sustainable development under paragraph (d) and the preservation of the character of
         the landscape under paragraph (e).
      
Finally, section of the Planning and Development Act enables the Minister for the Environment to direct local authorities
         to make development plans comply with the Planning Acts.
      
 County Cavan’s Bye-Laws relating to water pollution
The Local Government Code of confers on local authorities the option of making bye-laws which are mandatory, but in a
         limited locality. Within that framework, County Cavan adopted the Water Pollution (Wastewater Treatment Systems for Single
         Houses) Bye-Laws, (‘the Bye-Laws’), which implement a complete system of ‘management’ of waste water from all IWWTS,
         old and new.
      
Section 1.of the Bye-Laws requires every waste water treatment system to comply with the EPA Manual and its updated
         versions. Under section 2.1, IWWTS must function properly and be of sufficient capacity.
      
In addition, section 6.provides that inspections must be carried out by a competent person at least every seven years.
      
Finally, section 2.enables the competent authorities to require temporary measures to be taken and section 8.makes any
         contravention of the Bye-Laws a criminal offence.
      
 Pre-litigation procedure
Following a complaint relating to odours from an urban waste water treatment plant, the Commission, on October 2002, sent
         Ireland a letter of formal notice, since it considered that Ireland should have transposed Directive 75/as regards some
         aspects of the management of that waste such as odours, not regulated by Council Directive 91/271/EEC of May concerning
         urban waste-water treatment (OJ L 135, p. 40). The Commission then issued, on July 2003, a reasoned opinion on the
         same complaint.
      
In an additional letter of formal notice dated December 2003, the Commission maintained that Ireland, which relied on the
         exclusion under Article 2(1)(b) of Directive 75/442, had cited no existing legislation, Community or national, which would
         justify the absence of specific provision transposing that directive as regards odours from urban waste water treatment plants.
         The Commission also extended its action to domestic waste waters disposed of in the countryside through IWWTS, on the ground
         that, since no national legislation organised the management of such waste, Ireland had failed to fulfil its obligations to
         transpose Articles and to of that directive.
      
On December 2004, the Commission sent Ireland an additional reasoned opinion repeating the previous complaints, concluding
         that Ireland had infringed its obligations under Directive 75/and requesting it to rectify the infringement within a period
         of two months from the receipt of that opinion.
      
The Commission, taking account of the enactment, at the end of 2005, of new legislation on odours from urban waste water treatment
         plants, abandoned the complaint on that point.
      
On the other hand, since it considered that the situation continued to be unsatisfactory as regards domestic waste waters
         from septic tanks and other IWWTS in the countryside or in small agglomerations, Ireland having failed, to that extent, to
         transpose Articles and to of Directive 75/442, the Commission decided to bring the present action.
      
 The action
 The applicability of Directive 75/and the scope of the action for failure to fulfil obligations
Ireland denies that Directive 75/applies to domestic waste waters disposed of through IWWTS in the countryside.
      
 Arguments of the parties
In Ireland’s submission, waste waters covered by the present action are not ‘waste’ within the meaning of Directive 75/because they are not in the ‘list of wastes belonging to the categories listed in Annex I’ adopted by the Commission under
         Article 1(a) in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article of that directive. It also challenges the relevance
         of the headings in the nomenclature cited by the Commission. Ireland also draws attention to the practical difficulties which
         the classification of such waste waters as ‘waste’ would involve, since it is confronted with the management of dwellings
         scattered in the countryside. It submits also that the 5th, 6th, 10th and 12th recitals in the preamble to Directive 75/indicate that it does not cover IWWTS.
      
The Commission denies that the preamble to Directive 75/can be indicative of the Community legislature’s intention to
         include or not to include certain waste in the directive’s scope by the mere fact that it is or is not expressly referred
         to. It argues that Annex I to that directive is very broad in scope. It submits, citing several headings in the nomenclature,
         that the ‘list of wastes’ covers waste waters from septic tanks and other IWWTS. It points out also that waste waters are
         specifically referred to in Article of the directive and that the Court’s case-law confirms the inclusion, in certain circumstances,
         of waste waters in its scope, the Commission referring in that regard to Case C‑114/AvestaPolarit Chrome [2003] ECR I‑and Case C‑252/Thames Water Utilities [2007] ECR I‑3883. It submits also that the difference between the text of Directive 75/in its original version and that
         following the amendments inserted by Directive 91/indicates, rather, the Community legislature’s intention not to exclude
         waste waters from the scope of Directive 75/442.
      
 Findings of the Court
It follows from settled case-law that both Annex I to Directive 75/and the list of wastes included in Commission Decision
         2000/532/EC of May (‘the European Waste Catalogue’), adopted pursuant to Article of that directive, are only indicative
         (see, to that effect, Case C‑9/Palin Granit and Vehmassalon kansanterveystyön kuntayhtymän hallitus [2002] ECR I‑3533, paragraph 22; Case C‑1/Van de Walle and Others [2004] ECR I‑7613, paragraph 42; and Thames Water Utilities, paragraph 24). It follows that the mere fact that waste waters are not included in the European Waste Catalogue does not
         mean that they cannot be classified as waste. 
      
Moreover, the Court held in paragraph of the judgment in Thames Water Utilities that it is clear from Article 2(1)(b)(iv) of Directive 75/that the Community legislature intended expressly to classify
         waste waters as ‘waste’ within the meaning of the directive, while providing that that waste may, in certain circumstances,
         escape its scope and come within that of other legislation.
      
It is clear from the foregoing that waste waters covered by the present action are ‘waste’ within the meaning of Directive
         75/442, regardless of whether or not they are included in the European Waste Catalogue.
      
However, it is appropriate, first, to note that the Commission, taking into account the fact that Community legislation other
         than Directive 75/442, namely Directive 91/concerning urban waste-water treatment and Council Directive 80/68/EEC of December
         on the protection of groundwater against pollution caused by certain dangerous substances (OJ L p. 43), governs,
         in part, waste waters and IWWTS, limited the scope of its action to domestic waste waters disposed of in the countryside through
         IWWTS.
      
Secondly, it should be acknowledged that the Commission, in its reply, expressly abandoned the complaints relating to inadequate
         transposition of Articles and to of Directive 75/442, thus limiting the subject-matter of its action to the incorrect
         transposition of Articles and thereof. The Commission also accepted that County Cavan’s Bye-Laws constitute ‘other
         legislation’ within the meaning of Article 2(1)(b) of that directive and, consequently, also excluded that county from the
         subject-matter of its action.
      
It follows from the foregoing that the present action seeks a declaration that Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations
         under Directive 75/solely in so far as, with the exception of County Cavan, it has failed to transpose Articles and
         of that directive as regards domestic waste waters disposed of in the countryside through IWWTS.
      
 The failure to fulfil obligations
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission notes the existence, throughout Ireland, of serious shortcomings which are capable of adversely affecting the
         environment and which it considers are linked to deficiencies, such as incorrect construction, unsuitable siting, insufficient
         capacities, maintenance and inspection and the inactivity of the competent administrative authorities.
      
It submits, by reference to paragraph of the judgment in Case C‑135/Commission v Italy [2007] ECR I‑3475, that whilst it cannot, as a rule, be directly inferred from the fact that a situation is not in conformity
         with the objectives laid down in Article of Directive 75/that the Member State concerned has necessarily failed to fulfil
         its obligations under that provision, if that situation persists and leads, in particular, to a significant deterioration
         in the environment over a protracted period without any action being taken by the competent authorities, it may nevertheless
         be an indication that the Member State has exceeded its discretion.
      
The Commission submits that it has provided strong evidence of the existence, in Ireland, of serious damage to the environment
         in connection with the use of septic tanks, without denial in that regard by Ireland. It also points out that Irish legislation,
         older and more recent, has not led to any amelioration of the situation in that respect.
      
The Commission therefore claims that the Court should hold that the disposal of domestic waste waters in the countryside through
         septic tanks and other IWWTS is not covered in Ireland by ‘other legislation’, either Community or national, within the meaning
         of Article 2(1)(b) of Directive 75/442, with the exception of County Cavan’s Bye-Laws, and that Ireland should have adapted
         its national law to meet all the obligations arising from Articles and of that directive.
      
Ireland contends that, contrary to the Commission’s claim, the existing national legal instruments fully meet the requirements
         of Directive 75/442.
      
It submits that the Commission’s reasoning in support of the assertion that the national law in force has not enabled pollution
         to be reduced in practice, like the arguments which the Commission devotes to water pollution in Ireland, is outside the scope
         of the present action. In any event, the Commission has not proved a link between the use of septic tanks and other IWWTS
         and groundwater pollution.
      
 Findings of the Court
Where waste waters are already covered by other legislation Article 2(1)(b)(iv) of Directive 75/does not apply to them,
         except for waste in liquid form. 
      
It follows from the very wording of that provision, just as it does from the objectives of Directive 75/442, that waste waters
         which must be regarded as waste fall outside the legal regime under the directive only where, and to the extent that, they
         are governed by ‘other legislation’ within the meaning of that directive, that is to say by Community or national legislation
         which contains precise provisions organising the management of waste and ensures a level of protection which is at least equivalent
         to that resulting from Directive 75/and, more particularly, from Articles 4, and thereof (see, to that effect, Thames Water Utilities, paragraph 34).
      
As the Commission points out, Ireland admits to not having expressly and specifically transposed Directive 75/as regards
         waste waters but submits that Irish law as a whole ensures compliance with all the obligations arising from that directive.
         
      
It must be examined, therefore, whether it can be held that there is in Ireland ‘other legislation’ within the meaning of
         Directive 75/which ensures the protection of the environment as regards waste waters.
      
The requirements of Directive 75/relevant in this case are contained in its Article 4, which provides that Member States
         are to take the necessary measures to ensure that waste is recovered or disposed of without endangering human health and without
         using processes or methods which could harm the environment, and Article 8, which requires Member States to take the necessary
         measures to ensure that any holder of waste has it handled by a private or public waste collector or by an undertaking which
         carries out the operations of disposal or recovery listed in Annexes IIA and IIB respectively to that directive, or recovers
         or disposes of it himself in accordance with the provisions thereof.
      
Those articles thus cover without distinction ‘any holder of waste’ and Article concerns all ‘processes or methods which
         could harm the environment’. Those provisions therefore necessarily cover waste from all IWWTS constructed before or after
         the entry into force of Directive 75/442. Consequently, for waste waters to escape the application of that directive ‘other
         legislation’ within the meaning of Article 2(1)(b) must apply to all domestic waste waters disposed of in the countryside.
      
The objectives of Directive 75/are the protection of human health and of the environment, as is made clear, first, in
         the third recital in its preamble, in the terms of which ‘the essential objective of all provisions relating to waste disposal
         must be the protection of human health and the environment against harmful effects caused by the collection, transport, treatment,
         storage and tipping of waste’, and, second, in Article of that directive.
      
Thus, in order to implement effectively the objectives of, and a level of protection equivalent to that resulting from, Directive
         75/442, ‘other legislation’ within the meaning of Article 2(1)(b) thereof must, taking account of the particularities of the
         management of a given category of waste and possibly taking as its inspiration the detailed provisions and rules under that
         directive, contain specific provisions with the object of preventing the adverse effects on the environment or human health
         which could be caused by that waste. 
      
As regards domestic waste waters from IWWTS, one of the relevant detailed rules resides, as the Commission recognises, in
         the implementation of an appropriate system of monitoring the management of that waste, involving, in particular, regular
         inspection by the competent authorities of the functioning and maintenance of IWWTS. 
      
As regards, first, the possible existence at Community level of ‘other legislation’ within the meaning of Article 2(1)(b)
         of Directive 75/442, the Commission’s action as finally pleaded does not cover waste waters and IWWTS covered by Directives
         91/and 80/68, which do not apply to the disposal of domestic waste waters in the countryside through septic tanks and
         other IWWTS. Those directives cannot therefore constitute ‘other legislation’ within the meaning of Directive 75/442. 
      
In the absence of ‘other legislation’ at Community level, national legislation may also constitute ‘other legislation’ within
         the meaning of Article 2(1)(b) of Directive 75/(see, to that effect, AvestaPolarit Chrome, paragraphs to 51).
      
As regards, secondly, possible ‘other legislation’ on the national level, it need not necessarily correspond to a single provision
         organising the management of the waste concerned, but may consist in a number of complementary provisions each covering part
         of the scope of Directive 75/442, provided that it also fulfils the requirements set out in paragraph of the present judgment.
         
      
It should however be pointed out that the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations must be determined
         by reference to the situation prevailing in the Member State at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion (see,
         among others, Case C‑64/Commission v Greece [2002] ECR I‑2523, paragraph 7, and Case C‑456/Commission v Germany [2007] ECR I‑10517, paragraph 15). Therefore, a provision which entered into force after the end of that period cannot properly
         be relied upon in the defence of an action for failure to fulfil obligations.
      
Thus, in this case, the Water Services Act 2007, which had not been enacted or entered into force at the end of the period
         laid down in the reasoned opinion, cannot properly be relied upon by Ireland in the present action. The same applies to Standard
         I.S. EN 12566-3:2005, relating to ‘proprietary’ systems, which, according to Ireland itself, did not enter into force until
         July 2009.
      
It follows that the existence at national level of ‘other legislation’ within the meaning of Article 2(1)(b) of Directive
         75/can arise, in the framework of the present action, only from the provisions, possibly complementary, of four groups
         of acts enacted before the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion, namely the Public Health (Ireland) Act, 1878,
         the Local Government (Water Pollution) Acts, and 1990, the Building Control Acts 1990-and the Planning and Development
         Acts 2000-2006.
      
It must therefore be examined whether the rules laid down by those various provisions, first, cover domestic waste waters
         in the countryside and, second, ensure the realisation of the objectives of Directive 75/442, particularly by establishing
         sufficient measures of inspection.
      
It should, first of all, be examined whether the scope of those provisions covers the treatment and disposal of domestic waste
         waters in the countryside sufficiently precisely.
      
The Public Health (Ireland) Act, does not, at first sight, apply to septic tanks and other IWWTS, since the list of sources
         of nuisance it covers does not include such systems. While the mere fact that it predates the advent of the techniques implemented
         in those systems makes it impossible to state that it applies to them, Ireland has not made clear whether it could have been
         applied to the constructions concerned. 
      
The Building Control Acts 1990-apply only to IWWTS constructed after their entry into force, that is since 1992.
      
Likewise, the scope of the Planning and Development Acts 2000-is limited to IWWTS constructed after their entry into
         force, that is after 2000. Ireland has not, in that regard, shown that other legislation covered earlier installations sufficiently
         precisely.
      
Finally, as regards the Local Government (Water Pollution) Acts, and 1990, since they prohibit water pollution without
         reference to the pollution’s origin, they apply to domestic waste waters in the countryside and to all IWWTS. However, the
         exception under those acts for discharges of domestic sewage not exceeding five cubic metres per day is likely to exclude
         from its scope many IWWTS covered by the present action.
      
The same provisions should, secondly, be analysed with regard to the objectives pursued by Directive 75/442.
      
The Public Health (Ireland) Act, applies to nuisances which could be injurious to health. It is not therefore limited,
         contrary to the Commission’s submission, only to the unpleasantness referred to in the second indent of the first paragraph
         of Article of that directive, that is to say noise and odours. However, that act does not refer to the protection of the
         environment.
      
The objective of the Local Government (Water Pollution) Acts, and is limited to the protection of water. That concern
         could be relevant, in Ireland’s submission, as regards certain aspects of the protection of human health and of the environment,
         in particular because of the protection of underground waters used for human consumption, but that protection, by itself,
         is insufficient in the light of the broader objective pursued by Directive 75/442. 
      
On the other hand, contrary to the Commission’s submission, the prohibition of pollution under that legislation is sufficiently
         mandatory, since contraventions of its requirements are subject to criminal sanctions and the cases of exemption from criminal
         sanctions are limited.
      
The Building Control Acts 1990-directly protect only human health and water which may be used for human consumption,
         without reference to the other elements of the environment. In order to attain that objective, that legislation covers the
         construction of septic tanks by reference to Standard S.R.6:1991. But that reference does not mean that the legislation can
         attain the general high level of safety required by Directive 75/442. The Commission points out, in that regard, that that
         standard is not suited to the geological and soil characteristics generally found in Ireland, and Ireland, for its part, implicitly
         recognises the inadequacy of that standard by stating, in its rejoinder, that it will not in future refer to it.
      
Finally, under the Planning and Development Acts 2000‑2006, a person wishing to obtain planning permission must provide the
         competent authority with certain information relating to the installation of an IWWTS. 
      
In that regard, it is appropriate to point out, first, that the information in the light of which such permission is granted
         is, as the Commission acknowledged in its reply, full and relevant, thus enabling the competent authority to give its decision
         with appropriate knowledge of the case. 
      
Secondly, the Commission no longer challenges, in its reply, the binding nature of the development plan for the authority
         responsible for granting planning permissions. While Ireland implicitly recognises the non-binding nature of the Sustainable
         Rural Housing Guidelines of and the Development Plan and Development Management Guidelines 2007, since it states, in
         its rejoinder, its intention to make them mandatory, the Commission admits in its pleadings that development plans must take
         account of the objectives defined in section 10(2) of the Planning and Development Act 2000, which refers specifically to
         the ‘objectives of conservation and protection of the environment’. However, as the Commission maintains, that provision does
         not cover all the objectives of Article of Directive 75/since it makes no reference to human health.
      
Thirdly, the standards in force before the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion, in the light of which planning
         permissions were granted, did not ensure a level of environmental and human health protection as high as that pursued by Directive
         75/442. Indeed, as stated in paragraph of the present judgment, Standard S.R.6:relating to septic tanks is not suited
         to the geological and soil characteristics of most of Ireland. 
      
Fourthly, the code constituted by the updated version of the EPA Manual, the relevance of which is admitted by the Commission
         in the final state of its pleadings, is still not mandatory for the authority responsible for granting planning permission.
         Likewise, the recommendations in Circular SP 5/do not have the indisputable binding force necessary for the effective application
         of Community law, as the Commission maintains in its action by also drawing attention to the numerous cases of non-compliance,
         on the facts, with that circular.
      
Finally, it is appropriate to examine whether the legislation upon which Ireland relies ensures a satisfactory system of inspection
         of the efficacy of IWWTS.
      
So far as concerns the implementation of systems of inspection permitting effective compliance with the objectives of Directive
         75/442, it is common ground that settlement in Ireland is, in a substantial part of its territory, scattered, consisting of
         numerous isolated individual dwellings, not connected to collective sewage treatment systems, which entails almost systematic
         recourse to individual septic tanks. According to consistent figures presented by Ireland and by the Commission, there are
         about septic tanks in that Member State. 
      
However, it does not in the least follow that the implementation of an adequate system of assessment and checking of IWWTS
         is impossible. The Commission recognises indeed, in that respect, that County Cavan’s Bye-Laws, which require inspections
         at least every seven years, are sufficient with regard to the objectives pursued by Directive 75/442.
      
The Public Health (Ireland) Act, confers on the authorities appropriate powers and imposes on them an inspection obligation
         corresponding, as the Commission accepts, to the level of safety required by that directive. Likewise, contrary to the impression
         given by the Commission, the extent of the powers delegated to the authorities by the Building Control Acts 1990-and
         the existence of minimum standards of inspection are such as reasonably to guarantee the effectiveness of that legislation
         in the light of the particular constraints prevailing in Ireland.
      
The competent authorities’ powers under the Local Government (Water Pollution) Acts, and and the Planning and Development
         Acts 2000-are adequate, which the Commission does not deny. However, they are not exercised within the framework of a
         system of checks guaranteeing, for example by means of regular inspections at intervals appropriate to the situation in Ireland,
         a level of protection equivalent to that which Directive 75/is intended to achieve. Thus, as the Commission maintains,
         the intervention of the Minister for the Environment under section of the Planning and Development Act is only discretionary.
         The circumstance asserted by Ireland that the Minister systematically examines, in practice, the compliance of development
         plans with that act cannot guarantee, with indisputable binding force, the mandatory nature of that intervention.
      
It must, consequently, be held that the Public Health (Ireland) Act, neither applies, at first sight, to IWWTS nor satisfies,
         in any event, the objectives of Directive 75/422, that the Local Government (Water Pollution) Acts, and do not provide
         for an appropriate system of inspection, that the Building Control Acts 1990-apply only to IWWTS built after and
         do not guarantee that they conform to the objectives of Directive 75/442, and that the Planning and Development Acts 2000-apply only to IWWTS built after 2000, they subject the construction of septic tanks to rules which are not suited to the objectives
         of the directive and they do not provide for an appropriate system of inspection.
      
It follows from all the foregoing that the provisions upon which Ireland relies, even taken in their entirety, do not constitute
         ‘other legislation’ within the meaning of Article 2(1)(b) of Directive 75/442, since, in particular, they only partially implement
         procedures which ensure that the objectives pursued by that directive are effectively realised.
      
Consequently, Ireland cannot validly maintain that the existence of ‘other legislation’ within the meaning of Article 2(1)(b)
         of Directive 75/relieved it of the obligation to adopt the provisions necessary to transpose fully Articles and thereof.
      
In the absence of such transposition, the Commission’s action must be upheld.
      
Accordingly, it must be held that, by failing to adopt, save in County Cavan, all the laws, regulations and administrative
         provisions necessary to comply with Articles and of Directive 75/as regards domestic waste waters disposed of in the
         countryside through septic tanks and other IWWTS, Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Further, under Article 69(5) thereof, a party who discontinues proceedings
         is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied for in the other party’s observations on the discontinuance. As
         the Commission, in its reply, partly discontinued its action, and as Ireland, in its rejoinder, applied for costs against
         the Commission, it is appropriate to order Ireland to pay three quarters of the Commission’s costs and to order that, as for
         the remainder, each party shall bear its own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by failing to adopt, save in County Cavan, all the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary
            to comply with Articles and of Council Directive 75/442/EEC of July on waste, as amended by Council Directive
            91/156/EEC of March 1991, as regards domestic waste waters disposed of in the countryside through septic tanks and other
            individual waste water treatment systems, Ireland has failed to fulfil its obligations under that directive;
2.      Orders Ireland to pay three quarters of the costs of the Commission of the European Communities and to bear its own costs;
3.      Orders the Commission of the European Communities to bear one quarter of its own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 