
Case C-268/Impact
v
Minister for Agriculture and Food and Others 
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Labour Court)
(Directive 1999/70/EC – Clauses and of the framework agreement on fixed-term work – Fixed-term employment in the public sector – Employment conditions – Pay and pensions – Renewal of fixed-term contracts for a period of up to eight years – Procedural autonomy – Direct effect)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Community law – Principles – Right to effective judicial protection
(Council Directive 1999/70)
2.        Social policy – Framework agreement on fixed-term work concluded by ETUC, UNICE and CEEP – Directive 1999/(Art. 139(1) and (2) EC; Council Directive 1999/70, Annex, clauses 4(1) and 5(1))
3.        Social policy – Framework agreement on fixed-term work concluded by ETUC, UNICE and CEEP – Directive 1999/(Arts EC and 249, third para., EC; Council Directive 1999/70)
4.        Acts of the institutions – Directives – Implementation by Member States
(Art. 249, third para., EC; Council Directive 1999/70)
5.        Social policy – Framework agreement on fixed-term work concluded by ETUC, UNICE and CEEP – Directive 1999/(Council Directive 1999/70, Annex, clause 4)
1.        Community law, in particular the principle of effectiveness, requires that a specialised court which is called upon, under
         the, albeit optional, jurisdiction conferred on it by the legislation transposing Directive 1999/concerning the framework
         agreement on fixed-term work concluded by ETUC, UNICE and CEEP, to hear and determine a claim based on an infringement of
         that legislation, must also have jurisdiction to hear and determine an applicant’s claims arising directly from the directive
         itself in respect of the period between the deadline for transposing the directive and the date on which the transposing legislation
         entered into force if it is established that the obligation on that applicant to bring, at the same time, a separate claim
         based directly on the directive before an ordinary court would involve procedural disadvantages liable to render excessively
         difficult the exercise of the rights conferred on him by Community law. It is for the national court to undertake the necessary
         checks in that regard. 
      
(see para. 55, operative part 1)
2.        Whenever the provisions of a directive appear, so far as their subject-matter is concerned, to be unconditional and sufficiently
         precise, they may be relied upon by individuals as against the State, particularly in its capacity as an employer. That principle
         can be applied in respect of provisions of agreements which, like the framework agreement on fixed-term work which is annexed
         to Directive 1999/concerning the framework agreement on fixed-term work concluded by ETUC, UNICE and CEEP, are the product
         of a dialogue, based on Article 139(1) EC, between management and labour at Community level and which have been implemented
         in accordance with Article 139(2) EC by a directive of the Council, of which they are thus an integral component.
      
In that regard, Clause 4(1) of that framework agreement, which prohibits, in a general manner and in unequivocal terms, any
         difference in treatment of fixed-term workers in respect of employment conditions which is not objectively justified, is unconditional
         and sufficiently precise for individuals to be able to rely upon it before a national court; that is not the case, however,
         as regards Clause 5(1) of the framework agreement, which assigns to the Member States the general objective of preventing
         the abusive use of successive fixed-term employment contracts or relationships, while leaving to them the choice as to how
         to achieve it. 
      
(see paras 57-58, 60, 68, 70, 73, 79-80, operative part 2)
3.        Article EC, the third paragraph of Article EC, and Directive 1999/concerning the framework agreement on fixed-term
         work concluded by ETUC, UNICE and CEEP must be interpreted as meaning that an authority of a Member State acting in its capacity
         as a public employer may not adopt measures contrary to the objective pursued by that directive and the framework agreement
         on fixed-term work as regards prevention of the abusive use of fixed-term contracts, which consist in the renewal of such
         contracts for an unusually long term in the period between the deadline for transposing Directive 1999/and the date on
         which the transposing legislation entered into force.
      
(see para. 92, operative part 3)
4.        When applying domestic law and, in particular, legislative provisions specifically adopted for the purpose of implementing
         the requirements of a directive, national courts are bound to interpret that law, so far as possible, in the light of the
         wording and the purpose of the directive in order to achieve the result sought by it and thus to comply with the third paragraph
         of Article EC. The obligation on a national court to refer to the content of a directive when interpreting and applying
         the relevant rules of domestic law is, however, limited by general principles of law, particularly those of legal certainty
         and non-retroactivity, and that obligation cannot serve as the basis for an interpretation of national law contra legem.
      
In those circumstances, in so far as the applicable national law contains a rule that precludes the retrospective application
         of legislation unless there is a clear and unambiguous indication to the contrary, a national court hearing a claim based
         on an infringement of a provision of national legislation transposing Directive 1999/concerning the framework agreement
         on fixed-term work concluded by ETUC, UNICE and CEEP is required, under Community law, to give that provision retrospective
         effect to the date by which that directive should have been transposed only if that national legislation includes an indication
         of that nature capable of giving that provision retrospective effect.
      
(see paras 98, 100, 104, operative part 4)
5.        Articulating a principle of Community social law which cannot be interpreted restrictively, Clause of the framework agreement
         on fixed‑term work, which is annexed to Directive 1999/concerning the framework agreement on fixed-term work concluded
         by ETUC, UNICE and CEEP, must be interpreted as meaning that employment conditions within the meaning of that clause encompass
         conditions relating to pay and to pensions which depend on the employment relationship, to the exclusion of conditions relating
         to pensions arising under a statutory social-security scheme.
      
(see paras 114, 134, operative part 5)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
April (*)
      
(Directive 1999/70/EC – Clauses and of the framework agreement on fixed-term work – Fixed-term employment in the public sector – Employment conditions – Pay and pensions – Renewal of fixed-term contracts for a period of up to eight years – Procedural autonomy – Direct effect)
In Case C‑268/06,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Labour Court (Ireland), made by decision of June 2006,
         received at the Court on June 2006, in the proceedings
      
Impact
v
Minister for Agriculture and Food,
Minister for Arts, Sport and Tourism,
Minister for Communications, Marine and Natural Resources,
Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Minister for Justice, Equality and Law Reform,
Minister for Transport,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, A. Rosas, K. Lenaerts (Rapporteur), G. Arestis, U. Lõhmus and L. Bay Larsen, Presidents
         of Chambers, P. Kūris, E. Juhász, A. Borg Barthet, J. Klučka and A. Ó Caoimh, Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Kokott,
Registrar: K. Sztranc-Sławiczek, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on December 2007,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Impact, by B. O’Moore SC, M. Bolger BL, and D. Connolly, Solicitor,
–        Ireland, by D. O’Hagan and M. Heneghan, acting as Agents, assisted by A. Collins SC, and by A. Kerr and F. O’Dubhghaill BL,
–        the Netherlands Government, by H.G. Sevenster and M. de Grave, acting as Agents,
–        the United Kingdom Government, by E. O’Neill, K. Smith and I. Rao, acting as Agents, assisted by R. Hill, Barrister,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by M. van Beek and J. Enegren, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on January 2008,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Clauses and of the framework agreement on fixed-term
         work concluded on March (‘the framework agreement’), which is annexed to Council Directive 1999/70/EC of June concerning the framework agreement on fixed-term work concluded by ETUC, UNICE and CEEP (OJ L 175, p. 43), and the scope
         of the Member States’ procedural autonomy and extent of the obligation on the courts of the Member States to interpret national
         law in conformity with Community law.
      
The reference was made in proceedings brought by the Irish trade union Impact, acting on behalf of Irish civil servants, against
         the government departments which employ them concerning, first, the pay and pension conditions applied to those civil servants
         on the basis of their status as fixed-term workers and, second, the conditions for the renewal of certain fixed-term contracts
         by one of those government departments.
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
Directive 1999/is founded on Article 139(2) EC and its purpose, as provided in Article 1, is ‘to put into effect the framework
         agreement … concluded … between the general cross-industry organisations (ETUC, UNICE and CEEP) annexed hereto’.
      
According to the first paragraph of Article of the directive:
      
‘Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive
         by July 2001, or shall ensure that, by that date at the latest, management and labour have introduced the necessary measures
         by agreement, the Member States being required to take any necessary measures to enable them at any time to be in a position
         to guarantee the results imposed by this Directive. They shall forthwith inform the Commission thereof.’
      
In accordance with Article 3, the directive entered into force on July 1999, the date of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Communities.
      
As provided in Clause 1, the purpose of the framework agreement ‘is to:
      
(a)      improve the quality of fixed-term work by ensuring the application of the principle of non-discrimination;
(b)      establish a framework to prevent abuse arising from the use of successive fixed-term employment contracts or relationships’.
Clause of the framework agreement, entitled ‘Principle of non-discrimination’, provides:
      
‘1.      In respect of employment conditions, fixed-term workers shall not be treated in a less favourable manner than comparable permanent
         workers solely because they have a fixed-term contract or relation unless different treatment is justified on objective grounds.
      
2.      Where appropriate, the principle of pro rata temporis shall apply.
      
3.      The arrangements for the application of this clause shall be defined by the Member States after consultation with the social
         partners and/or the social partners, having regard to Community law and national law, collective agreements and practice.
      
4.      Period-of-service qualifications relating to particular conditions of employment shall be the same for fixed-term workers
         as for permanent workers except where different length-of-service qualifications are justified on objective grounds.’
      
Clause of the framework agreement, relating to ‘[m]easures to prevent abuse’, states:
      
‘1.      To prevent abuse arising from the use of successive fixed-term employment contracts or relationships, Member States, after
         consultation with social partners in accordance with national law, collective agreements or practice, and/or the social partners,
         shall, where there are no equivalent legal measures to prevent abuse, introduce in a manner which takes account of the needs
         of specific sectors and/or categories of workers, one or more of the following measures:
      
(a)      objective reasons justifying the renewal of such contracts or relationships;
(b)      the maximum total duration of successive fixed-term employment contracts or relationships;
(c)      the number of renewals of such contracts or relationships.
2.      Member States after consultation with the social partners and/or the social partners shall, where appropriate, determine under
         what conditions fixed-term employment contracts or relationships:
      
(a)      shall be regarded as “successive”;
(b)      shall be deemed to be contracts or relationships of indefinite duration.’
The framework agreement also contains a clause relating to ‘[p]rovisions on implementation’, which provides, in Clause 8(5):
      
‘The prevention and settlement of disputes and grievances arising from the application of this agreement shall be dealt with
         in accordance with national law, collective agreements and practice.’
      
 National legislation
Directive 1999/was transposed into Irish law by the Protection of Employees (Fixed-Term Work) Act (‘the Act’).
         The Act entered into force on July 2003.
      
Section of the Act transposes Clause of the framework agreement. The combined provisions of sections 2(1) and 6(1)
         of the Act secure pay and pension rights for fixed-term employees that are equal to those of comparable permanent employees.
      
Section of the Act transposes Clause of the framework agreement. Section 9(1) provides that the fixed-term contract
         of an employee who, on or after the passing of the Act, has completed his or her third year of continuous employment
         with his or her employer or associated employer, may be renewed by that employer on only one occasion for a fixed term of
         no longer than one year. Under section 9(3) of the Act, any term of a fixed-term employment contract which purports to
         contravene section 9(1) is to have no effect and the contract in question is to be deemed to be a contract of indefinite duration.
      
An employer may nevertheless derogate from the requirements of sections and of the Act if there are objective grounds
         for doing so. The meaning of ‘objective grounds’ is amplified in section of the Act.
      
Section 14(1) of the Act provides that an employee or the trade union of which the employee is a member may present a
         complaint alleging a breach of the Act to a Rights Commissioner, who is required to investigate the complaint and give
         a decision in writing. Where the complaint is upheld, the Rights Commissioner may order redress in the terms provided for
         by section 14(2) of the Act, namely, inter alia, compensation of up to two years’ remuneration.
      
Section of the Act provides that the parties may bring an appeal before the Labour Court against the decision of a
         Rights Commissioner. An appeal against the decision of the Labour Court may be brought before the High Court.
      
The office of Rights Commissioner and the Labour Court were established by the Industrial Relations Act and the Industrial
         Relations Act respectively. Various Irish statutes, including the Act, confer jurisdiction upon them to hear and
         determine disputes between employers and employees. However, according to the order for reference, neither the Rights Commissioners
         nor the Labour Court have express jurisdiction to determine a claim based on a directly effective provision of Community law
         unless that provision comes within the scope of the legislation conferring jurisdiction upon them.
      
 The facts of the case in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
In the main proceedings, Impact is acting on behalf of of its members (‘the complainants in the main proceedings’) employed
         in various Irish government departments (‘the respondents in the main proceedings’) on the basis of successive fixed-term
         employment contracts for periods which commenced before July 2003, the date on which the Act entered into force, and
         which continued beyond that date.
      
The complainants in the main proceedings are all unestablished civil servants and, under Irish regulations governing employment
         in the civil service, are subject to a different scheme to that which is applicable to established civil servants. The order
         for reference states that the complainants in the main proceedings consider the latter scheme to be more favourable than that
         which is applicable to them.
      
Some of the complainants in the main proceedings had less than three continuous years’ service as fixed-term employees and
         are claiming employment conditions equal to those of comparable permanent employees; the others had more than three continuous
         years’ service and are claiming, in addition to equality of employment conditions, a contract of indefinite duration.
      
According to the order for reference, the purpose of the fixed-term contracts at issue was to meet the temporary needs of
         the respondents in the main proceedings and to cover situations in which permanent funding for the posts involved could not
         be guaranteed. The general practice of the respondents in the main proceedings was to renew those contracts for periods of
         between one and two years. However, in the period immediately before the Act entered into force, one of the respondents
         in the main proceedings renewed the contracts of a certain number of the complainants in the main proceedings for a fixed
         term of up to eight years.
      
Taking the view that the respondents in the main proceedings, in their capacity as employers, had contravened the provisions
         of the Act and Directive 1999/to the detriment of the complainants in the main proceedings, Impact initiated proceedings
         before a Rights Commissioner on behalf of those complainants. In those proceedings, it alleged, first, infringement of the
         entitlement of the complainants in the main proceedings to equal treatment in respect of pay and pension rights with established
         civil servants – the latter being regarded, according to the complainants in the main proceedings, as comparable permanent
         workers – and, second, that the successive renewals of fixed-term contracts constituted an abuse. The complaints thus presented
         were based on Clauses and of the framework agreement as regards the period between July 2001, the deadline for transposing
         Directive 1999/70, and July 2003, the date on which the provisions transposing the directive into Irish law entered into
         force. As regards the period after July 2003, the complaints were based on section of the Act.
      
The respondents in the main proceedings challenged the jurisdiction of the Rights Commissioner to entertain the complaints
         in question in so far as they were based on Directive 1999/70. They contended that the Rights Commissioner’s jurisdiction
         was confined to adjudicating on complaints based on domestic law. They also claimed that Clauses and of the framework
         agreement – which are neither unconditional nor sufficiently precise – could not be relied upon by individuals before national
         courts. They contended further that a fixed-term worker was not entitled under the terms of Clause of the framework agreement
         to the same pay and pension conditions as a comparable permanent worker.
      
The Rights Commissioner took the view that she had jurisdiction to entertain all of the complaints, including those relating
         to the period between July and July 2003. She held that the principle of non-discrimination referred to in Clause
         of the framework agreement encompassed both pay and pension rights and that that clause was directly effective, unlike Clause
         5.
      
Taking the view that the complaints, other than those based on Clause of the framework agreement, were well founded, and
         that the respondents in the main proceedings had infringed the rights of the complainants in the main proceedings under both
         national law and Directive 1999/by affording them less favourable employment conditions than those afforded to comparable
         permanent workers, the Rights Commissioner awarded the complainants monetary compensation ranging from EUR to EUR 000,
         pursuant to section 14(2) of the Act. In addition she ordered the respondents in the main proceedings to apply to the
         complainants in the main proceedings terms and conditions of employment equivalent to those applicable to comparable permanent
         workers. She also ordered them to grant certain complainants in the main proceedings a contract of indefinite duration on
         terms no less favourable than those enjoyed by comparable permanent workers.
      
The respondents in the main proceedings appealed to the Labour Court against the Rights Commissioner’s decision. Impact cross-appealed
         against the decision in so far as it held Clause of the framework agreement not to be directly effective.
      
In the light of the arguments exchanged, the referring court is faced with a series of questions which are decisive for the
         resolution of the dispute in the main proceedings and which turn on the interpretation of Community law.
      
First, while the Act does not expressly confer jurisdiction upon it to adjudicate on a claim which requires the application
         of directly effective Community law, the Labour Court nevertheless has doubts as to whether, in the light of Article EC,
         on the one hand, and the principles of equivalence and effectiveness underpinning the procedural autonomy of the Member States,
         on the other, it may decline jurisdiction to consider the claims in the main proceedings in so far as they are based on Directive
         1999/and the framework agreement.
      
Second, on the assumption that it does have jurisdiction to apply Community law, the referring court questions whether Clauses
         and of the framework agreement – on which the claims in the main proceedings are based so far as concerns the period between
         July and July – are unconditional and sufficiently precise so as to be directly effective. It takes the view
         that this is the case only in respect of Clause 4.
      
Third, the referring court questions whether Clause of the framework agreement may be relied upon so as to render unlawful
         the decision taken by one of the respondents in the main proceedings in the period immediately prior to the entry into force
         of the Act to retain some of the complainants in the main proceedings on contracts of up to eight years’ duration.
      
The referring court takes the view that, notwithstanding the apparent absence of bad faith on the part of the relevant defendant
         and its explanation concerning temporary needs and the impossibility of guaranteeing permanent funding for the posts concerned,
         the specific effect of that decision was to deprive the complainants in the main proceedings of the opportunity to obtain
         a contract of indefinite duration within a reasonable time after the adoption of the Act. The referring court considers
         that, by that decision, Ireland gained an advantage at the expense of those complainants from its own illegality in failing
         to transpose Directive 1999/on time.
      
Fourth, on the assumption that it does not have jurisdiction to apply Community law or that Clauses and of the framework
         agreement are not directly effective, the referring court questions whether its obligation to interpret national law in conformity
         with Community law means that it must interpret the Act as having retrospective effect to July 2001.
      
The referring court notes that, while Irish law generally precludes the retrospective application of legislation, there is
         nothing in section of the Act to prevent it from being applied retrospectively. The referring court goes on to state
         that, while the interpretative obligation is indeed limited by the principles of legal certainty and non-retroactivity and
         cannot, of itself and irrespective of national legislation implementing Directive 1999/70, determine or aggravate the liability
         in criminal law resulting from an infringement of Community law, the question nevertheless arises in the present case as to
         whether that obligation means that domestic law can be applied retrospectively so as to impose civil liability on a Member
         State, in its capacity as an employer, for acts or omissions contrary to the provisions of a directive which occurred at a
         time when that directive ought to have been transposed by the Member State in question.
      
Fifth, the referring court questions whether employment conditions within the meaning of Clause of the framework agreement
         encompass conditions relating to pay and pension rights.
      
It refers to the broad meaning of ‘pay’ in the context of Article EC in relation to the principle of gender equality,
         and considers that if the clause in question were to be construed as being inapplicable to pay it would deprive fixed-term
         workers of protection against discrimination with regard to a number of essential matters covered by pay, which would be contrary
         to the objective of the framework agreement.
      
Furthermore it takes the view that, having regard to Article EC and the Community Charter of the Fundamental Social Rights
         of Workers adopted at the European Council’s meeting in Strasbourg on December (in particular Article of the Charter)
         – in conjunction with which Article EC must be read –, Article 137(5) EC, which excludes pay from the scope of Article
         EC, must be interpreted as being intended solely to preclude the European Community from having legislative competence
         to fix a Community minimum wage and that it does not therefore prevent the term ‘working conditions’ within the meaning of
         Article 137(1) EC from encompassing pay and pension matters.
      
In the light of these various unresolved issues, the Labour Court decided to stay the proceedings and to put the following
         questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      In deciding a case at first instance under a provision of domestic law or in determining an appeal against such a decision,
         are the Rights Commissioners and the Labour Court required by any principle of Community law (in particular the principles
         of equivalence and effectiveness) to apply a directly effective provision of … Directive 1999/… in circumstances where:
      
–        the Rights Commissioner and the Labour Court have not been given express jurisdiction to do so under the domestic law of the
         Member State including the provisions of domestic law transposing the Directive,
      
–        Individuals can pursue alternative claims arising out of a failure by their employer to apply the Directive to their individual
         circumstances before the High Court and
      
–        Individuals can pursue alternative claims before an ordinary court of competent jurisdiction against the Member State seeking
         damages for loss suffered by them arising from the Member State’s failure to transpose the Directive on time?
      
(2)      If the answer to Question is in the affirmative:
(a)      Is Clause 4(1) of the framework agreement … unconditional and sufficiently precise in its terms as to be capable of being
         relied upon by individuals before their national courts?
      
(b)      Is Clause 5(1) of the framework agreement … unconditional and sufficiently precise in its terms as to be capable of being
         relied upon by individuals before their national courts?
      
(3)      Having regard to the Court’s answers to Question and Question 2(b), does Clause 5(1) of the framework agreement … preclude
         a Member State, acting in its capacity as an employer, from renewing a fixed-term contract of employment for up to eight years
         in the period after the said Directive should have been transposed and before the transposing legislation was enacted in domestic
         law where:
      
–        on all previous occasions the contract had been renewed for shorter periods, and the employer requires the services of the
         employee for the extended period, 
      
–        the renewal for the extended period has the effect of circumventing the application to an individual of the full benefit of
         Clause of the framework agreement when transposed into domestic law, and 
      
–        there are no objective reasons unrelated to the employee’s status as a fixed-term worker for such a renewal?
(4)      If the answer to Question or Question is in the negative, are the Rights Commissioner and the Labour Court required by
         any provision of Community law (and in particular the obligation to interpret domestic law in light of the wording and purpose
         of a Directive so as to produce the result pursued by the Directive) to interpret provisions of domestic law enacted for the
         purpose of transposing Directive 1999/… as having retrospective effect to the date on which the said Directive should have
         been transposed where:
      
–        the wording of the provision of domestic law does not expressly preclude such an interpretation, but,
–        a rule of domestic law governing the construction of statutes precludes such retrospective application unless there is a clear
         and unambiguous indication to the contrary?
      
(5)      If the answer to Question l or Question is in the affirmative, do the “employment conditions” to which Clause of the framework
         agreement … refers include conditions of an employment contract relating to remuneration and pensions?’
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
 Question By its first question, the referring court seeks, in essence, to establish whether, notwithstanding the absence of any express
         provision to that effect in the relevant national law, a national court or tribunal, such as the Labour Court or a Rights
         Commissioner, which is called upon to decide a case concerning an infringement of the legislation transposing Directive 1999/is required by Community law to hold that it also has jurisdiction to hear and determine claims based directly on that directive
         itself, where such claims relate to a period after the deadline for transposing the directive concerned, but before the date
         of entry into force of the transposing legislation giving it jurisdiction to hear and determine claims based on that legislation.
      
The referring court explains in that regard that the parties can bring the Member State concerned before the ordinary courts,
         either in its capacity as an employer or in order to obtain damages for loss arising from a failure to transpose Directive
         1999/within the prescribed period.
      
As a preliminary point, it should be noted, as it was by Ireland at the hearing, that neither Directive 1999/nor the framework
         agreement designates the national courts having jurisdiction to ensure that they are applied, nor do they define the detailed
         procedural rules governing judicial actions for safeguarding their application. On the contrary, Clause 8(5) of the framework
         agreement refers to national law, collective agreements and practice as regards the prevention and settlement of disputes
         and grievances arising from the application of that agreement.
      
It must also be observed that the freedom to choose the ways and means of ensuring that a directive is implemented does not
         affect the obligation imposed on all Member States to which the directive is addressed to adopt all the measures necessary
         to ensure that the directive concerned is fully effective in accordance with the objective which it pursues (see Case 14/von Colsonand Kamann [1984] ECR 1891, paragraph 15).
      
The Member States’ obligation arising from a directive to achieve the result envisaged by that directive and their duty under
         Article EC to take all appropriate measures, whether general or particular, to ensure the fulfilment of that obligation
         is binding on all the authorities of the Member States including, for matters within their jurisdiction, the courts (von Colson and Kamann, paragraph 26).
      
It is the responsibility of the national courts in particular to provide the legal protection which individuals derive from
         the rules of Community law and to ensure that those rules are fully effective (Joined Cases C‑397/to C‑403/Pfeiffer and Others [2004] ECR I‑8835, paragraph 111).
      
In that regard, it is important to note that the principle of effective judicial protection is a general principle of Community
         law (see, to that effect, Case C‑432/Unibet [2007] ECR I‑2271, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
The Court has consistently held that, in the absence of Community rules governing the matter, it is for the domestic legal
         system of each Member State to designate the courts and tribunals having jurisdiction and to lay down the detailed procedural
         rules governing actions for safeguarding rights which individuals derive from Community law (see, in particular, Case 33/Rewe-Zentralfinanz and Rewe-Zentral [1976] ECR 1989, paragraph 5; Case 45/Comet [1976] ECR 2043, paragraph 13; Case C‑312/Peterbroeck [1995] ECR I‑4599, paragraph 12; Unibet, paragraph 39; and Joined Cases C‑222/to C‑225/van der Weerd and Others [2007] ECR I‑4233, paragraph 28).
      
The Member States, however, are responsible for ensuring that those rights are effectively protected in each case (see, in
         particular, Case 179/Bozzetti [1985] ECR 2301, paragraph 17; Case C‑446/SEIM [1996] ECR I‑73, paragraph 32; and Case C‑54/Dorsch Consult [1997] ECR I‑4961, paragraph 40).
      
On that basis, as is apparent from well-established case-law, the detailed procedural rules governing actions for safeguarding
         an individual’s rights under Community law must be no less favourable than those governing similar domestic actions (principle
         of equivalence) and must not render practically impossible or excessively difficult the exercise of rights conferred by Community
         law (principle of effectiveness) (see, in particular, Rewe-Zentralfinanz and Rewe-Zentral, paragraph 5; Comet, paragraphs to 16; Peterbroeck, paragraph 12; Unibet, paragraph 43; and van der Weerd and Others, paragraph 28).
      
Those requirements of equivalence and effectiveness, which embody the general obligation on the Member States to ensure judicial
         protection of an individual’s rights under Community law, apply equally to the designation of the courts and tribunals having
         jurisdiction to hear and determine actions based on Community law.
      
A failure to comply with those requirements at Community level is – just like a failure to comply with them as regards the
         definition of detailed procedural rules – liable to undermine the principle of effective judicial protection.
      
It is in the light of those considerations that the referring court’s first question must be answered.
      
It must be observed that, since the Act constitutes the legislation by which Ireland discharged its obligations under
         Directive 1999/70, a claim based on an infringement of that legislation and a claim based directly on that directive must,
         as the referring court itself pointed out, be regarded as being covered by the same form of action (see, to that effect, Case
         C‑326/Levez [1998] ECR I‑7835, paragraphs and 47, and Case C‑78/Preston and Others [2000] ECR I‑3201, paragraph 51). Notwithstanding formal distinctions as to their legal basis, both claims, as the Advocate
         General noted at point of her Opinion, seek the protection of the same rights deriving from Community law, namely Directive
         1999/and the framework agreement.
      
In those circumstances, where the national legislature has chosen to confer on specialised courts jurisdiction to hear and
         determine actions based on the legislation transposing Directive 1999/70, the obligation which would be placed on individuals
         in the situation of the complainants – who sought to bring a claim based on an infringement of that legislation before such
         a specialised court – to bring at the same time a separate action before an ordinary court to assert the rights which they
         can derive directly from that directive in respect of the period between the deadline for transposing it and the date on which
         the transposing legislation entered into force, would be contrary to the principle of effectiveness if – which is for the
         referring court to ascertain – it would result in procedural disadvantages for those individuals, in terms, inter alia, of
         cost, duration and the rules of representation, such as to render excessively difficult the exercise of rights deriving from
         that directive.
      
At the hearing, Ireland claimed that the jurisdiction given to the Rights Commissioners and the Labour Court by the Act
         is optional and therefore does not prevent individuals from bringing a single action, based partly on national law and partly
         on Community law, before an ordinary court.
      
Even if that is so, the fact remains that where individuals intended – as the complainants did in the main proceedings – to
         rely on the, albeit optional, jurisdiction which the national legislature, when transposing Directive 1999/70, conferred on
         those specialised courts to hear and determine disputes arising from the Act, the principle of effectiveness requires
         that those individuals should also be able to seek before the same courts the protection of the rights which they can derive
         directly from the directive itself, if it should emerge from the checks undertaken by the referring court that the obligation
         to divide their action into two separate claims and to bring the claim based directly on the directive before an ordinary
         court leads to procedural complications liable to render excessively difficult the exercise of those rights conferred on the
         parties by Community law.
      
If the referring court were to find such an infringement of the principle of effectiveness, it would be for that court to
         interpret the domestic jurisdictional rules in such a way that, wherever possible, they contribute to the attainment of the
         objective of ensuring effective judicial protection of an individual’s rights under Community law (see, to that effect, Unibet, paragraph 44).
      
Having regard to the foregoing considerations, the answer to the first question must be that Community law, in particular
         the principle of effectiveness, requires that a specialised court which is called upon, under the, albeit optional, jurisdiction
         conferred on it by the legislation transposing Directive 1999/70, to hear and determine a claim based on an infringement of
         that legislation, must also have jurisdiction to hear and determine an applicant’s claims arising directly from the directive
         itself in respect of the period between the deadline for transposing the directive and the date on which the transposing legislation
         entered into force if it is established that the obligation on that applicant to bring, at the same time, a separate claim
         based directly on the directive before an ordinary court would involve procedural disadvantages liable to render excessively
         difficult the exercise of the rights conferred on him by Community law. It is for the national court to undertake the necessary
         checks in that regard.
      
 Question In the event that, having regard to the answer given to its first question, the referring court must declare that it has jurisdiction
         to hear and determine the claims of the complainants in the main proceedings based directly on Directive 1999/70, it is necessary
         to answer the second question, by which the referring court asks, in essence, whether Clauses 4(1) and 5(1) of the framework
         agreement are capable of being relied upon by individuals before their national courts.
      
The Court has consistently held in that regard that, whenever the provisions of a directive appear, so far as their subject-matter
         is concerned, to be unconditional and sufficiently precise, they may be relied upon by individuals as against the State, particularly
         in its capacity as an employer (see, in particular, to that effect, Case 152/Marshall [1986] ECR 723, paragraphs and 49, and Case C‑187/Kutz-Bauer [2003] ECR I‑2741, paragraphs and 71).
      
As the Advocate General noted at point of her Opinion, that case-law can be applied to agreements which, like the framework
         agreement, are the product of a dialogue, based on Article 139(1) EC, between management and labour at Community level and
         which have been implemented in accordance with Article 139(2) EC by a directive of the Council of the European Union, of which
         they are thus an integral component.
      
 Clause 4(1) of the framework agreement
Clause 4(1) of the framework agreement prohibits, in respect of employment conditions, the treatment of fixed-term workers
         in a less favourable manner than comparable permanent workers solely because they have a fixed-term contract or relation unless
         different treatment is justified on objective grounds.
      
That provision prohibits, in a general manner and in unequivocal terms, any difference in treatment of fixed-term workers
         in respect of employment conditions which is not objectively justified. As Impact maintained, its subject-matter appears therefore
         to be sufficiently precise to be relied upon by an individual and to be applied by the national court (see, by analogy, Marshall, paragraph 52).
      
Contrary to Ireland’s submission, the fact that there is no definition of ‘employment conditions’ in Clause 4(1) does not
         render that provision incapable of being applied by a national court to the facts of a dispute which it is to hear and determine
         and, consequently, is unlikely to render the subject-matter of that provision insufficiently precise. Thus, the provisions
         of a directive have already been deemed to be sufficiently precise notwithstanding the absence of a Community definition of
         the social-law terms included in those provisions (see, in that respect, Joined Cases C‑6/and C‑9/Francovich and Others [1991] ECR I‑5357, paragraphs and 14).
      
Furthermore, the precise prohibition laid down by Clause 4(1) of the framework agreement does not require the adoption of
         any further measure of the Community institutions (see, by analogy, Case 41/van Duyn [1974] ECR 1337, paragraph 6). Besides, the provision under consideration does not in any way confer on Member States the
         right, when transposing it into domestic law, to limit the scope of the prohibition laid down in respect of employment conditions
         (see, by analogy, Marshall, paragraph 55).
      
Admittedly, as Ireland submitted, that provision includes, in relation to the principle of non-discrimination there laid down,
         a qualification concerning justification on objective grounds.
      
However, as the referring court itself pointed out, the application of that qualification is subject to judicial control (for
         an example of such control in relation to the concept of objective reasons in the context of Clause 5(1) of the framework
         agreement, see Case C‑212/Adeneler and Others [2006] ECR I‑6057, paragraphs to 75), although the possibility of relying on it does not preclude the view that the provision
         at issue confers on individuals rights which they may enforce in the national courts and which the latter must protect (see,
         by analogy, van Duyn, paragraph 7; Case C‑156/Hansa Fleisch Ernst Mundt [1992] ECR I‑5567, paragraph 15; Case C‑374/Feyrer [1999] ECR I‑5153, paragraph 24; and also Case C‑413/Baumbast and R [2002] ECR I‑7091, paragraphs and 86).
      
The precision and unconditionality of Clause 4(1) of the framework agreement are not affected by Clause 4(2) either. As the
         Advocate General noted at point of her Opinion, Clause 4(2) simply articulates one of the consequences which may be associated,
         where appropriate, subject to judicial control, with the application of the principle of non-discrimination in favour of fixed-term
         workers, without in any way undermining the substance of that principle.
      
As regards Clause 4(3) of the framework agreement, upon which Ireland also relied in order to deny Clause 4(1) direct effect,
         it must be observed that Clause 4(3) entrusts the Member States and/or the social partners with the definition of the arrangements
         for facilitating the ‘application’ of the principle of non-discrimination laid down by that clause.
      
Such arrangements cannot therefore in any way relate to the actual substance of that principle (see, by analogy, Case 8/Becker [1982] ECR 53, paragraphs and 33). As the referring court itself suggested, and as Impact submitted, they cannot therefore
         limit the existence or restrict the scope of that principle (see, by analogy, Case 2/Reyners [1974] ECR 631, paragraphs and 26, and Becker, paragraph 39).
      
It follows that Clause 4(1) of the framework agreement appears, so far as its subject-matter is concerned, to be unconditional
         and sufficiently precise for individuals to be able to rely upon it before a national court.
      
 Clause 5(1) of the framework agreement
Clause 5(1) of the framework agreement requires Member States to adopt one or more of the measures listed where domestic law
         does not include equivalent legal measures, in order to prevent abuse arising from the use of successive fixed-term employment
         contracts or relationships. The measures listed, of which there are three, relate, respectively, to objective reasons justifying
         the renewal of such contracts or relationships, the maximum total duration of successive fixed-term employment contracts or
         relationships, and the number of renewals of such contracts or relationships.
      
In prescribing the effective and binding adoption of at least one of the measures listed in Clause 5(1) of the framework agreement
         intended to prevent the abusive use of successive fixed-term employment contracts or relationships, where domestic law does
         not already include equivalent measures (see Adenelerand Others, paragraphs and 101; Case C‑53/Marrosu and Sardino [2006] ECR I‑7213, paragraph 44; and also Case C‑180/Vassallo [2006] ECR I‑7251, paragraph 35), Clause 5(1) assigns to the Member States the general objective of preventing such abuse,
         while leaving to them the choice as to how to achieve it.
      
Under Clause 5(1), it is effectively left to the discretion of the Member States to rely to that end on one or more of the
         measures listed in that clause, or even on existing equivalent legal measures, while taking account of the needs of specific
         sectors and/or categories of workers.
      
Admittedly, as the Commission contended when referring to the judgment in Francovich and Others (paragraph 17), the right of the Member States to choose among several possible means of achieving the result required by
         a directive does not preclude the possibility for individuals of enforcing before the national courts rights the content of
         which can be determined sufficiently precisely on the basis of the provisions of that directive alone (see also, to that effect,
         Case C‑271/Marshall [1993] ECR I‑4367, paragraph 37, and Pfeiffer and Others, paragraph 105).
      
However, it must be held that, unlike the provisions at issue in the case giving rise to the judgment in Francovich and Others, Clause 5(1) of the framework agreement does not contain any unconditional and sufficiently precise obligation capable of
         being relied upon, in the absence of transposing measures taken within the requisite period, by an individual before a national
         court.
      
In Francovich and Others, notwithstanding the freedom of choice given to the Member States by the directive in question to achieve the result required
         by that directive, the Court of Justice was able to identify in the directive provisions defining, unconditionally and sufficiently
         precisely, content comprising minimum protection in favour of individuals: in that case, a minimum guarantee for the payment
         of wage claims in the event of the employer’s insolvency (for other cases of identification of minimum protection, see also
         Case C‑303/Simap [2000] ECR I‑7963, paragraphs and 69, and Pfeiffer and Others, paragraph 105).
      
In the present case, however, the Court cannot accept the Commission’s suggestion that Clause 5(1) of the framework agreement
         also establishes such minimum material protection in that, in the absence of any other measure intended to combat abuse or
         at least of any sufficiently effective, objective and transparent measure to that end, it requires objective reasons to justify
         the renewal of successive fixed-term employment contracts or relationships.
      
First, while it is true, as the Court stated in paragraph of the judgment in Adeneler and Others, that, according to paragraph of the general considerations in the framework agreement, the signatory parties to that agreement
         took the view that ‘the use of fixed-term employment contracts founded on objective reasons is a way to prevent abuse’, the
         fact remains that the construction advocated by the Commission effectively introduces a hierarchy between the various measures
         referred to in Clause 5(1) of the framework agreement, whereas the terms of that provision themselves unequivocally show that
         the various measures envisaged are intended to be ‘equivalent’.
      
Second, as the Advocate General also noted at point of her Opinion, the interpretation proposed by the Commission would
         have the effect of rendering meaningless the choice of means allowed by Clause 5(1) of the framework agreement, since it would
         permit an individual to plead the absence of objective reasons in order to challenge the renewal of his fixed-term contract,
         even where that renewal did not infringe the rules relating to maximum total duration or number of renewals adopted by the
         Member State concerned in accordance with the options available under Clause 5(1)(b) and (c).
      
Contrary to what was accepted in the cases giving rise to the judgments cited in paragraph of the present judgment, it
         is therefore not possible, in the present case, to determine sufficiently the minimum protection which should, on any view,
         be implemented pursuant to Clause 5(1) of the framework agreement.
      
It follows that that provision does not appear, so far as its subject-matter is concerned, to be unconditional and sufficiently
         precise for individuals to be able to rely upon it before a national court.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the second question must be that Clause 4(1) of the framework agreement is unconditional
         and sufficiently precise for individuals to be able to rely upon it before a national court; that is not the case, however,
         as regards Clause 5(1) of the framework agreement.
      
 Question By its third question the referring court asks, in essence, having regard to the answers to the first question and to the
         second question in so far as it relates to Clause 5(1) of the framework agreement, whether Clause 5(1) of the framework agreement
         precludes a Member State, acting in its capacity as an employer, from renewing a fixed-term employment contract for up to
         eight years in the period between the deadline for transposing Directive 1999/and the date on which the legislation transposing
         that directive enters into force.
      
In relation to that third question the referring court explains that, on previous occasions, the contract in question had
         always been renewed for shorter periods; that the employer requires the services of the employee for a period exceeding the
         usual term on renewal; that the renewal for an extended period has the effect of circumventing the application to an employee
         of Clause of the framework agreement when transposed into domestic law; and that there are no objective reasons unrelated
         to the employee’s status as a fixed-term worker for such a renewal.
      
In the event that, having regard to the answer given to its first question, the referring court must declare that it has jurisdiction
         to hear and determine the claims of the complainants in the main proceedings based directly on Directive 1999/70, it must
         be stated that while, in accordance with the answer to the second question, the subject-matter of Clause 5(1) of the framework
         agreement is not unconditional and sufficiently precise for individuals to be able to rely upon it before a national court,
         the fact none the less remains that, under the third paragraph of Article EC, the directive leaves to the national authorities
         the choice of form and methods but is binding, as to the result to be achieved, upon each Member State to which it is addressed
         (see von Colson and Kamann, paragraph 15).
      
The first paragraph of Article of Directive 1999/thus provides that the Member States are required to take any necessary
         measures to enable them at any time to be in a position to guarantee the results imposed by the directive.
      
As has already been observed in paragraph of this judgment, the Member States’ obligation to achieve the result envisaged
         by a directive and, under Article EC, to take all appropriate measures, whether general or particular, to ensure the fulfilment
         of that obligation, is binding on all the authorities of the Member States (see von Colson and Kamann, paragraph 26). Such obligations devolve on those authorities, including, where appropriate, in their capacity as a public
         employer.
      
As regards the objective laid down by Directive 1999/and the framework agreement, the latter proceeds – as is apparent
         from paragraphs and of the general considerations in the framework agreement – on the premiss that employment contracts
         of indefinite duration are the general form of employment relationship, while recognising that fixed-term employment contracts
         are a feature of employment in certain sectors or in respect of certain occupations and activities (see Adeneler and Others, paragraph 61).
      
Consequently, the benefit of stable employment is viewed as a major element in the protection of workers (see Case C‑144/Mangold [2005] ECR I‑9981, paragraph 64), whereas – as is apparent from the second paragraph of the preamble to the framework agreement
         and paragraph of the general considerations – it is only in certain circumstances that fixed-term employment contracts are
         liable to respond to the needs of both employers and workers (see Adeneler and Others, paragraph 62).
      
From this angle, the framework agreement seeks to place limits on successive recourse to the latter category of employment
         relationship, a category regarded as a potential source of abuse to the disadvantage of workers, by laying down as a minimum
         a number of protective provisions designed to prevent the status of employees from being insecure (see Adeneler and Others, paragraph 63).
      
As is apparent from Clause 1(b) of the framework agreement, its purpose is to establish a framework to prevent abuse arising
         from the use of successive fixed-term employment contracts or relationships. According to its own terms, Clause 5(1) of the
         framework agreement specifically pursues that objective of prevention.
      
It follows that the Member States are required under Article EC and the third paragraph of Article EC, as well as under
         Directive 1999/itself, to take any appropriate measure, whether general or particular, to achieve the objective of that
         directive and of the framework agreement of preventing the abusive use of fixed-term contracts.
      
However, that obligation would be rendered ineffective if an authority of a Member State, acting in its capacity as a public
         employer, were authorised to renew contracts for an unusually long term in the period between the deadline for transposing
         Directive 1999/and the date on which the transposing legislation entered into force, thereby depriving the persons concerned
         for an unreasonable period of time of the benefit of the measures adopted by the national legislature for the purpose of transposing
         Clause of the framework agreement.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the third question must be that Article EC, the third paragraph of Article
         EC, and Directive 1999/must be interpreted as meaning that an authority of a Member State acting in its capacity as
         a public employer may not adopt measures contrary to the objective pursued by that directive and the framework agreement as
         regards prevention of the abusive use of fixed-term contracts, which consist in the renewal of such contracts for an unusually
         long term in the period between the deadline for transposing Directive 1999/and the date on which the transposing legislation
         entered into force.
      
 Question In the event that, having regard to the answer given to its first question, the referring court is not required to declare
         that it has jurisdiction to hear and determine the claims of the complainants in the main proceedings based directly on Directive
         1999/70, it is necessary to answer the fourth question, by which the referring court queries, in essence, whether it is under
         an obligation, by virtue of its obligation to interpret domestic law in conformity with Community law, to give the Act
         retrospective effect to the date by which that directive should have been transposed.
      
As a preliminary point, it must be noted that the fourth question relates only to section of the Act, which is the
         measure that transposes Clause of the framework agreement.
      
It is indicated in the order for reference that the complainants in the main proceedings have, on the other hand, conceded
         that the wording used in section of the Act makes it impossible for retrospective effect to be given to that section
         (which effectively transposes Clause of the framework agreement), and to interpret it in that way would be contra legem.
      
It is thus necessary to consider whether, in the situation referred to in paragraph of this judgment where it would have
         jurisdiction only to rule on the complaints in the main proceedings in so far as they are based on an infringement of the
         Act, the referring court is required – in accordance with the obligation to interpret national law in conformity with
         Community law – to give section of the Act retrospective effect to the date by which Directive 1999/should have
         been transposed.
      
The referring court states in that regard that, while it is true that the wording of section of the Act does not expressly
         preclude a retrospective construction, a domestic rule of construction does preclude the retrospective application of legislation
         unless there is a clear and unambiguous indication to the contrary.
      
In that regard, when applying domestic law and, in particular, legislative provisions specifically adopted for the purpose
         of implementing the requirements of a directive, national courts are bound to interpret that law, so far as possible, in the
         light of the wording and the purpose of the directive in order to achieve the result sought by it and thus to comply with
         the third paragraph of Article EC (see, in particular, Pfeiffer and Others, paragraph and the case-law cited).
      
The requirement that national law be interpreted in conformity with Community law is inherent in the system of the EC Treaty,
         since it permits national courts, for the matters within their jurisdiction, to ensure the full effectiveness of Community
         law when they determine the disputes before them (see, inter alia, Pfeiffer and Others, paragraph 114, and Adeneler and Others, paragraph 109).
      
However, the obligation on a national court to refer to the content of a directive when interpreting and applying the relevant
         rules of domestic law is limited by general principles of law, particularly those of legal certainty and non-retroactivity,
         and that obligation cannot serve as the basis for an interpretation of national law contra legem (see Case 80/Kolpinghuis Nijmegen [1987] ECR 3969, paragraph 13, and Adeneler and Others, paragraph 110; see also, by analogy, Case C‑105/Pupino [2005] ECR I‑5285, paragraphs and 47).
      
The principle that national law must be interpreted in conformity with Community law none the less requires national courts
         to do whatever lies within their jurisdiction, taking the whole body of domestic law into consideration and applying the interpretative
         methods recognised by domestic law, with a view to ensuring that the directive in question is fully effective and achieving
         an outcome consistent with the objective pursued by it (see Pfeiffer and Others, paragraphs 115, 116, and 119, and Adeneler andOthers, paragraph 111).
      
In the present case, since, according to the information given in the order for reference, domestic law appears to include
         a rule that precludes the retrospective application of legislation unless there is a clear and unambiguous indication to the
         contrary, it is for the referring court to ascertain whether there is a provision in that legislation, in particular in the
         Act, which contains such an indication capable of giving retrospective effect to section of the Act.
      
In the absence of such a provision, Community law – in particular the requirement for national law to be interpreted in conformity
         with Community law – cannot be interpreted as requiring the referring court to give section of the Act retrospective
         effect to the date by which Directive 1999/should have been transposed, as the referring court would otherwise be constrained
         to interpret national law contra legem.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the fourth question must be that, in so far as the applicable national law contains
         a rule that precludes the retrospective application of legislation unless there is a clear and unambiguous indication to the
         contrary, a national court hearing a claim based on an infringement of a provision of national legislation transposing Directive
         1999/is required, under Community law, to give that provision retrospective effect to the date by which that directive
         should have been transposed only if that national legislation includes an indication of that nature capable of giving that
         provision retrospective effect.
      
 Question In the event that, having regard to the answer given to its first question, the referring court must declare that it has jurisdiction
         to hear and determine a claim based directly on Directive 1999/70, it is necessary to answer the fifth question, by which
         the referring court asks whether ‘employment conditions’ within the meaning of Clause of the framework agreement include
         conditions of an employment contract relating to remuneration and pensions.
      
In that regard, as the Court has already held, the Council, in adopting Directive 1999/70, in order to implement the framework
         agreement, relied on Article 139(2) EC, which provides that agreements concluded at a Community level are to be implemented
         for matters covered by Article EC (Case C‑307/Del Cerro Alonso [2007] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 33).
      
Those matters include, in Article 137(1)(b) EC, ‘working conditions’.
      
It cannot be determined from the wording of Article 137(1)(b) EC alone, any more than from that of Clause of the framework
         agreement, whether or not the working conditions or employment conditions respectively referred to in those two provisions
         include conditions relating to matters such as the remuneration and pensions at issue in the main proceedings.
      
In that regard, the fact, noted by the United Kingdom Government, that a number of Community-law provisions – such as Article
         3(1)(c) of Council Directive 76/207/EEC of February on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men
         and women as regards access to employment, vocational training and promotion, and working conditions (OJ L 39, p. 40),
         as amended by Directive 2002/73/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of September (OJ L 269, p. 15),
         Article 3(1)(c) of Council Directive 2000/43/EC of June implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons
         irrespective of racial or ethnic origin (OJ L 180, p. 22), or even Article 3(1)(c) of Council Directive 2000/78/EC of
         November establishing a general framework for equal treatment in employment and occupation (OJ L 303, p. 16)
         –expressly state that the term ‘employment and working conditions’ (to which those provisions refer) includes remuneration
         does not permit the conclusion to be drawn from the absence of a statement to that effect in Clause of the framework agreement
         that, for the purposes of applying that clause, the term ‘employment conditions’ does not cover financial aspects such as
         those at issue in the main proceedings.
      
Since the question of interpretation raised cannot be resolved by the wording of Clause of the framework agreement, it is
         necessary, in accordance with settled case-law, to take into consideration the context and the objectives pursued by the rules
         of which that clause is part (see, in particular, Case 292/Merck [1983] ECR 3781, paragraph 12; Case 337/St. Nikolaus Brennerei und Likörfabrik [1984] ECR 1051, paragraph 10; Case C‑223/Adidas [1999] ECR I‑7081, paragraph 23; and Case C‑76/P Britannia Alloys & Chemicals v Commission [2007] ECR I‑4405, paragraph 21).
      
In that regard, as the Court has already noted (Del Cerro Alonso, paragraph 36), it is apparent from the wording of Clause 1(a) of the framework agreement that one of its objectives is to
         ‘improve the quality of fixed-term work by ensuring the application of the principle of non-discrimination’. Similarly, the
         third paragraph of the preamble to the framework agreement states that this framework agreement ‘illustrates the willingness
         of the Social Partners to establish a general framework for ensuring equal treatment for fixed-term workers by protecting
         them against discrimination’. Recital (14) in the preamble to Directive 1999/states that the aim of the framework agreement
         is, in particular, to improve the quality of fixed-term work by setting out the minimum requirements in order to ensure the
         application of the principle of non-discrimination.
      
The framework agreement, in particular Clause 4, thus follows an aim which is akin to the fundamental objectives enshrined
         in the first paragraph of Article EC as well as in the third paragraph of the preamble to the EC Treaty and Article and the first paragraph of Article of the Community Charter of the Fundamental Social Rights of Workers to which Article
         EC refers, and which are associated with the improvement of living and working conditions and the existence of proper
         social protection for workers, in the present case, for fixed-term workers.
      
Moreover, the first paragraph of Article EC, which defines the objectives with a view to which the Council may, in respect
         of the matters covered by Article EC, implement in accordance with Article 139(2) EC agreements concluded between social
         partners at Community level, refers to the European Social Charter signed at Turin on October 1961, which includes at point
         of Part I the right for all workers to a ‘fair remuneration sufficient for a decent standard of living for themselves and
         their families’ among the objectives which the contracting parties have undertaken to achieve, in accordance with Article
         in Part III of the Charter.
      
In the light of those objectives, Clause of the framework agreement must be interpreted as articulating a principle of Community
         social law which cannot be interpreted restrictively (see Del Cerro Alonso, paragraph 38).
      
As submitted by both Impact and the Commission, to interpret Clause of the framework agreement as categorically excluding
         from the term ‘employment conditions’ for the purposes of that clause financial conditions such as those relating to remuneration
         and pensions, effectively reduces – contrary to the objective attributed to that clause – the scope of the protection against
         discrimination for the workers concerned by introducing a distinction based on the nature of the employment conditions, which
         the wording of that clause does not in any way suggest.
      
Moreover, as the Advocate General noted at point of her Opinion, such an interpretation would render the reference in
         Clause 4(2) of the framework agreement to the principle of pro rata temporis meaningless, that principle being intended by definition only to apply to divisible performance, such as that deriving from
         financial employment conditions linked, for example, to remuneration and pensions.
      
Contrary to the submissions of Ireland and the United Kingdom Government, the foregoing analysis is not called into question
         by the case-law which the Court has developed in relation to equal treatment for men and women, according to which working
         conditions for the purposes of Directive 76/207, prior to its amendment by Directive 2002/73, do not encompass pay (see, in
         particular, Case C‑342/Gillespie and Others [1996] ECR I‑475, paragraph 24; Case C‑313/Wippel [2004] ECR I‑9483, paragraphs to 33; and Case C‑191/McKenna [2005] ECR I‑7631, paragraph 30).
      
That case-law is accounted for by the existence also of Article of the EC Treaty (Articles to of the EC Treaty
         were replaced by Articles EC to EC) and of a directive dedicated to the equal treatment of men and women in relation
         to pay, namely Council Directive 75/117/EEC of February on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating
         to the application of the principle of equal pay for men and women (OJ L 45, p. 19).
      
Since there is no such duality of legislation in respect of the principle of non-discrimination of fixed-term workers, it
         is not possible to draw any lessons from that case-law as regards the interpretation of ‘employment conditions’ within the
         meaning of Clause of the framework agreement.
      
As regards the objection by Ireland and the United Kingdom Government based on Article 137(5) EC, as interpreted by the judgment
         in Case C‑14/Dellas and Others [2005] ECR I‑10253, paragraphs and 39, it must be borne in mind that Directive 1999/was adopted on the basis of Article
         139(2) EC, which refers to Article EC for the list of matters within the competence of the Council for the purposes, inter
         alia, of implementing agreements concluded between social partners at Community level.
      
According to Article 137(5) EC, the provisions of Article EC ‘shall not apply to pay, the right of association, the right
         to strike or the right to impose lock-outs’.
      
As the Court has already held, as Article 137(5) EC derogates from paragraphs to of that article, the matters reserved
         by that paragraph must be interpreted strictly so as not to unduly affect the scope of paragraphs to 4, nor to call into
         question the aims pursued by Article EC (Del Cerro Alonso, paragraph 39).
      
More particularly, the exception relating to ‘pay’ set out in Article 137(5) EC is explained by the fact that fixing the level
         of pay falls within the contractual freedom of the social partners at a national level and within the relevant competence
         of Member States. In those circumstances, in the present state of Community law, it was considered appropriate to exclude
         determination of the level of wages from harmonisation under Article EC et seq. (Del Cerro Alonso, paragraphs and 46).
      
As the Commission contended, that exception must therefore be interpreted as covering measures – such as the equivalence of
         all or some of the constituent parts of pay and/or the level of pay in the Member States, or the setting of a minimum guaranteed
         Community wage – which amount to direct interference by Community law in the determination of pay within the Community.
      
It cannot, however, be extended to any question involving any sort of link with pay; otherwise some of the areas referred
         to in Article 137(1) EC would be deprived of much of their substance (see, to that effect, Del Cerro Alonso, paragraph 41; see also, to the same effect, Case C‑84/United Kingdom v Council [1996] ECR I‑5755, concerning the Council’s competence to adopt, on the basis of Article 118a of the EC Treaty (Articles
         to of the EC Treaty were replaced by Articles EC to EC), Council Directive 93/104/EC of November concerning
         certain aspects of the organisation of working time (OJ L 307, p. 18), in particular Article of that directive, relating
         to the grant of four weeks’ paid annual leave).
      
It follows that the derogation in Article 137(5) EC does not preclude the interpretation of Clause of the framework agreement
         as imposing on the Member States the obligation to ensure that fixed-term workers are also guaranteed the application of the
         principle of non-discrimination in relation to pay. That derogation cannot therefore prevent workers such as the complainants
         in the main proceedings from pleading the direct effect of Clause 4(1) in contesting the application, in relation to pay,
         of less favourable treatment than that which is given to comparable permanent workers and for which there is no objective
         justification (see, to that effect, Del Cerro Alonso, paragraphs and 47).
      
For the reasons set out in paragraphs to of the judgment in Del CerroAlonso, the foregoing interpretation is in no way incompatible with the arguments in paragraphs and of the judgment in Dellas and Others.
      
At the hearing, the United Kingdom Government submitted that it may be inferred from the judgment in Del Cerro Alonso that the principle of non-discrimination laid down by the framework agreement concerns only the constituent parts of pay,
         excluding the level of pay, which the national competent authorities remain free to set differently for permanent and for
         fixed-term workers.
      
However, while it is true – as paragraphs and of the judgment in Del Cerro Alonso show and as has been noted in paragraphs and of the present judgment – that the establishment of the level of the
         various constituent parts of the pay of a worker falls outside the competence of the Community legislature and is unquestionably
         still a matter for the competent bodies in the various Member States, those bodies must nevertheless exercise their competence
         consistently with Community law – particularly Clause of the framework agreement – in the areas in which the Community does
         not have competence (see, to that effect, Case C‑438/International Transport Workers’ Federation and Finnish Seamen’s Union [2007] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 40, and Case C‑341/Laval un Partneri [2007] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 87).
      
It follows that, in establishing both the constituent parts of pay and the level of those constituent parts, the national
         competent bodies must apply to fixed-term workers the principle of non-discrimination as laid down in Clause of the framework
         agreement.
      
With regard to pensions, it must be noted that, according to the settled case-law of the Court in relation to Article of the Treaty, or, with effect from May 1999, in relation to Article EC, which concern the principle of equal treatment
         of men and women in relation to pay, the term ‘pay’ within the meaning of the second subparagraph of Article 141(2) EC covers
         pensions which depend on the employment relationship between worker and employer, excluding those deriving from a statutory
         scheme, to the financing of which workers, employers and possibly the public authorities contribute in a measure determined
         less by the employment relationship than by considerations of social policy (see, in particular, Case 80/Defrenne [1971] ECR 445, paragraphs and 8; Case 170/Bilka-Kaufhaus [1986] ECR 1607, paragraphs to 22; Case C‑262/Barber [1990] ECR I‑1889, paragraphs to 28; and Joined Cases C‑4/and C‑5/Schönheit and Becker [2003] ECR I‑12575, paragraphs to 64).
      
Taking that case-law into account, it must be held that the term ‘employment conditions’ within the meaning of Clause 4(1)
         of the framework agreement covers pensions which depend on an employment relationship between worker and employer, excluding
         statutory social-security pensions, which are determined less by that relationship than by considerations of social policy.
      
That interpretation is supported by the information in the fifth paragraph of the preamble to the framework agreement, according
         to which the parties to the agreement ‘recognis[e] that matters relating to statutory social security are for decision by
         the Member States’ and call on the Member States to give effect to the Employment Declaration of the Dublin European Council
         in which emphasised, inter alia, the need to adapt social-security systems to new patterns of work in order to provide
         appropriate social protection to those engaged in such work.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the fifth question must be that Clause of the framework agreement must be interpreted
         as meaning that employment conditions within the meaning of that clause encompass conditions relating to pay and to pensions
         which depend on the employment relationship, to the exclusion of conditions relating to pensions arising under a statutory
         social-security scheme.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Community law, in particular the principle of effectiveness, requires that a specialised court which is called upon, under
            the, albeit optional, jurisdiction conferred on it by the legislation transposing Council Directive 1999/70/EC of June
            concerning the framework agreement on fixed-term work concluded by ETUC, UNICE and CEEP, to hear and determine a claim
            based on an infringement of that legislation, must also have jurisdiction to hear and determine an applicant’s claims arising
            directly from the directive itself in respect of the period between the deadline for transposing the directive and the date
            on which the transposing legislation entered into force if it is established that the obligation on that applicant to bring,
            at the same time, a separate claim based directly on the directive before an ordinary court would involve procedural disadvantages
            liable to render excessively difficult the exercise of the rights conferred on him by Community law. It is for the national
            court to undertake the necessary checks in that regard.
2.      Clause 4(1) of the framework agreement on fixed-term work concluded on March 1999, which is annexed to Directive 1999/70,
            is unconditional and sufficiently precise for individuals to be able to rely upon it before a national court; that is not
            the case, however, as regards Clause 5(1) of the framework agreement.
3.      Article EC, the third paragraph of Article EC, and Directive 1999/must be interpreted as meaning that an authority
            of a Member State acting in its capacity as a public employer may not adopt measures contrary to the objective pursued by
            that directive and the framework agreement on fixed-term work as regards prevention of the abusive use of fixed-term contracts,
            which consist in the renewal of such contracts for an unusually long term in the period between the deadline for transposing
            Directive 1999/and the date on which the transposing legislation entered into force.
4.      In so far as the applicable national law contains a rule that precludes the retrospective application of legislation unless
            there is a clear and unambiguous indication to the contrary, a national court hearing a claim based on an infringement of
            a provision of national legislation transposing Directive 1999/is required, under Community law, to give that provision
            retrospective effect to the date by which that directive should have been transposed only if that national legislation includes
            an indication of that nature capable of giving that provision retrospective effect.
5.      Clause of the framework agreement on fixed-term work must be interpreted as meaning that employment conditions within the
            meaning of that clause encompass conditions relating to pay and to pensions which depend on the employment relationship, to
            the exclusion of conditions relating to pensions arising under a statutory social-security scheme.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: English.
      
Top  
 