
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-463/Commission of the European CommunitiesvKingdom of Spain
«(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Articles EC and EC – System of administrative approval relating to privatised undertakings)»
Opinion of Advocate General Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer delivered on February I - Judgment of the Court, May I - Summary of the Judgment
1..
Free movement of capital – Restrictions – Obstacles resulting from privileges retained by the Member States in the management of privatised undertakings – Justification – System of property ownership – No justification  (Arts and EC) 
2..
Free movement of capital – Restrictions – National rules laying down a system of prior administrative approval in respect of certain decisions by commercial undertakings – Not permissible – Justification based on grounds of public security – No justification  (Arts EC and 58(1)(b) EC) 
1.
 Concerns which, depending on the circumstances, may justify the retention by Member States of a degree of influence within
         undertakings that were initially public and subsequently privatised, where those undertakings are active in fields involving
         the provision of services in the public interest or strategic services, cannot, however, entitle Member States to plead their
         own systems of property ownership, referred to in Article EC, by way of justification for obstacles, resulting from privileges
         attaching to their position as shareholder in a privatised undertaking, to the exercise of the freedoms provided for by the
         Treaty, such as the free movement of capital between Member States. That article does not have the effect of exempting the
         Member States' systems of property ownership from the fundamental rules of the Treaty.  see paras 66-2.
 A Member State which maintains in force national rules submitting to prior administrative approval the decisions of commercial
         undertakings relating to: ─ the undertaking's winding-up, demerger or merger; ─ the disposal or charging of the assets or shareholdings necessary for the attainment of the undertaking's object; ─ a change in the undertaking's object; ─ dealings in the share capital involving the disposal or acquisition of shares, which result in the State's shareholding
         being reduced, fails to fulfil its obligations under Article EC. Such rules constitute a restriction on the movement of capital for the purposes of Article EC. The fact that the restrictions
         on the acquisition of shares apply without distinction to both residents and non-residents does not mean that they fall outside
         the scope of Article EC, since they affect the position of a person acquiring a shareholding as such and are thus liable
         to deter investors from other Member States from making such investments and, consequently, to affect access to the market.
         Furthermore, no justification for such rules can be accepted. Although, in that respect, the objective of safeguarding supplies
         of petroleum or electricity supplies and of ensuring a minimum level of telecommunications services in the event of a crisis,
         within the Member State concerned, may constitute a public-security reason and, therefore, justify an obstacle to the free
         movement of capital, such rules go beyond what is necessary to attain that objective, since they do not provide any objective
         and specific criteria such as to allow review of the exercise of the particularly broad discretion enjoyed by the administrative
         authorities.  see paras 54, 59, 61-62, 65, 71, 73, 76, 79-80, 84, operative part
      
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURTMay (1)
((Failure by a Member State to fulfil its obligations – Articles EC and EC – System of administrative approval relating to privatised undertakings))
In Case C-463/00, 
            
 Commission of the European Communities,  represented initially by M. Patakia and M. Desantes, and, subsequently, by M. Patakia and G. Valero Jordana, acting as Agents,
            with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, 
v
 Kingdom of Spain,  represented by N. Díaz Abad, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
defendant, supported by United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,  represented by R. Magrill, acting as Agent, and D. Wyatt QC and J. Crow, Barrister, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
intervener, 
APPLICATION for a declaration that the provisions of Article and Article 3(1) and (2), together with Article 1, of Ley 5/de régimen jurídico de enajenación de participaciones públicas en determinadas empresas (Law 5/of March on the
            legal arrangements for disposal of public shareholdings in certain undertakings (BOE No of March 1995, p. 9366) and
            the implementing royal decrees enacted under Article of Law 5/(Royal Decree No 3/of January concerning
            Repsol SA (BOE No of January 1996, p. 1133), Royal Decree No 8/of January concerning Telefónica de España
            SA and Telefónica Servicios Móviles SA (BOE No of January 1997, p. 907), Royal Decree No 40/of January concerning Corporación Bancaria de España SA (Argentaria) (BOE No of January 1998, p. 1851), Royal Decree No 552/of April concerning Tabacalera SA (BOE No of April 1998, p. 11370), and Royal Decree No 929/of May concerning Endesa SA (BOE No of May 1998, p. 17939)), in so far as they implement a system of prior administrative
            approval
            
─
which is not justified by any overriding requirements of the general interest, 
            
─
which does not lay down objective and stable criteria which have been made public, and 
            
─
which does not comply with the principle of proportionality, 
            
are incompatible with Article EC and Article EC,
            
THE COURT,,
composed of: G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias, President, J.-P. Puissochet, M. Wathelet and R. Schintgen (Presidents of Chambers), C. Gulmann, D.A.O. Edward, A. La Pergola, P. Jann (Rapporteur), V. Skouris, F. Macken, N. Colneric, S. von Bahr and A. Rosas, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer, Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator, 
            
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,after hearing oral argument from the parties at the hearing on November 2002, at which the Commission was represented by
            M. Patakia and G. Valero Jordana, the Kingdom of Spain by N. Díaz Abad and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
            Ireland by J.E. Collins, acting as Agent, and by D. Wyatt and J. Crow,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on February 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on December 2000, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         under Article EC against the Kingdom of Spain for a declaration that the provisions of Article and Article 3(1) and
         (2), together with Article 1, of Law 5/of March on the legal arrangements for disposal of public shareholdings
         in certain undertakings (BOE No of March 1995, p. 9366,  
         Law 5/1995) and the implementing royal decrees enacted under Article of Law 5/(Royal Decree No 3/of January concerning
         Repsol SA (BOE No of January 1996, p. 1133,  
         Royal Decree No 3/1996), Royal Decree No 8/of January concerning Telefónica de España SA and Telefónica Servicios Móviles SA (BOE No
         of January 1997, p. 907,  
         Royal Decree No 8/1997), Royal Decree No 40/of January concerning Corporación Bancaria de España SA (Argentaria) (BOE No of January
         1998, p. 1851,  
         Royal Decree 40/1998), Royal Decree No 552/of April concerning Tabacalera SA (BOE No of April 1998, p. 11370,  
         Royal Decree No 552/1998), and Royal Decree No 929/of May concerning Endesa SA (BOE No of May 1998, p. 17939,  
         Royal Decree No 929/1998)), in so far as they implement a system of prior administrative approval 
         
─
which is not justified by any overriding requirements of the general interest, 
         
─
which does not lay down objective and stable criteria which have been made public, and 
         
─
which does not comply with the principle of proportionality, 
         
are incompatible with Article EC and Article EC.
         
            
By order of the President of the Court of June 2001, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was granted
         leave to intervene in support of the form of order sought by the Kingdom of Spain. 
         
Legal background to the proceedings
Community law
         
            
Article 56(1) EC is worded as follows: Within the framework of the provisions set out in this Chapter, all restrictions on the movement of capital between Member
         States and between Member States and third countries shall be prohibited.
         
            
Article 58(1)(b) EC provides: The provisions of Article shall be without prejudice to the right of Member States:...
         
(b)
to take all requisite measures to prevent infringements of national law and regulations, in particular in the field of taxation
         and the prudential supervision of financial institutions, or to lay down procedures for the declaration of capital movements
         for purposes of administrative or statistical information, or to take measures which are justified on grounds of public policy
         or public security.
         
            
Annex I to Council Directive 88/361/EEC of June for the implementation of Article of the Treaty (OJ L 178,
         p. 5) contains a nomenclature of the capital movements referred to in Article of that directive. In particular, it lists
         the following movements: I ─ Direct investments
         
1.
 Establishment and extension of branches or new undertakings belonging solely to the person providing the capital, and the
         acquisition in full of existing undertakings. 
         
2.
 Participation in new or existing undertakings with a view to establishing or maintaining lasting economic links. 
         ...
         
            
The explanatory notes appearing at the end of Annex I to Directive 88/provide that  
         direct investments means: Investments of all kinds by natural persons or commercial, industrial or financial undertakings, and which serve to establish
         or to maintain lasting and direct links between the person providing the capital and the entrepreneur to whom or the undertaking
         to which the capital is made available in order to carry on an economic activity. This concept must therefore be understood
         in its widest sense....As regards those undertakings mentioned under I-of the Nomenclature which have the status of companies limited by shares,
         there is participation in the nature of direct investment where the block of shares held by a natural person or another undertaking
         or any other holder enables the shareholder, either pursuant to the provisions of national laws relating to companies limited
         by shares or otherwise, to participate effectively in the management of the company or in its control....
         
            
The nomenclature appearing in Annex I to Directive 88/also refers to the following movements: III ─ Operations in securities normally dealt in on the capital market...A ─ Transactions in securities on the capital market
         
1.
 Acquisition by non-residents of domestic securities dealt in on a stock exchange 
         ...
         
3.
 Acquisition by non-residents of domestic securities not dealt in on a stock exchange 
         ...
         
            
Article EC provides: This Treaty shall in no way prejudice the rules in Member States governing the system of property ownership.
         National law
         
            
Law 5/lays down the rules concerning the privatisation of undertakings in the Spanish public sector. Articles to provide: Article 1. Substantive scopeThis Law shall apply to:
         
1.
 Commercial undertakings in which, on the date on which this Law enters into force, the State holds, directly or indirectly,
         more than 25% of the share capital and which are controlled by the State member in any of the ways laid down by the applicable
         commercial legislation, provided that, as regards the activity carried out by the undertaking, on its own account or as a
         result of a holding in other companies, any of the following conditions are met:
         
(a)
essential services or public services formally defined as such are supplied; 
         
(b)
activities are carried out which by law and for reasons of public interest are subject to specific administrative review procedures,
         applying particularly to the persons carrying out the activities; 
         
(c)
the activity is exempt in whole or in part from the rules on competition under Article of the Treaty Establishing the European
         Economic Community. 
         
2.
 Commercial undertakings which are part of a group, as defined in Article of Law 24/of July on the Stock Market,
         in which any of the undertakings falling within paragraph (1) above has a dominant position, provided that they meet any of
         the conditions referred to in subparagraphs (a), (b) or (c) of paragraph (1).
         Article 2. Conditions for applicationThe system of prior administrative approval set out in Article et seq. of this Law shall apply where the public holding
         of the State member of the undertakings referred to in the preceding article falls within either of the following cases:
         
1.
 Where, in one transaction, or a series of transactions, the holding is disposed of in such a way that it is reduced by a percentage
         equal to, or greater than, 10% of the share capital, provided that the resulting direct or indirect State holding in that
         capital is less than 50%.
         
2.
 Where as the direct or indirect consequence of any act or transaction the holding is reduced to less than 15% of the share
         capital.
         Article 3. Prior administrative approval
         
1.
 Where one of the conditions for application referred to in the preceding article has arisen and as established in the Royal
         Decree referred to in Article of this Law, decisions on the following matters by the managing organs of the undertakings
         mentioned in Article of this Law may be subject to prior administrative approval:
         
(a)
the voluntary winding-up, demerger or merger of the undertaking; 
         
(b)
any kind of disposal or charging, under any name whatsoever, of the assets or shareholdings necessary for the attainment of
         the undertaking's object and which are defined as such; 
         
(c)
a change in the undertaking's object. 
         
2.
 Likewise, where one of the conditions for application set out in Article of this Law has arisen, and as provided in the
         Royal Decree referred to in the following article, the following transactions may be subject to prior administrative approval:
         
(a)
operations consisting in dealings in the share capital which result, following one transaction or a series of transactions,
         in the State's shareholding, as regards the undertaking subject to the special regime laid down by this Law, being reduced
         by a percentage equal to, or greater than, 10%. 
         
(b)
the direct or indirect acquisition, including through a trustee or other third party, of shares or other securities capable
         of conferring a right, directly or indirectly, to subscribe for or acquire shares or securities, where the acquisition results
         in a holding of at least 10% of the share capital. 
         ...Article 4. System of administrative approval
         
1.
 The system of prior administrative approval shall be established by Royal Decree made in the Council of Ministers on a proposal
         from the Minister competent in the relevant sphere and following an opinion from the Council of State.
         
2.
 The Royal Decree establishing the system to which this article refers shall enter into force prior to the transactions mentioned
         in Article and shall specify:
         
(a)
its substantive scope; 
         
(b)
those of the transactions mentioned in Article which are specifically to be subject to prior administrative approval; 
         
(c)
the authority which is competent to grant approval; 
         
(d)
the period throughout which the system of prior administrative approval is to apply. 
         
3.
 Except in the case mentioned in paragraph (2)(d) above, the procedures laid down in paragraph (1) of this article shall apply
         if the system of prior administrative approval is modified or withdrawn.
         
            
The general provisions implementing Law 5/were laid down by Royal Decree No 1525/of September (BOE No of September 1995, p. 28616,  
         Royal Decree No 1525/1995). 
         
            
Furthermore, pursuant to Article of Law 5/1995, Royal Decrees Nos 3/1996, 8/1997, 40/1998, 552/and 929/lay down
         the system of approval applying to undertakings operating in the petroleum, telecommunications, banking, tobacco and electricity
         sectors respectively.  Each of the royal decrees defines (as is required by Article 4(2) of Law 5/1995) its substantive scope
         by reference to that law, the transactions which are subject to prior administrative approval, the administrative body which
         is competent to grant approval and the date on which the system ceases to apply, the various decrees setting dates between
         October and June 2008. 
         Pre-litigation procedure
            
By letter of October 1998, the Commission informed the Spanish Government that the system of prior administrative approval
         established by Law 5/and Royal Decrees Nos 3/1996, 8/1997, 40/1998, 552/and 929/might infringe the provisions
         of the EC Treaty on free movement of capital and freedom of establishment.  The Commission therefore asked the Spanish Government
         to submit its observations within two months. 
         
            
The Spanish Government replied to that letter of formal notice by letter of January 1999, in which it contended that the
         measures at issue were compatible with Community law. The government explained its point of view in a further letter of March 1999. 
         
            
Since it was not convinced by the answers thus provided, the Commission sent the Kingdom of Spain a reasoned opinion on August 1999, requiring it to comply with it within a two-month period. 
         
            
The Spanish Government replied to the reasoned opinion by letter of November 1999.  In its letter it gave a detailed explanation
         of the arrangements for the privatisation of certain undertakings operating in the Spanish public sector and reiterated its
         view that the measures at issue were compatible with Community law, in particular with Articles EC, EC and EC. 
         
            
The Commission was unconvinced by those explanations and brought the present action before the Court of Justice. 
         AdmissibilityPleas in law and arguments of the parties
         
            
The Spanish Government raises three pleas of inadmissibility. 
         
            
First, it argues that the regimes introduced by Royal Decree No 40/and Royal Decree No 552/1998, as amended by Royal
         Decree No 67/of January (BOE No 28, of February 2000, p. 4700), ceased to apply on February and October
         respectively.  Therefore, the action should be declared inadmissible in relation to those regimes. 
         
            
As regards the regimes introduced by Royal Decrees Nos 3/1996, 8/and 929/1998, which are still applicable, the Spanish
         Government requests, second, that the action should be dismissed as inadmissible, since there is inconsistency in the legislative
         provisions mentioned by the Commission in its application.  The Commission refers solely to Article 1(1) of Law 5/1995, whilst
         the regimes actually take effect under Article 1(2), which deals with groups of undertakings. 
         
            
The Spanish Government submits, third, that the application must be declared inadmissible as regards Article 3(1) of Law 5/1995,
         which concerns decisions of the managing organs, since the Commission refers in its observations to  
         transactions falling within Article 3(2) and not to  
         decisions. 
         
            
The Commission asks the Court to reject the pleas of inadmissibility. 
         
            
The Commission argues that the regimes introduced by Royal Decrees Nos 40/and 552/1998, as amended, came to an end after
         expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion for compliance therewith, namely after October 1999.  It is apparent
         from settled case-law that the question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations must be determined by
         reference to the situation prevailing at the end of that period. 
         
            
As regards the alleged failure to mention Article 1(2) of Law 5/in its application, the Commission maintains that it
         referred generally to Article on several occasions, without drawing any distinction between the two paragraphs thereof.
          Even if the Court were to find that groups were excluded from the action, that would not render it inadmissible  
          vis-à-vis  the parent companies.  In any event, Royal Decree No 8/concerning Telefónica de España SA and Telefónica Servicios Móviles
         SA does not relate to the whole group but specifically covers two undertakings within the group. 
         
            
As regards decisions of the managing organs, both the first page of the application and the form of order sought by the application
         contain a reference to paragraphs (1) and (2) of Article of Law 5/1995.  Furthermore, there is a specific reference in the
         body of the application to corporate decisions and more general references to the transactions which, as a whole, are subject
         to approval.  There are therefore no grounds for contending that the applications lacks precision. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
As regards the first plea of inadmissibility, it is sufficient to state that it is clear from the Court's case-law that the
         question whether a Member State has failed to fulfil its obligations must be determined by reference to the situation prevailing
         in the Member State at the end of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion and that the Court cannot take account of any
         subsequent changes (see,  
          inter alia , Case C-174/Commission  v  
          Luxembourg  [2002] ECR I-11171, paragraph 18). Given that the reasoned opinion was dated August and that there was a two-month
         period within which to comply with it, the fact that the regimes introduced by Royal Decrees Nos 40/and 552/1998, as
         amended, expired on February and October respectively does not affect the question whether an infringement
         existed at the end of that period. 
         
            
The first plea of inadmissibility must therefore be rejected. 
         
            
As regards the second and third pleas of inadmissibility, Article 38(1)(c) of the Rules of Procedure provides that the application
         must state the subject-matter of the proceedings and a summary of the pleas in law on which the application is based. In this
         instance, it is sufficiently clear from the application that the action deals specifically with the implementing royal decrees
         enacted pursuant to Law 5/1995, some of which concern independent undertakings and others of which concern groups of undertakings,
         and that the provisions of Law 5/are cited only in so far as they form the legal basis for the decrees in question. 
         It is therefore of no relevance that the Commission did not refer on each occasion specifically to paragraph (1) or paragraph
         (2) of Article of Law 5/1995.  As regards the decisions of the managing organs referred to in Article 3(1) of Law 5/1995,
         it is quite clear from the application that the action is concerned with measures taken under Article 3(1) of Law 5/as
         well as with those taken under Article 3(2). The application is consequently clear and unambiguous. 
         
            
The second and third pleas of inadmissibility must therefore be rejected. 
         
            
It follows that the action is admissible in its entirety. 
         SubstancePleas in law and arguments of the parties
         
            
In its application, the Commission refers, first, to its Communication 97/C 220/of July on certain legal aspects
         concerning intra-EU investment (OJ C 220, p. 15;  
         the Communication). It observes that in the Communication it publicised its view on the interpretation of the Treaty provisions concerning
         the free movement of capital and freedom of establishment in the context of measures taken by a Member State in the course
         of privatisation of a public undertaking. 
         
            
Under paragraph of the Communication, any measure which subjects to prior administrative approval exercise of the right
         to acquire controlling shareholdings, unrestricted exercise of the voting rights attaching thereto or management of an undertaking
         is to be considered as a restriction on direct investment operations by investors from another Member State and on portfolio
         investment operations, since the approval procedures could be used to restrain investors wishing to carry out portfolio investment
         operations from buying non-controlling stakes above the established thresholds. 
         
            
In the Commission's submission, the national law in question, by making it possible to subject certain actions to prior administrative
         approval, does not comply with the conditions set out in the Communication and thus infringes Articles EC and EC.
         
         
            
As regards more specifically the free movement of capital, the Commission refers to Case C-54/Église de Scientologie  [2000] ECR I-1335, paragraph 14, from which it is clear that a provision of national law which makes a direct foreign investment
         subject to prior authorisation constitutes a restriction on the movement of capital. 
         
            
Although it is true that the Member States may, by reason of exceptions provided for by the Treaty, impose restrictions on
         the free movement of capital and freedom of establishment in certain circumstances linked to the exercise of official authority,
         to public order, to public security and to public health, the exceptions are to be restrictively interpreted and their scope
         cannot be determined unilaterally by the Member States.  Furthermore, they must pass the proportionality test, be in conformity
         with the principle of legal certainty and not be implemented for purely economic ends (see Case C-19/Kraus  [1993] ECR I-1663; and Case C-55/Gebhard  [1995] ECR I-4165). 
         
            
Considerations of a purely economic or administrative nature cannot in any event constitute an overriding requirement of the
         general interest such as to justify restricting the freedoms laid down by the Treaty. Thus, the tobacco manufacturer, Tabacalera
         SA, and the banking association, Corporación Bancaria de España SA (Argentaria), could not, prima facie, be the subject of
         justification based on overriding requirements of the general interest.  The rules relating to approval which concern the
         other undertakings at issue do not provide for any conditions and could be applied in any situation as the administration
         wishes.  Moreover, as regards Telefónica de España SA and Telefónica Servicios Móviles SA, Royal Decree No 8/also covers
         mobile telephony services outside Spain.  Endesa SA was formed specifically to promote the development in international markets,
         particularly in South America, of the group to which it belongs.  It clearly does not play a part in maintaining a strategic
         service within the Spanish economy. 
         
            
In the Commission's submission, the regime at issue, in particular paragraph (2) of Article of Law 5/but also paragraph
         (1) thereof, in any event infringes the principle of proportionality.  A system of prior administrative approval, which is
         necessarily more restrictive than a system of  
          ex post facto  control, must be subject to very strict conditions.  However, that is not the case in this instance: the system at issue
         is not transparent, the conditions on which approval is granted are neither defined nor foreseeable and the system does not
         allow individuals to be apprised of the exact extent of their rights and obligations. 
         
            
The Spanish Government has not shown either that prior administrative approval is the least restrictive means at its disposal
         or that it is the only effective way of supervising, reviewing and possibly prohibiting certain investments which are incompatible
         with the objectives pursued.  Furthermore, the regime allows the administration an unfettered discretion  
          vis-à-vis  investors who are nationals of other Member States. 
         
            
At the hearing the Commission indicated that it concurred with the findings made by the Court in its judgments in comparable
         cases delivered after commencement of this action, namely the judgments of June in Case C-367/Commission  v  
          Portugal  [2002] ECR I-4731, Case C-483/Commission  v  
          France  [2002] ECR I-4781; and Case C-503/Commission  v  
          Belgium  [2002] ECR I-4809. The Court held in those judgments that systems of prior approval such as that at issue here are incompatible
         with the free movement of capital. 
         
            
The Spanish Government argues (in the alternative since it contends that the action is inadmissible) that there is no basis
         for the Commission's finding and that the action must be dismissed as to substance.  It starts by giving a detailed explanation
         of the privatisation process in the Spanish public sector and of the constitutional background to that process in order to
         show that they are perfectly legal under national law.  The Kingdom of Spain's sole intention was to enact, at the start of
         the privatisation process, ancillary measures which would ensure that the specific responsibilities of each of the undertakings
         concerned would be successfully carried out. 
         
            
The government then refers to Royal Decree No 1525/1995, the preamble to which states that  
         the system of approval set up by Law 5/of March and, therefore, this Royal Decree shall be applied consistently with
         the provisions of the Treaty establishing the European Community concerning the right of establishment and the free movement
         of capital.  It follows that Community law is also fully complied with. 
         
            
The Spanish Government also refers to the principle of the neutrality of the Treaty as regards the system of property ownership,
         enshrined in Article EC.  It shares the view expressed by Advocate General Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer in his Opinion in the cases
         cited above,  
          Commission  v  
          Portugal ,  
          Commission  v  
          France  and  
          Commission  v  
          Belgium , that similar rules applying in Portugal, France and Belgium ought to be regarded as compatible with Community law as a result
         of Article EC.  Since the Member States may lawfully decide to privatise public-sector undertakings, it is appropriate
         to apply the legal maxim that he who can do most can also do least. 
         
            
In any event, the system of prior administrative approval deriving from Law 5/is compatible with the free movement of
         capital and freedom of establishment. All the managing organs' decisions listed in Article 3(1) of Law 5/relate to the
         continued performance of the undertaking's object or to its property and can therefore be justified on the basis that they
         secure the undertaking's continuity. Furthermore, the conditions on which an investor who is a national of another Member
         State may acquire controlling stakes, referred to in Article 3(2) of Law 5/1995, are the same as those applying to Spanish
         nationals.  The system in question does therefore not give rise to discrimination on grounds of nationality. 
         
            
Although the rules at issue might be capable of affecting freedom of establishment, the free movement of capital is certainly
         not restricted.  The objective of the system of prior administrative approval is not to limit the access to national financial
         markets of capital from other Member States or to regulate the legal system applying to transactions carried out for that
         purpose.  The law in force in each Member State is one factor of the market and cannot be deemed contrary to the free movement
         of capital.  Furthermore, the regime at issue concerns solely shareholders' political rights, such as the right to vote, as
         opposed to their economic rights. 
         
            
The system of prior administrative approval can in any event be justified by overriding requirements of the general interest,
         which relate to strategically important interests and to the need to guarantee continuity in public services. References to
         that guarantee appear in each of the royal decrees at issue. It is the responsibility of the Member States to ensure security
         of supplies, economic and social stability and protection of consumers' interests. 
         
            
The system at issue also complies with the principle of proportionality.  Securing continuity in public services is a clear,
         objective and non-discriminatory criterion, which is also consonant with the principle of legal certainty even if it gives
         rise to exercise of a discretionary power.  Furthermore, the authorities are always subject to rules of law when exercising
         such a power. 
         
            
An exhaustive list of the grounds for refusing the administrative approval at issue, such as the Commission requires, is unnecessary
         and would paralyse administrative action. 
         
            
Moreover, all the measures implementing the legislation at issue are subject to review by the courts in accordance with national
         legal procedures, the basis of which is to be found in Articles 9.3, and of the Spanish constitution. The rules with
         which this action is concerned therefore do not lack transparency. 
         
            
Finally, the Spanish Government refers to Article 86(2) EC. Without explaining its argument in detail, it maintains that that
         provision constitutes a general rule authorising Member States to adopt measures which derogate not only from the Treaty articles
         on competition but also from other provisions of the Treaty. 
         
            
The United Kingdom Government, which has intervened in support of the form of order sought by the Spanish Government, submits
         that a distinction must be drawn between a statutory power to make the acquisition of shares in a company subject to prior
         approval, as provided for in Article 3(2) of Law 5/1995, and statutory powers of veto over corporate decisions relating to
         the disposal of property and assets or to other decisions relating to the day-to-day management of the company, as provided
         for in Article 3(1).  Unlike the first type of power, the second is certainly not capable of constituting a restriction on
         freedom of establishment or on the free movement of capital and thus does not require justification. 
         
            
The Commission's analysis is incorrect in so far as it considers that any measure which hinders, or makes less attractive,
         the exercise of freedoms laid down in the Treaty must be not only non-discriminatory but also justified on grounds of proportionate
         recourse to overriding requirements.  The Court's case-law clearly shows that measures which do not restrict access to the
         market need not be justified in that way (see, in particular, Joined Cases C-267/and C-268/Keck and Mithouard  [1993] ECR I-6097, paragraph 17). 
         Findings of the Court
         Article EC
         
            
It must be recalled at the outset that Article 56(1) EC gives effect to free movement of capital between Member States and
         between Member States and third countries. To that end it provides, within the framework of the provisions of the chapter
         of the Treaty headed  
         Capital and payments, that all restrictions on the movement of capital between Member States and between Member States and third countries are
         prohibited. 
         
            
Although the Treaty does not define the terms  
         movements of capital and  
         payments, it is settled case-law that Directive 88/361, together with the nomenclature annexed to it, may be used for the purposes
         of defining what constitutes a capital movement (Case C-222/Trummer and Mayer  [1999] ECR I-1661, paragraphs and 21). 
         
            
Points I and III in the nomenclature set out in Annex I to Directive 88/361, and the explanatory notes appearing in that annex,
         indicate that direct investment in the form of participation in an undertaking by means of a shareholding or the acquisition
         of securities on the capital market constitute capital movements for the purposes of Article EC. The explanatory notes
         state that direct investment is characterised, in particular, by the possibility of participating effectively in the management
         of a company or in its control. 
         
            
In the light of those considerations, it is necessary to consider whether the rules deriving from Law 5/and Royal Decrees
         Nos 3/1996, 8/1997, 40/1998, 552/and 929/constitute a restriction on the movement of capital between Member States:
         those rules submit to the prior approval of the national authorities decisions of commercial undertakings relating to: 
         
─
the undertaking's winding-up, demerger or merger; 
         
─
the disposal or charging of the assets or shareholdings necessary for the attainment of the undertaking's object; 
         
─
a change in the undertaking's object; 
         
─
dealings in the share capital which result in the State's shareholding being reduced by a percentage equal to or greater than
            10%; 
         
─
a share purchase resulting in a holding of at least 10% of the share capital, 
         
where the State's shareholding in the undertaking has been reduced by at least 10% and has fallen below 50% or where the holding
         has been reduced to less than 15% of the share capital.
         
            
The Spanish Government argues, as a preliminary point, that the measures provided for in Article 3(2) of Law 5/apply
         without distinction on grounds of nationality. There is thus no discriminatory treatment of nationals of other Member States.
         Consequently, the measures at issue do not constitute a restriction on the free movement of capital. 
         
            
That argument cannot be accepted. It is clear from paragraphs and of the judgments in  
          Commission  v  
          Portugal  and  
          Commission  v  
          France  respectively that the prohibition laid down in Article EC goes beyond the mere elimination of unequal treatment, on grounds
         of nationality, as between operators on the financial markets. 
         
            
Rules which, like Article 3(2) of Law 5/1995, limit the acquisition of shareholdings constitute a restriction on the free
         movement of capital. 
         
            
The United Kingdom Government, relying in this respect on  
          Keck and Mithouard , argues that the measures provided for in Article 3(1) of Law 5/do not restrict access to the market and that they are
         therefore incapable of affecting the free movement of capital. 
         
            
That argument cannot be accepted. The measures at issue do not have comparable effects to those of the rules which the judgment
         in  
          Keck and Mithouard  regarded as not falling within the scope of Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC). 
         
            
According to that judgment, the application to products from other Member States of national provisions restricting or prohibiting,
         within the Member State of importation, certain selling arrangements is not such as to hinder trade between Member States
         so long as, first, those provisions apply to all relevant traders operating within the national territory and, second, they
         affect in the same manner, in law and in fact, the marketing of domestic products and of those from other Member States. The
         reason is that the application of such provisions is not such as to prevent access by the latter to the market of the Member
         State of importation or to impede such access more than it impedes access by domestic products (Case C-384/Alpine Investments  [1995] ECR I-1141, paragraph 37). 
         
            
In this instance, although the relevant restrictions on investment operations apply without distinction to both residents
         and non-residents, it must none the less be held that they affect the position of a person acquiring a shareholding as such
         and are thus liable to deter investors from other Member States from making such investments and, consequently, affect access
         to the market (see, also, the judgment of today's date in Case C-98/Commission  v  
          United Kingdom  [2003] ECR I-4641, paragraph 47). 
         
            
In those circumstances, it must be held that both the rules based on Article 3(2) of Law 5/and those based on Article
         3(1) thereof constitute a restriction on the movement of capital for the purpose of Article EC. 
         
            
The fact, pleaded by the Spanish Government, that Royal Decree No 1525/provides in its preamble that the rules in question
         are to be applied consistently with Community law does not make any difference to that finding. 
         
            
First, a statement of that kind cannot, in the absence of appropriate justification, render a requirement for prior approval
         compatible with Community law.  Second, such an abstract rule cannot ensure with any certainty that when the system at issue
         is actually applied, its application will always be consistent with the requirements of Community law. 
         
            
It is therefore appropriate to consider whether, and if so on what conditions, the restriction at issue may be permitted so
         far as the various undertakings covered by the relevant royal decrees are concerned. 
         
            
As the Court has held (see the judgments cited above in  
          Commission  v  
          Portugal , paragraph 47,  
          Commission  v  
          France , paragraph 43, and  
          Commission  v  
          Belgium , paragraph 43), it is undeniable that, depending on the circumstances, certain concerns may justify the retention by Member
         States of a degree of influence within undertakings that were initially public and subsequently privatised, where those undertakings
         are active in fields involving the provision of services in the public interest or strategic services. 
         
            
However, those concerns cannot entitle Member States to plead their own systems of property ownership, referred to in Article
         EC, by way of justification for obstacles, resulting from privileges attaching to their position as shareholder in a privatised
         undertaking, to the exercise of the freedoms provided for by the Treaty. That article does not have the effect of exempting
         the Member States' systems of property ownership from the fundamental rules of the Treaty (see  
          Commission  v  
          France , paragraph 44, and  
          Commission  v  
          Belgium , paragraph 44). 
         
            
The free movement of capital, as a fundamental principle of the Treaty, may be restricted only by national rules which are
         justified by reasons referred to in Article 58(1) EC or by overriding requirements of the general interest. Furthermore, in
         order to be so justified, the national legislation must be suitable for securing the objective which it pursues and must not
         go beyond what is necessary in order to attain it, so as to accord with the principle of proportionality (see, to that effect,
          
          Commission  v  
          Portugal , paragraph 49,  
          Commission  v  
          France , paragraph 45, and  
          Commission  v  
          Belgium , paragraph 45). 
         
            
As regards a system of prior administrative approval of the kind at issue in the present case, the Court has previously held
         that such a system must be proportionate to the aim pursued, inasmuch as the same objective could not be attained by less
         restrictive measures, in particular a system of declarations  
          ex post facto  (see, to that effect, Joined Cases C-163/94, C-165/and C-250/Sanz de Lera and Others  [1995] ECR I-4821, paragraphs to 28; Case C-205/Analir and Others  [2001] ECR I-1271, paragraph 35;  
          Commission  v  
          Portugal , paragraph 50; and  
          Commission  v  
          France , paragraph 46). Such a system must be based on objective, non-discriminatory criteria which are known in advance to the undertakings
         concerned, and all persons affected by a restrictive measure of that type must have a legal remedy available to them (
          Analir , paragraph 38;  
          Commission  v  
          Portugal , paragraph 50; and  
          Commission  v  
          France , paragraph 46). 
         
            
In this case, the Spanish Government contends that the regime at issue is justified by overriding requirements of the general
         interest linked to strategic imperatives and the need to ensure continuity in public services.  In that regard, it should
         be stated at the outset that Tabacalera SA, which produces tobacco, and Corporación Bancaria de España SA (Argentaria), a
         group of commercial banks which operate in the traditional banking sector and which are not claimed to carry out any of the
         functions of a central bank or similar body, are not undertakings whose objective is to provide public services.  In merely
         referring to  
         certain lines of business which in the past fell within the remit of public savings banks, the Spanish Government does not establish that there are
         particular circumstances as a result of which the banking group takes responsibility for a public-service function.  It follows
         that the regimes relating to Tabacalera SA and Corporación Bancaria de España SA (Argentaria) cannot be justified. 
         
            
As regards the three other undertakings concerned, which are active in the petroleum, telecommunications and electricity sectors,
         it is undeniable that the objective of safeguarding supplies of such products or the provision of such services within the
         Member State concerned in the event of a crisis may constitute a public-security reason (see, for similar situations,  
          Commission  v  
          France , paragraph 47, and  
          Commission  v  
          Belgium , paragraph 46) and therefore may justify an obstacle to the free movement of capital. 
         
            
However, the Court has also held that the requirements of public security, as a derogation from the fundamental principle
         of free movement of capital, must be interpreted strictly, so that their scope cannot be determined unilaterally by each Member
         State without any control by the Community institutions.  Thus, public security may be relied on only if there is a genuine
         and sufficiently serious threat to a fundamental interest of society (see, in particular,  
          Église de Scientologie , paragraph 17;  
          Commission  v  
          France , paragraph 48; and  
          Commission  v  
          Belgium , paragraph 47). 
         
            
It is therefore appropriate to ascertain whether the rules at issue relating to those three entities provide assurance within
         the Member State concerned, in the event of a genuine and serious threat, that there would be a minimum supply of petroleum
         products and electricity and a minimum level of telecommunications services and do not go beyond what is necessary for that
         purpose. 
         
            
In that regard, so far as the Commission's complaint relating to Article 3(2) of Law 5/is concerned, it must be borne
         in mind that the rules introduced by that provision provide, first, that dealings in the share capital which result in the
         State's shareholding being reduced by a percentage equal to, or greater than, 10%, provided that the holding has fallen below
         50% or that the holding has been reduced to less than 15% of the share capital, and, second, that share purchases resulting
         in a stake of at least 10% of the share capital, must be approved by a public authority.  Exercise of the State's right is
         not subject, under the relevant provisions, to any conditions.  The investors concerned are given no indication of the specific,
         objective circumstances in which prior approval will be granted or withheld. 
         
            
Such lack of precision does not enable individuals to be apprised of the extent of their rights and obligations deriving from
         Article EC, with the result that such rules must be regarded as contrary to the principle of legal certainty (
          Commission  v  
          France , paragraph 50). 
         
            
The administrative authorities have in this sphere a particularly broad discretion which represents a serious threat to the
         free movement of capital and may end by negating it completely.  The rules concerned therefore go beyond what is necessary
         to attain the objective relied on by the Spanish Government, namely preventing any impairment of supplies of petroleum products
         or electricity or of telecommunication services. 
         
            
As regards the Commission's complaint relating to Article 3(1) of Law 5/1995, which concerns prior administrative approval
         of decisions on the winding-up, demerger or merger of the undertaking, on the disposal or charging of the assets or shareholdings
         necessary for the attainment of the undertakings' objects and on any change in the undertakings' objects, the Spanish Government
         submitted at the hearing that the rules thus introduced must be upheld because they are similar to those examined in  
          Commission  v  
          Belgium , which were approved by the Court since they concerned solely certain assets of the companies at issue and certain management
         decisions rather than restrictions as to the persons who may invest or their shareholdings as such. 
         
            
In that regard, it is clear from paragraphs to of  
          Commission  v  
          Belgium , first, that the system examined in that judgment was one of  
          ex post facto  opposition, which is less restrictive than a system of prior approval such as that in the present case (see, to that effect,
         Joined Cases C-515/99, C-519/to C-524/and C-526/to C-540/Reisch and Others  [2002] ECR I-2157, paragraph 37).  Furthermore, a feature of the Belgian system was that it listed specifically the strategic
         assets concerned and the management decisions which could be challenged in any given case.  Finally, any intervention by the
         administrative authorities was strictly limited to cases in which the objectives of the energy policy were jeopardised.  Any
         decision taken in that context had to be supported by a formal statement of reasons and was subject to an effective review
         by the courts. 
         
            
The rules deriving from the combined application of Article 3(1) of Law 5/and the royal decrees relating to the relevant
         undertakings in the petroleum, telecommunications and electricity sectors do not satisfy those criteria.  The  
         assets or shareholdings necessary for the attainment of the undertaking's object and which are defined as such, to which Article 3(1)(b) of Law 5/refers, are precisely defined only in certain of the decrees. The voluntary winding-up,
         demerger or merger of the undertaking or a change in its object, to which subparagraphs (a) and (c) of Article 3(1) refer,
         are not, unlike the decisions at issue in  
          Commission  v  
          Belgium  (paragraph 50), decisions concerning specific management matters but decisions fundamental to the life of an undertaking.
          Similarly, the administrative authority's power to intervene is not in this case, as it was in the case relating to the Kingdom
         of Belgium, subject to any condition fettering the authority's discretion.  The fact that it appears to be possible to bring
         legal proceedings against such decisions makes no difference to that finding, since neither the law nor the decrees at issue
         provide the national courts with sufficiently precise criteria to enable them to review the way in which the administrative
         authority exercises its discretion. 
         
            
Given the lack of any objective, precise criteria deriving from the rules at issue, it must be held that the latter go beyond
         what is necessary to attain the objective relied on by the Spanish Government. 
         
            
That finding cannot be called in question by the fact that the three royal decrees concerned introduced regimes which will
         last only years.  An infringement of Treaty obligations does not cease to be an infringement merely because it is limited
         in time. 
         
            
Nor can that finding be called in question by the argument which the Spanish Government bases on Article 86(2) EC. In that
         regard, although it is true that paragraph (2) of Article EC, read with paragraph (1) thereof, seeks to reconcile the Member
         States' interest in using certain undertakings, in particular in the public sector, as an instrument of economic or social
         policy with the Community's interest in ensuring compliance with the rules on competition and the preservation of the unity
         of the common market (Case C-202/France  v  
          Commission  [1991] ECR I-1223, paragraph 12; and Case C-157/Commission  v  
          Netherlands  [1997] ECR I-5699, paragraph 39), it is none the less the case that the Member State must set out in detail the reasons for
         which, in the event of elimination of the contested measures, the performance, under economically acceptable conditions, of
         the tasks of general economic interest which it has entrusted to an undertaking would, in its view, be jeopardised (
          Commission  v  
          Netherlands , paragraph 58). 
         
            
The Spanish Government has given no explanation of why that would be the case here.  Consequently, the argument based on Article
         86(2) EC must also be rejected. 
         
            
It must therefore be held that, by maintaining in force the provisions of Article and Article 3(1) and (2) of Law 5/as well as Royal Decrees Nos 3/1996, 8/1997, 40/1998, 552/and 929/1998, in so far as they implement a system of prior
         administrative approval, the Kingdom of Spain has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC. 
         Article EC
         
            
The Commission is also seeking a declaration that there has been an infringement of Article EC, namely the freedom of establishment
         in so far as it concerns undertakings. 
         
            
In that regard, it is appropriate to point out that in so far as the legislation in issue entails restrictions on freedom
         of establishment, such restrictions are a direct consequence of the obstacles to the free movement of capital considered above,
         to which they are inextricably linked.  Consequently, since an infringement of Article EC has been established, there is
         no need for a separate examination of the measures at issue in the light of the Treaty rules concerning freedom of establishment.
         
         
Costs
            
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been applied
         for in the successful party's pleadings. Since the Commission sought an order for costs against the Kingdom of Spain and the
         latter has been unsuccessful, it must be ordered to pay the costs. Under the first subparagraph of Article 69(4) of those
         Rules, the United Kingdom, which has intervened in these proceedings, is to bear its own costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT
hereby: 
         
1.
 Declares that,
             by maintaining in force the provisions of Article and Article 3(1) and (2) of Ley 5/de régimen jurídico de enajenación
               de participaciones públicas en determinadas empresas (Law 5/on the legal arrangements for disposal of public shareholdings
               in certain undertakings) of March 1995, as well as Royal Decree No 3/of January concerning Repsol SA, Royal
               Decree No 8/of January concerning Telefónica de España SA and Telefónica Servicios Móviles SA, Royal Decree No
               40/of January concerning Corporación Bancaria de España SA (Argentaria), Royal Decree No 552/of April
               concerning Tabacalera SA, and Royal Decree No 929/of May concerning Endesa SA, in so far as they implement
               a system of prior administrative approval, the Kingdom of Spain has failed to fulfil its obligations under Article EC;
2.
 Orders the Kingdom of Spain to pay the costs;
3.
 Orders the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to bear its own costs.
Rodríguez Iglesias 
Puissochet
Wathelet 
Schintgen 
Gulmann 
Edward 
La Pergola
Jann 
Skouris 
Macken 
Colneric 
von Bahr
Rosas 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on May 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: Spanish.
Top  
 