
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-30/Commission of the European CommunitiesvInstituto Tecnológico para a Europa Comunitária (ITEC)
«(Arbitration clause – Non-performance of contract – Recovery of moneys advanced – Procedure in default)»
Judgment of the Court (Third Chamber), October I - Summary of the Judgment
Procedure – Proceedings brought before the Court on the basis of an arbitration clause – Contract granting Community funding for a project in the field of research and technological development, including demonstration – Total final contribution to the project less than the amount paid out by the Commission – Right to partial reimbursement of an advance payment together with default interest(Art. EC)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)October (1)
((Arbitration clause – Non-performance of contract – Recovery of moneys advanced – Procedure in default))
In Case C-30/03, 
            
 Commission of the European Communities,   represented by G. Braga da Cruz and C. Giolito, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, 
v
 Instituto Tecnológico para a Europa Comunitária (ITEC),  a private establishment established in Lisbon (Portugal),
            
defendant, 
APPLICATION by the Commission under Article EC to recover EUR 105.advanced by it to the defendant in relation to
            performance of Contract No PRO 036, together with default interest, 
            
THE COURT (Third Chamber),,
composed of: J.-P. Puissochet, President of the Chamber, F. Macken and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
Advocate General: S. Alber, Registrar: R. Grass, 
            
having regard to the report of the Judge-Rapporteur,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on January the Commission of the European Communities brought an action
         under an arbitration clause based on Article EC against the private research establishment Instituto Tecnológico para
         a Europa Comunitária (hereinafter  
         ITEC) for recovery of an advance payment of a principal amount of EUR 105.97, paid by the Commission under Contract No PRO
         (hereinafter  
         the contract), together with EUR 432.by way of default interest at the rate of 5.25% as from December 2002, giving a total of
         EUR 538.01, to which should be added EUR 3.by way of interest at the same rate as from December for each day
         until full payment is made. 
         
Facts and legal framework
            
On July the European Community, represented by the Commission, concluded the contract with ITEC, as coordinator, CPIN
         ─ Centro Promotor de Inovação e Negócios, NET ─ Novas Empresas e Tecnologias, CIEBI ─ Centro de Inovação Empresarial da Beira
         Interior and CEIA ─ Centro de Inovação Empresarial do Alentejo. 
         
            
The contract provided for the implementation of a research project called  
         TEC+, with financial support from the Community under Council Decision 94/917/EC of December adopting a specific programme
         for the dissemination and optimisation of the results of activities in the field of research and technological development,
         including demonstration (to 1998) (OJ L 361, p. 101). 
         
            
Under Article 2(1) of the contract, the duration of the project was to be months as from August 1997. 
         
            
Under Article 4(1) of the contract, the Commission undertook to contribute financially to the proper execution of the project,
         the total allowable costs of which had been estimated at ECU 590.  Under Article 4(2), that contribution could cover up
         to 75% of the total allowable costs or, if need be, 100% of additional costs, with a ceiling of ECU 795. 
         
            
Under Article 4(3) of the contract, the Commission was to finance the project as follows: 
         
─
an initial advance of ECU 949, to be paid within two months following the last signature by the parties to the contract;
            
         
─
periodical payments to be made within two months following approval of interim reports and corresponding statements of costs,
            with the total amount of the initial advance and the periodical payments not exceeding 75% of the maximum amount of the Commission's
            financial contribution to the project;  
         
─
the remainder of the total contribution (balance of 25%) to be paid within two months as from the time of approval of the
            final report and of the statement of costs for the final period. 
         
            
Article 4(5) of the contract provided that all payments to be made by the Commission are to be made through the project coordinator,
         who also had the obligation to transfer immediately the amount of the payment to the contracting party for whom it is intended.
         
         
            
Articles 1(4) and 3(1) of the contract provide, respectively, that ITEC, in its capacity as coordinator, is to be the only
         party to liaise with the Commission for the transmission of all documents pertaining to the contract, and also undertakes
         to submit periodical reports every six months as from the time performance of the contract begins, accompanied by statements
         of costs, as well as a final report to be submitted within two months following expiry of the contract. 
         
            
Under Article 4(3) of Annex II to the contract, the contracting parties undertook, in the event that the total financial contribution
         to the project was less than the total amount of payments made, to reimburse the difference to the Commission immediately.
         
         
            
Under Article of the contract, the parties agreed that all disputes concerning the validity, performance and interpretation
         of the contract would be referred to the Court of First Instance of the European Communities.  The same article provides that
         the contract is governed by Luxembourg law. 
         
            
In accordance with the provisions of the contract, the Commission made the following payments to ITEC: 
         
─
in July 1997, ECU by way of initial advance;  
         
─
in March 1998, ECU 778.following submission, on March 1998, of the statement of costs for the period from August
            to January 1998;  
         
─
in November 1998, ECU 554.following submission, on August 1998, of the statement of costs for the period from February
            to July 1998;  
         
─
in April 1999, ECU 901.following submission, on February 1999, of the statement of costs for the period from August
            to January 1999. 
         
            
On September 1999, ITEC submitted by way of supporting documents for the initial advance by the Commission the fourth periodical
         report for the period from February to March 1999, for which the contribution requested from the Commission totalled
         ECU 843.03. 
         
            
Accordingly, the Commission paid ITEC an initial amount of ECU 949, whereas the amount should have been only ECU 843.03.
         
         
            
By letter of October 1999, the Commission informed ITEC that it had to reimburse the overpayment of ECU 105.made
         by the Commission to it. 
         
            
Subsequently, on May the Commission issued debit note No in the amount of EUR 105.against ITEC, payable
         by June 2000.  Under the heading  
         Conditions of payment, the Commission stated that, after that date, default interest would be due at the rate applied by the European Central Bank
         to its refinancing operations in euros in June 2000, plus 1.5%.  It sent two new reminders on January and May 2001.
         
         
            
On December 2001, ITEC sent the Commission a fax, confirming its interest in finding a solution to the problem. 
         
            
Since ITEC did not respond to the Commission's claim, the Commission brought the present action. 
         Procedure before the Court
            
Under Article EC and Council Decision 88/591/ECSC, EEC, Euratom of October establishing a Court of First Instance
         of the European Communities (OJ L 319, p. 1), the Court of Justice alone has jurisdiction to rule on an application by
         an institution pursuant to an arbitration clause. 
         
            
The Commission's application was duly notified to ITEC.  Considering that ITEC had not lodged a defence within the prescribed
         time-limit, the Commission requested that the Court give judgment by default in its favour in accordance with Article 94(1)
         of the Rules of Procedure of the Court. 
         
            
ITEC, having been properly notified, did not lodge a defence within the time-limit prescribed by Article 40(1) of the Rules
         of Procedure.  The Court must therefore give judgment by default.  Since there is no doubt as to the admissibility of the
         application, it is incumbent on the Court, in accordance with Article 94(2) of the Rules of Procedure, to consider whether
         the forms of order sought by the applicant appear well founded. 
         
            
The Commission claims that the Court should order ITEC: 
         
─
to pay the applicant EUR 538.consisting of the principal amount of EUR 105.together with EUR 432.by way of
            default interest at the rate of 5.25% as from December 2002; 
         
─
to pay EUR 3.by way of interest at the same rate as from December for each day until full payment is made;  
         
─
to pay the costs. 
         
Reimbursement of part of the advance
            
Under Article 4(3) of Annex II to the contract, the contracting parties undertook, if the total financial contribution to
         the project was less than the total amount of payments made, to reimburse the difference to the Commission immediately. 
         
            
It is apparent from the information provided by the Commission that ITEC received a total of EUR 183.and that, on the
         basis of the various statements of costs it submitted, the Commission's total contribution should have been only EUR 077.25.
         
         
            
Accordingly, it is appropriate to grant the forms of order sought by the Commission as regards reimbursement of the overpayment
         of ECU 105.97. 
         Interest
            
In the debit note issued against ITEC, the Commission stated that it was payable by June and that, after that date,
         default interest would be due at the rate applied by the European Central Bank to its refinancing operations in EUR in June
         2000, plus 1.5%. 
         
            
The Court notes, however, that Article 4(3) of Annex II to the contract does not provide that the reimbursement of overpayments
         made by the Commission to ITEC is to bear default interest. 
         
            
Since no contractual rate of interest is provided for, and since the contract is governed by Luxembourg law, it is appropriate
         to apply Article of the Luxembourg Civil Code, which provides that  
         where liability is limited to the payment of a certain sum, damages for late performance cannot exceed an order to pay interest
         at the legal rate ... .  Such damages shall be due without the creditor's being obliged to demonstrate any loss.  They shall
         be due only as from the day of the order to pay, except in cases where the law provides that they shall accrue automatically
         .... 
         
            
Since it put ITEC on notice, the Commission is entitled to claim default interest at the legal rate prescribed by Luxembourg
         law, as from June 2000. 
         
            
The Grand-Ducal Regulation of January (
          Mémorial  A 2000, p. 282) set the legal rate of interest for the year at 5%.  That rate was modified by the Grand-Ducal Regulation
         of December (
          Mémorial  A 2000, p. 3290), which set it at 5.75% for the year 2001.  For the years and 2003, the Grand-Ducal Regulations of January and January (
          Mémorial  A 2002, p. 225, and A 2003, p. 380) set the interest rate at 5%. 
         
            
Pursuant to Article 2(1) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1103/of June on certain provisions relating to the introduction
         of the euro (OJ L 162, p. 1), references to the ecu must be replaced by references to the euro at a rate of one euro
         to one ecu. 
         
            
Consequently, ITEC must be ordered to pay the Commission the sum of EUR 105.97, together with default interest at the rate
         prescribed by Luxembourg law, calculated in accordance with the provisions of the Grand-Ducal Regulations of January and
         December 2000, January and January 2003, until the debt is paid in full. 
         
Costs
            
According to Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have
         been applied for in the successful party's pleadings.  Since ITEC has been unsuccessful and the Commission has applied for
         costs, ITEC must be ordered to pay the costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Third Chamber)
hereby:  
         
1.
 Orders Instituto Tecnológico para a Europa Comunitária (ITEC) to repay to the Commission of the European Communities the sum
            of EUR 105.97, together with default interest at the rate prescribed by Luxembourg law, calculated in accordance with the
            provisions of the Grand-Ducal Regulations of January and December 2000, January and January 2003, until the
            debt is paid in full; 
            
2.
 Orders Instituto Tecnológico para a Europa Comunitária (ITEC) to pay the costs. 
            
Puissochet
Macken 
Cunha Rodrigues 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on October 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
V. Skouris  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: Portuguese.
Top  
 