
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-112/Eugen Schmidberger, Internationale Transporte und PlanzügevRepublik Österreich(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Oberlandesgericht Innsbruck (Austria))
         
«(Free movement of goods – Restriction resulting from actions of individuals – Obligations of the Member States – Decision not to prohibit a demonstration by environmental protesters which resulted in the complete closure of the Brenner
               motorway for almost hours – Justification – Fundamental rights – Freedom of expression and freedom of assembly – Principle of proportionality)»
            
Opinion of Advocate General Jacobs delivered on July I - Judgment of the Court, June I - Summary of the Judgment
1..
Free movement of goods – Trade barriers resulting from actions by private individuals – Obligations of the Member States – Adoption of measures to ensure the free movement of goods – Scope of the obligation – Acts affecting the flow of imports and exports and merely transit  (EC Treaty, Art. (now Art. EC) and Arts and (now, after amendment, Arts EC and EC) 
2..
Free movement of goods – Barriers to free movement by road between Member States resulting from the decision of a Member State not to prohibit a demonstration
                     by protesters – Justification – Protection of the fundamental rights of the protesters – Need to balance the interests at stake – Principle of proportionality – Discretion of the national authorities – Limits  
                  (EC Treaty, Art. (now Art. EC) and Arts 30, and (now, after amendment, Arts EC, EC and EC) 
1.
 Having regard to the fundamental role assigned to the free movement of goods in the Community system, in particular for the
         proper functioning of the internal market, the obligation upon each Member State to ensure the free movement of goods in its
         territory by taking the measures necessary and appropriate for the purposes of preventing any restriction due to the acts
         of individuals applies without the need to distinguish between cases where such acts affect the flow of imports or exports
         and those affecting merely the transit of goods.  see para. 2.
 The fact that the competent authorities of a Member State did not ban a demonstration by protesters which resulted in the
         complete closure of a major transit route between Member States for a given period is not incompatible with Articles and
         of the Treaty (now, after amendment, Articles EC and EC), read together with Article of the Treaty (now Article
         EC) provided that that restriction of trade in goods between Member States is justified by the legitimate interest in the
         protection of fundamental rights, in this case the protesters' freedom of expression and freedom of assembly, which applies
         both to the Community and the Member States. In considering that justification, the interests involved must be weighed, namely the free movement of goods which may, in
         certain circumstances, be subject to restrictions for the reasons laid down in Article of the Treaty (now, after amendment,
         Article EC) or for overriding requirements relating to the public  interest, on the one hand, and the freedom of expression
         and freedom of assembly, which are also subject to certain limitations justified by objectives in the public interest, on
         the other, having regard to all the circumstances of the case in order to determine whether a fair balance was struck between
         those interests. It is true that the national authorities enjoy a wide margin of discretion in that regard, but it is for the Court to determine
         whether the restrictions placed upon intra-Community trade are proportionate in the light of the legitimate objective pursued,
         namely, in the present case, the protection of fundamental rights. Whilst a demonstration on a public highway usually entails inconvenience for non-participants, in particular as regards free
         movement, that inconvenience may in principle be tolerated provided that the objective pursued is the public and lawful demonstration
         of an opinion.  see paras , 69, 74, 78-82, 91, 94, operative part
      
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURTJune (1)
((Free movement of goods – Restriction resulting from actions of individuals – Obligations of the Member States – Decision not to prohibit a demonstration by environmental protesters which resulted in the complete closure of the Brenner
                  motorway for almost hours – Justification – Fundamental rights – Freedom of expression and freedom of assembly – Principle of proportionality))
               
In Case C-112/00, 
            REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Oberlandesgericht Innsbruck (Austria) for a preliminary ruling in the proceedings
            pending before that court between 
            
 Eugen Schmidberger, Internationale Transporte und Planzüge
and
 Republik Österreich,
on the interpretation of Articles 30, and of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Articles EC, EC and EC) read
            together with Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC), and on the conditions for liability of a Member State for damage
            caused to individuals by a breach of Community law,
THE COURT,,
composed of: G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias, President, J.-P. Puissochet, M. Wathelet and R. Schintgen (Rapporteur) (Presidents of Chambers), C. Gulmann, D.A.O. Edward, P. Jann, V. Skouris, F. Macken, N. Colneric, S. von Bahr, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues and A. Rosas, Judges, 
            
Advocate General: F.G. Jacobs, Registrar: H.A. Rühl (Principal Administrator), 
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
─
Eugen Schmidberger, Internationale Transporte und Planzüge, by K.-H. Plankel, H. Mayrhofer and R. Schneider, Rechtsanwälte,
               
               
─
the Republic of Austria, by A. Riccabona, acting as Agent, 
               
─
the Austrian Government, by H. Dossi, acting as Agent, 
               
─
the Greek Government, by N. Dafniou and G. Karipsiadis, acting as Agents, 
               
─
the Italian Government, by U. Leanza, acting as Agent, assisted by O. Fiumara, vice avvocato generale dello Stato, 
               
─
the Netherlands Government, by M.A. Fierstra, acting as Agent, 
               
─
the Commission of the European Communities, by J.C. Schieferer, acting as Agent, 
               
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,
after hearing the oral observations of Eugen Schmidberger, Internationale Transporte und Planzüge, represented by R. Schneider;
               the Republic of Austria, represented by A. Riccabona; the Austrian Government, represented by E. Riedl, acting as Agent; the
               Greek Government, represented by N. Dafniou and G. Karipsiadis; the Italian Government, represented by O. Fiumara; the Netherlands
               Government, represented by H.G. Sevenster, acting as Agent; the Finnish Government, represented by T. Pynnä, acting as Agent;
               and the Commission, represented by J.C. Schieferer and J. Grunwald, acting as Agent, at the hearing on March 2002,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on July 2002, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By order of February 2000, received at the Court on March 2000, the Oberlandesgericht Innsbruck (Innsbruck Higher Regional
         Court) referred under Article EC six questions for a preliminary ruling on the interpretation of Articles 30, and of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Articles EC, EC and EC) read together with Article of the EC Treaty (now
         Article EC), and on the conditions for liability of a Member State for damage caused to individuals by a breach of Community
         law. 
         
            
Those questions were raised in proceedings between Eugen Schmidberger, Internationale Transporte und Planzüge (
         Schmidberger) and the Republic of Austria concerning the permission implicitly granted by the competent authorities of that Member State
         to an environmental group to organise a demonstration on the Brenner motorway, the effect of which was to completely close
         that motorway to traffic for almost hours. 
         
National law
            
Paragraph of the Versammlungsgesetz (Law on assembly) of 1953, as subsequently amended (
         VslgG) provides: 
         
(1)
A person desirous of arranging a popular meeting or any meeting accessible to the public and not limited to invited guests
         must give written notice thereof to the authority (Paragraph 16) at least hours in advance of the proposed event, stating
         the purpose, place and time of the meeting.  The notice must reach the authority at least hours before the time of the
         proposed meeting.
         
(2)
On demand the authority shall forthwith issue a certificate concerning the notice ...
         .
         
            
Paragraph of the VslgG provides: Meetings whose purpose runs counter to the criminal law or which, if held, are likely to endanger public order or the common
         weal are to be banned by the authorities.
         
            
Paragraph of the VslgG provides: For the purposes of the present law, the usual meaning of  
         the authority is:
         
(a)
in places within their competence, the Federal Police; 
         
(b)
in the place where the Landeshauptmann [head of government of the Land] has his seat of government, where there is no Federal
         Police presence, the Sicherheitsdirektion [the security services]; ... 
         
(c)
in all other places, the Bezirksverwaltungsbehörde [district administrative authority]
         . 
         
            
Paragraph 42(1) of the Straßenverkehrsordnung (Highway Code) of 1960, as subsequently amended (
         the StVO), prohibits the transport by road of heavy goods trailers on Saturdays from 15.hrs to midnight and on Sundays and bank
         holidays from midnight to 22.hrs where the maximum permitted total weight of the heavy goods vehicle or of the trailer
         exceeds 3.tonnes.  Further, according to Paragraph 42(2), during the periods stated in Paragraph 42(1) the movement of heavy
         goods vehicles, articulated lorries and rigid-chassis lorries having a maximum permitted total weight in excess of 7.tonnes
         is prohibited.  Certain exceptions are permitted, in particular for the transport of milk, perishable foodstuffs or animals
         for slaughter (except for the transport of cattle on motorways). 
         
            
Under Paragraph 42(6) of the StVO, the movement of heavy goods vehicles having a maximum permitted total weight in excess
         of 7.tonnes is prohibited between 22.hrs and 05.hrs.  The journeys made by vehicles emitting noise below a certain
         level are not affected by that prohibition. 
         
            
Pursuant to Paragraph 45(2) et seq. of the StVO, derogations in respect of road use may be granted in respect of individual
         applications and subject to certain conditions. 
         
            
Paragraph of the StVO provides: Marches.  Unless provided otherwise, where it is intended to use a road for outdoor meetings, public or customary marches,
         local fêtes, parades or other such assemblies, these must be declared in advance by their organisers to the authority ....
         The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
According to the file in the main proceedings, on May the Transitforum Austria Tirol, an association  
         to protect the biosphere in the Alpine region, gave notice to the Bezirkshauptmannschaft Innsbruck (Innsbruck provincial government) under Paragraph of the VslgG and
         Paragraph of the StVO of a demonstration to be held from 11.hrs on Friday June to 15.hrs on Saturday June
         on the Brenner motorway (A13), resulting in that motorway being closed to all traffic on the section from the Europabrücke
         service area to the Schönberg toll station (Austria). 
         
            
On the same day, the chairman of that association gave a press conference following which the Austrian and German media disseminated
         information concerning the closure of the Brenner motorway.  The German and Austrian motoring organisations were also notified
         and they too offered practical information to motorists, advising them in particular to avoid that motorway during the period
         in question. 
         
            
On May 1998, the Bezirkshauptmannschaft requested the Sicherheitsdirektion für Tirol (Directorate of security for Tyrol)
         to provide instructions concerning the proposed demonstration.  On June 1998, the Sicherheitsdirektor issued an order that
         it was not to be banned.  On June 1998, there was a meeting of members of various local authorities in order to ensure
         that the demonstration would be free of trouble. 
         
            
Considering that that demonstration was lawful as a matter of Austrian law, the Bezirkshauptmannschaft decided not to ban
         it, but it did not consider whether its decision might infringe Community law. 
         
            
The demonstration took place at the stated place and time.  Consequently, heavy goods vehicles which should have used the
         Brenner motorway were immobilised from 09.hrs on Friday June 1998.  The motorway was reopened to traffic on Saturday
         June at approximately 15.hrs, subject to the prohibition on the movement of lorries in excess of 7.tonnes during
         certain hours on Saturdays and Sundays applicable under Austrian legislation. 
         
            
Schmidberger is an international transport undertaking based at Rot an der Rot (Germany) which operates six articulated heavy
         goods vehicles with  
         reduced noise and soot emission.  Its main activity is the transport of timber from Germany to Italy and steel from Italy to Germany.  Its vehicles generally
         use the Brenner motorway for that purpose. 
         
            
Schmidberger brought an action before the Landesgericht Innsbruck (Innsbruck Regional Court) (Austria) seeking damages of
         ATS against the Republic of Austria on the basis that five of its lorries were unable to use the Brenner motorway
         for four consecutive days because, first, Thursday June was a bank holiday in Austria, whilst and June were a Saturday and Sunday, and second, the Austrian legislation prohibits the movement of lorries in excess of 7.tonnes
         most of the time at weekends and on bank holidays.  That motorway is the sole transit route for its vehicles between Germany
         and Italy.  The failure on the part of the Austrian authorities to ban the demonstration and to intervene to prevent that
         trunk route from being closed amounted to a restriction of the free movement of goods.  Since it could not be justified by
         the protesters' right to freedom of expression and freedom of assembly the restriction was a breach of Community law in respect
         of which the Member State concerned incurred liability. In the present case, the damage suffered by Schmidberger consisted
         of the immobilisation of its heavy goods vehicles (ATS 000), the fixed costs in respect of the drivers (ATS 000) and
         a loss of profit arising from concessions on payment allowed to customers on account of the substantial delays in transporting
         the goods and the failure to make six journeys between Germany and Italy (ATS 000). 
         
            
The Republic of Austria contended that the claim should be rejected on the grounds that the decision not to ban the demonstration
         was taken following a detailed examination of the facts, that information as to the date of the closure of the Brenner motorway
         had been announced in advance in Austria, Germany and Italy, and that the demonstration did not result in substantial traffic
         jams or other incidents.  The restriction on free movement arising from a demonstration is permitted provided that the obstacle
         it creates is neither permanent nor serious. Assessment of the interests involved should lean in favour of the freedoms of
         expression and assembly, since fundamental rights are inviolable in a democratic society. 
         
            
Having found that Schmidberger had not shown either that its lorries would have had to use the Brenner motorway on and
         June or that it had not been possible, after it had become aware that the demonstration was due to take place, to
         change its routes in order to avoid loss, the Landesgericht Innsbruck dismissed the action by judgment of September on the grounds that the transport company had neither discharged the burden (under Austrian substantive law) of making out
         and proving its claim for pecuniary loss nor complied with its obligation (under Austrian procedural law) to present all the
         facts on which the application was based and which were necessary for the dispute to be determined. 
         
            
Schmidberger then lodged an appeal against that judgment before the Oberlandesgericht Innsbruck, which considers that it is
         necessary to have regard to the requirements of Community law where, as in the present case, claims are made which are, at
         least in part, founded on Community law. 
         
            
It considers that it is necessary in that regard to determine first whether the principle of the free movement of goods, possibly
         in conjunction with Article of the Treaty, requires a Member State to keep open major transit routes and whether that obligation
         takes precedence over fundamental rights such as the freedom of expression and the freedom of assembly guaranteed by Articles
         and of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (
         ECHR). 
         
            
If so, the national court asks, secondly, whether the breach of Community law thus established is sufficiently serious to
         give rise to State liability.  Questions of interpretation arise in particular in determining the degree of precision and
         clarity of Article as well as Articles 30, and of the Treaty. 
         
            
In the present case State liability might be incurred as a result of either legislative defect ─ the Austrian legislature
         having failed to adapt the legislation on freedom of assembly to comply with the obligations arising under Community law,
         in particular under the principle of the free movement of goods ─ or by reason of administrative fault ─ the competent national
         authorities being required by the obligation of cooperation and loyalty laid down by Article of the Treaty to interpret
         national law in such a way as to comply with the requirements of that Treaty as regards the free movement of goods, in so
         far as those obligations arising from Community law are directly applicable. 
         
            
Thirdly, the court seeks guidance as to the nature and extent of the right to compensation based on State liability.  It asks
         how stringent are the requirements as to proof of the cause and amount of the damage occasioned by a breach of Community law
         resulting from legislation or administrative action and wishes to know, in particular, whether a right to compensation also
         exists where the amount of the damage can only be assessed by general estimate. 
         
            
Lastly, the referring court harbours doubts as to the national requirements for establishing a right to compensation based
         on State liability.  It asks whether the Austrian rules on the burden and standard of proof and on the obligation to submit
         all facts necessary for the determination of the dispute comply with the principle of legal effectiveness, in so far as the
         rights based on Community law cannot always be defined  
          ab initio in their entirety and the applicant faces genuine difficulty in stating correctly all the facts required under Austrian law.
          Thus, in the present case, the content of the right to compensation based on State liability is so unclear, as regards its
         nature and extent, as to make a reference for a preliminary ruling necessary.  The reasoning of the court ruling at first
         instance is likely to curtail claims based on Community law by rejecting the application on the basis of principles of national
         law and circumventing on purely formal grounds relevant questions of Community law. 
         
            
Considering that the resolution of the dispute thus required an interpretation of Community law, the Oberlandesgericht Innsbruck
         decided to stay proceedings and refer the following questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
         
1.
 Are the principles of the free movement of goods under Article et seq. of the EC Treaty (now Article et seq. EC), or
         other provisions of Community law, to be interpreted as meaning that a Member State is obliged, either absolutely or at least
         as far as reasonably possible, to keep major transit routes clear of all restrictions and impediments,  
          inter alia , by requiring that a political demonstration to be held on a transit route, of which notice has been given, may not be authorised
         or must at least be later dispersed, if or as soon as it can also be held at a place away from the transit route with a comparable
         effect on public awareness? 
         
2.
 Where, on account of the failure by a Member State to indicate in its national provisions on freedom of assembly and the right
         to exercise it that, in the weighing of freedom of assembly against the public interest, the principles of Community law,
         primarily the fundamental freedoms and, in this particular case, the provisions on the free movement of goods, are also to
         be observed, a political demonstration of hours' duration is authorised and held which, in conjunction with a pre-existing
         national generally applicable ban on holiday driving, causes an essential intra-Community goods transit route to be closed,
          
          inter alia , to the majority of heavy goods traffic for four days, with a short interruption of a few hours, does that failure constitute
         a sufficiently serious infringement of Community law in order to establish liability on the part of the Member State under
         the principles of Community law, provided that the other requirements for such liability are met? 
         
3.
 Where a national authority decides that there is nothing in the provisions of Community law, in particular those concerning
         the free movement of goods and the general duty of cooperation and solidarity under Article of the EC Treaty (now Article EC),
         to preclude, and thus no ground on which to ban, a political demonstration of hours' duration which, in conjunction with
         a pre-existing national generally applicable ban on holiday driving, causes an essential intra-Community goods transit route
         to be closed,  
          inter alia , to the majority of heavy goods traffic for four days, with a short interruption of a few hours, does that decision constitute
         a sufficiently serious infringement of Community law in order to establish liability on the part of the Member State under
         the principles of Community law, provided that the other requirements for such liability are met? 
         
4.
 Is the objective of an officially authorised political demonstration, namely that of working for a healthy environment and
         of drawing attention to the danger to public health caused by the constant increase in the transit traffic of heavy goods
         vehicles, to be deemed to be of a higher order than the provisions of Community law on the free movement of goods under Article
         EC? 
         
5.
 Is there loss giving rise to a claim founded on State liability where the person incurring the loss can prove that he was
         in a position to earn income, in the present case from the international transport of goods by means of the heavy goods vehicles
         operated by him but rendered idle by the hour demonstration, yet is unable to prove the loss of a specific transport journey?
         
         
6.
 If the reply to Question is in the negative: In order to comply with the obligation of cooperation and solidarity incumbent under Article of the EC Treaty (now Article
         EC) on national authorities, in particular the courts, and with the principle of effectiveness, must application of national
         rules of substantive or procedural law curtailing the ability to assert claims which are well founded under Community law,
         such as in the present case a claim founded on State liability, be deferred pending full elucidation of the substance of the
         claim at Community law, if necessary following a reference to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling?
         
Admissibility
            
The Republic of Austria harbours doubts as to the admissibility of the present reference and submits essentially that the
         questions referred by the Oberlandesgericht Innsbruck are purely hypothetical and irrelevant to the determination of the dispute
         in the main proceedings. 
         
            
The legal action brought by Schmidberger, seeking to establish the liability of a Member State for breach of Community law,
         requires the company to adduce evidence of genuine damage resulting from the alleged breach. 
         
            
Before the two national courts successively seised of the dispute Schmidberger failed to establish either the existence of
         specific individual loss ─ by substantiating with specific evidence the statement that its heavy goods vehicles had to use
         the Brenner motorway on the days when the demonstration took place there, as part of transport operations between Germany
         and Italy ─ or, if appropriate, that it had complied with its obligation to mitigate the damage that it claims to have suffered,
         by explaining why it was not able to choose a route other than the one closed. 
         
            
In those circumstances, answers to the questions referred are not necessary in order to enable the referring court to decide
         the case or, at least, the request for a preliminary ruling is premature as long as the facts have not been found and relevant
         evidence has not been fully adduced before that court. 
         
            
In that regard, according to settled case-law, the procedure provided for by Article EC is an instrument of cooperation
         between the Court of Justice and national courts by means of which the former provides the latter with interpretation of such
         Community law as is necessary for them to give judgment in cases upon which they are called to adjudicate (see,  
          inter alia , Joined Cases C-297/and C-197/Dzodzi  [1990] ECR I-3763, paragraph 33; Case C-231/Gmurzynska-Bscher  [1990] ECR I-4003, paragraph 18; Case C-83/Meilicke  [1992] ECR I-4871, paragraph 22, and Case C-413/Baumbast and R  [2002] ECR I-7091, paragraph 31). 
         
            
In the context of that cooperation, it is for the national court seised of the dispute, which alone has direct knowledge of
         the facts giving rise to the dispute and must assume responsibility for the subsequent judicial decision, to determine in
         the light of the particular circumstances of the case both the need for a preliminary ruling in order to enable it to deliver
         judgment and the relevance of the questions which it submits to the Court.  Consequently, where the questions submitted concern
         the interpretation of Community law, the Court of Justice is, in principle, bound to give a ruling (see,
          inter alia , Case C-415/Bosman  [1995] ECR I-4921, paragraph 59; Case C-379/PreussenElektra  [2001] ECR I-2099, paragraph 38; Case C-153/Der Weduwe  [2002] ECR I-11319, paragraph 31, and Case C-318/Bacardi-Martini and Cellier des Dauphins  [2003] ECR I-905, paragraph 41). 
         
            
However, the Court has also held that, in exceptional circumstances, it can examine the conditions in which the case was referred
         to it by the national court (see, to that effect,  
          PreussenElektra , cited above, paragraph 39).  The spirit of cooperation which must prevail in preliminary ruling proceedings requires the
         national court for its part to have regard to the function entrusted to the Court of Justice, which is to contribute to the
         administration of justice in the Member States and not to give opinions on general or hypothetical questions (
          Bosman , paragraph 60;  
          Der Weduwe , paragraph 32, and  
          Bacardi-Martini and Cellier des Dauphins , paragraph 42). 
         
            
Thus, the Court has held that it has no jurisdiction to give a preliminary ruling on a question submitted by a national court
         where it is quite obvious that the interpretation or the assessment of the validity of a provision of Community law sought
         by that court bears no relation to the actual facts of the main action or its purpose, or where the problem is hypothetical,
         or where the Court does not have before it the factual or legal material necessary to give a useful answer to the questions
         submitted to it (see  
          Bosman , paragraph 61, and  
          Bacardi-Martini and Cellier des Dauphins , paragraph 43). 
         
            
In the present case, it is by no means clear that the questions referred by the national court fall within one or other of
         the situations referred to in the case-law cited in the preceding paragraph. 
         
            
The action brought by Schmidberger seeks compensation from the Republic of Austria for the damage which the alleged breach
         of Community law is said to have caused it, consisting in the fact that the Austrian authorities did not ban the demonstration
         which resulted in the Brenner motorway being closed to all traffic for a continuous period of almost hours. 
         
            
It follows that the request for an interpretation of Community law made by the national court has undeniably arisen in the
         context of a genuine dispute between the parties to the main proceedings and which cannot therefore be regarded as hypothetical.
         
         
            
Furthermore, it is apparent from the order for reference that the national court has set out in precise and detailed terms
         the reasons why it considers it necessary for the determination of the dispute before it to refer to the Court various questions
         on the interpretation of Community law including, in particular, that relating to the factors to be taken into account when
         taking evidence of the damage allegedly suffered by Schmidberger. 
         
            
Moreover, it follows from the observations submitted by the Member States in response to the notification of the order for
         reference and by the Commission pursuant to Article of the EC Statute of the Court of Justice that the information in that
         order enabled them properly to state their position on all the questions submitted to the Court. 
         
            
It is clear from the second paragraph of Article EC that it is for the national court to decide at what stage in the proceedings
         it is appropriate for that court to refer a question to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling (see Joined Cases 36/and 71/Irish Creamery Milk Suppliers Association and Others  [1981] ECR 735, paragraph 5, and Case C-236/JämO  [2000] ECR I-2189, paragraph 30). 
         
            
It is equally undeniable that the referring court has defined to the requisite legal standard both the factual and legal context
         of its request for interpretation of Community law and that it has provided the Court with all the information necessary to
         enable it to reply usefully to that request. 
         
            
Furthermore, it is logical that the referring court requests the Court, first, to determine which types of damage can be taken
         into consideration for the purposes of State liability for breach of Community law ─ and, in particular, requests it to clarify
         the question whether compensation is in respect only of damage in fact suffered or if it also covers loss of profit based
         on general estimates, and whether and to what extent the victim must try to avoid or mitigate that loss ─, before that court
         rules on the specific evidence recognised as being relevant by the Court in the assessment of the damage in fact suffered
         by Schmidberger. 
         
            
Lastly, in the context of an action for liability on the part of a Member State, the referring court not only asks the Court
         about the requirement that there be damage and the forms which that may take and the detailed rules of evidence in that regard,
         but also considers it necessary to pose several questions on the other requirements to be met in making out a claim based
         on such liability and, in particular, as to whether the conduct of the relevant national authorities in the main case constitutes
         a breach of Community law and whether that breach is such as to entitle the alleged victim to compensation. 
         
            
In the light of the foregoing, it cannot be maintained that as regards the main proceedings the Court is called upon to rule
         on a question which is purely hypothetical or irrelevant for the purposes of the decision which the national court is called
         upon to give. 
         
            
On the contrary, it follows from those considerations that the questions referred by that court meet an objective need for
         the purpose of settling the dispute before it, in the course of which it is called upon to give a decision capable of taking
         account of the Court's judgment, and the information provided to the latter, in particular in the order for reference, enables
         it to reply usefully to those questions. 
         
            
Consequently, the reference for a preliminary ruling made by the Oberlandesgericht Innsbruck is admissible. 
         The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
It should be noted at the outset that the questions referred by the national court raise two distinct, albeit related, issues.
         
         
            
First, the Court is asked to rule on whether the fact that the Brenner motorway was closed to all traffic for almost hours
         without interruption, in circumstances such as those at issue in the main proceedings, amounts to a restriction of the free
         movement of goods and must therefore be regarded as a breach of Community law. Second, the questions relate more specifically
         to the circumstances in which the liability of a Member State may be established in respect of damage caused to individuals
         as a result of an infringement of Community law. 
         
            
On the latter question, the national court asks in particular for clarification of whether, and if so to what extent, in circumstances
         such as those of the case before it, the breach of Community law ─ if made out ─ is sufficiently manifest and serious to give
         rise to liability on the part of the Member State concerned.  It also asks the Court about the nature and evidence of the
         damage to be compensated. 
         
            
Given that, logically, this second series of questions need be examined only if the first issue, as defined in the first sentence
         of paragraph of the present judgment, is answered in the affirmative, the Court must first give a ruling on the various
         points raised by that issue, which is essentially the subject of the first and fourth questions. 
         
            
In the light of the evidence in the file of the main case sent by the referring court and the written and oral observations
         presented to the Court, those questions must be understood as seeking to determine whether the fact that the authorities of
         a Member State did not ban a demonstration with primarily environmental aims which resulted in the complete closure of a major
         transit route, such as the Brenner motorway, for almost hours without interruption amounts to an unjustified restriction
         of the free movement of goods which is a fundamental principle laid down by Articles and of the Treaty, read together,
         if necessary, with Article thereof. 
         Whether there is a restriction of the free movement of goods
         
            
It should be stated at the outset that the free movement of goods is one of the fundamental principles of the Community. 
         
            
Thus, Article of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC), inserted in the first part thereof, entitled  
         Principles, provides in subparagraph (c) that for the purposes set out in Article of the Treaty the activities of the Community are
         to include an internal market characterised by the abolition, as between Member States, of obstacles to  
          inter alia  the free movement of goods. 
         
            
The second paragraph of Article 7a of the EC Treaty (now, after amendment, Article EC) provides that the internal market
         is to comprise an area without internal frontiers in which the free movement of goods is ensured in accordance with the provisions
         of the Treaty. 
         
            
That fundamental principle is implemented primarily by Articles and of the Treaty. 
         
            
In particular, Article provides that quantitative restrictions on imports and all measures having equivalent effect are
         prohibited between Member States.  Similarly, Article prohibits, between Member States, quantitative restrictions on exports
         and all measures having equivalent effect. 
         
            
It is settled case-law since the judgment in Case 8/Dassonville  [1974] ECR 837, paragraph 5) that those provisions, taken in their context, must be understood as being intended to eliminate
         all barriers, whether direct or indirect, actual or potential, to trade flows in intra-Community trade (see, to that effect,
         Case C-265/Commission  v  
          France  [1997] ECR I-6959, paragraph 29). 
         
            
In this way the Court held in particular that, as an indispensable instrument for the realisation of a market without internal
         frontiers, Article does not prohibit only measures emanating from the State which, in themselves, create restrictions on
         trade between Member States.  It also applies where a Member State abstains from adopting the measures required in order to
         deal with obstacles to the free movement of goods which are not caused by the State (
          Commission  v  
          France , cited above, paragraph 30). 
         
            
The fact that a Member State abstains from taking action or, as the case may be, fails to adopt adequate measures to prevent
         obstacles to the free movement of goods that are created, in particular, by actions by private individuals on its territory
         aimed at products originating in other Member States is just as likely to obstruct intra-Community trade as is a positive
         act (
          Commission  v  
          France , cited above, paragraph 31). 
         
            
Consequently, Articles and of the Treaty require the Member States not merely themselves to refrain from adopting measures
         or engaging in conduct liable to constitute an obstacle to trade but also, when read with Article of the Treaty, to take
         all necessary and appropriate measures to ensure that that fundamental freedom is respected on their territory (
          Commission  v  
          France , cited above, paragraph 32).  Article of the Treaty requires the Member States to take all appropriate measures, whether
         general or particular, to ensure fulfilment of the obligations arising out of the Treaty and to refrain from any measures
         which could jeopardise the attainment of the objectives of that Treaty. 
         
            
Having regard to the fundamental role assigned to the free movement of goods in the Community system, in particular for the
         proper functioning of the internal market, that obligation upon each Member State to ensure the free movement of products
         in its territory by taking the measures necessary and appropriate for the purposes of preventing any restriction due to the
         acts of individuals applies without the need to distinguish between cases where such acts affect the flow of imports or exports
         and those affecting merely the transit of goods. 
         
            
Paragraph of the judgment in  
          Commission  v  
          France , cited above, shows that the case giving rise to that judgment concerned not only imports but also the transit through France
         of products from other Member States. 
         
            
It follows that, in a situation such as that at issue in the main proceedings, where the competent national authorities are
         faced with restrictions on the effective exercise of a fundamental freedom enshrined in the Treaty, such as the free movement
         of goods, which result from actions taken by individuals, they are required to take adequate steps to ensure that freedom
         in the Member State concerned even if, as in the main proceedings, those goods merely pass through Austria en route for Italy
         or Germany. 
         
            
It should be added that that obligation of the Member States is all the more important where the case concerns a major transit
         route such as the Brenner motorway, which is one of the main land links for trade between northern Europe and the north of
         Italy. 
         
            
In the light of the foregoing, the fact that the competent authorities of a Member State did not ban a demonstration which
         resulted in the complete closure of a major transit route such as the Brenner motorway for almost hours on end is capable
         of restricting intra-Community trade in goods and must, therefore, be regarded as constituting a measure of equivalent effect
         to a quantitative restriction which is, in principle, incompatible with the Community law obligations arising from Articles
         and of the Treaty, read together with Article thereof, unless that failure to ban can be objectively justified. 
         Whether the restriction may be justified
         
            
In the context of its fourth question, the referring court asks essentially whether the purpose of the demonstration on and June ─ during which the demonstrators sought to draw attention to the threat to the environment and public health
         posed by the constant increase in the movement of heavy goods vehicles on the Brenner motorway and to persuade the competent
         authorities to reinforce measures to reduce that traffic and the pollution resulting therefrom in the highly sensitive region
         of the Alps ─ is such as to frustrate Community law obligations relating to the free movement of goods. 
         
            
However, even if the protection of the environment and public health, especially in that region, may, under certain conditions,
         constitute a legitimate objective in the public interest capable of justifying a restriction of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed
         by the Treaty, including the free movement of goods, it should be noted, as the Advocate General pointed out at paragraph
         of his Opinion, that the specific aims of the demonstration are not in themselves material in legal proceedings such as
         those instituted by Schmidberger, which seek to establish the liability of a Member State in respect of an alleged breach
         of Community law, since that liability is to be inferred from the fact that the national authorities did not prevent an obstacle
         to traffic from being placed on the Brenner motorway. 
         
            
Indeed, for the purposes of determining the conditions in which a Member State may be liable and, in particular, with regard
         to the question whether it infringed Community law, account must be taken only of the action or omission imputable to that
         Member State. 
         
            
In the present case, account should thus be taken solely of the objective pursued by the national authorities in their implicit
         decision to authorise or not to ban the demonstration in question. 
         
            
It is apparent from the file in the main case that the Austrian authorities were inspired by considerations linked to respect
         of the fundamental rights of the demonstrators to freedom of expression and freedom of assembly, which are enshrined in and
         guaranteed by the ECHR and the Austrian Constitution. 
         
            
In its order for reference, the national court also raises the question whether the principle of the free movement of goods
         guaranteed by the Treaty prevails over those fundamental rights. 
         
            
According to settled case-law, fundamental rights form an integral part of the general principles of law the observance of
         which the Court ensures.  For that purpose, the Court draws inspiration from the constitutional traditions common to the Member
         States and from the guidelines supplied by international treaties for the protection of human rights on which the Member States
         have collaborated or to which they are signatories.  The ECHR has special significance in that respect (see,  
          inter alia , Case C-260/ERT  [1991] ECR I-2925, paragraph 41; Case C-274/P  
          Connolly  v  
          Commission  [2001] ECR I-1611, paragraph 37, and Case C-94/Roquette Frères  [2002] ECR I-9011, paragraph 25). 
         
            
The principles established by that case-law were reaffirmed in the preamble to the Single European Act and subsequently in
         Article F.of the Treaty on European Union (
          Bosman , cited above, paragraph 79).  That provision states that  
         [t]he Union shall respect fundamental rights, as guaranteed by the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights
         and Fundamental Freedoms signed in Rome on November and as they result from the constitutional traditions common to
         the Member States, as general principles of Community law.
         
            
It follows that measures which are incompatible with observance of the human rights thus recognised are not acceptable in
         the Community (see,  
          inter alia ,  
          ERT , cited above, paragraph 41, and Case C-299/Kremzow  [1997] ECR I-2629, paragraph 14). 
         
            
Thus, since both the Community and its Member States are required to respect fundamental rights, the protection of those rights
         is a legitimate interest which, in principle, justifies a restriction of the obligations imposed by Community law, even under
         a fundamental freedom guaranteed by the Treaty such as the free movement of goods. 
         
            
It is settled case-law that where, as in the main proceedings, a national situation falls within the scope of Community law
         and a reference for a preliminary ruling is made to the Court, it must provide the national courts with all the criteria of
         interpretation needed to determine whether that situation is compatible with the fundamental rights the observance of which
         the Court ensures and which derive in particular from the ECHR (see to that effect,  
          inter alia , Case 12/Demirel  [1987] ECR 3719, paragraph 28). 
         
            
In the present case, the national authorities relied on the need to respect fundamental rights guaranteed by both the ECHR
         and the Constitution of the Member State concerned in deciding to allow a restriction to be imposed on one of the fundamental
         freedoms enshrined in the Treaty. 
         
            
The case thus raises the question of the need to reconcile the requirements of the protection of fundamental rights in the
         Community with those arising from a fundamental freedom enshrined in the Treaty and, more particularly, the question of the
         respective scope of freedom of expression and freedom of assembly, guaranteed by Articles and of the ECHR, and of the
         free movement of goods, where the former are relied upon as justification for a restriction of the latter. 
         
            
First, whilst the free movement of goods constitutes one of the fundamental principles in the scheme of the Treaty, it may,
         in certain circumstances, be subject to restrictions for the reasons laid down in Article of that Treaty or for overriding
         requirements relating to the public interest, in accordance with the Court's consistent case-law since the judgment in Case
         120/Rewe-Zentral  (
          Cassis de Dijon ) [1979] ECR 649. 
         
            
Second, whilst the fundamental rights at issue in the main proceedings are expressly recognised by the ECHR and constitute
         the fundamental pillars of a democratic society, it nevertheless follows from the express wording of paragraph of Articles
         and of the Convention that freedom of expression and freedom of assembly are also subject to certain limitations justified
         by objectives in the public interest, in so far as those derogations are in accordance with the law, motivated by one or more
         of the legitimate aims under those provisions and necessary in a democratic society, that is to say justified by a pressing
         social need and, in particular, proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued (see, to that effect, Case C-368/Familiapress  [1997] ECR I-3689, paragraph 26, Case C-60/Carpenter  [2002] ECR I-6279, paragraph 42, and Eur. Court HR, Steel and Others v. The United Kingdom judgment of September 1998,
          
          Reports of Judgments and Decisions  1998-VII, § 101). 
         
            
Thus, unlike other fundamental rights enshrined in that Convention, such as the right to life or the prohibition of torture
         and inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, which admit of no restriction, neither the freedom of expression nor the
         freedom of assembly guaranteed by the ECHR appears to be absolute but must be viewed in relation to its social purpose.  Consequently,
         the exercise of those rights may be restricted, provided that the restrictions in fact correspond to objectives of general
         interest and do not, taking account of the aim of the restrictions, constitute disproportionate and unacceptable interference,
         impairing the very substance of the rights guaranteed (see, to that effect, Case C-62/Commission  v
          Germany  [1992] ECR I-2575, paragraph 23, and Case C-404/P  
          X  v  
          Commission  [1994] ECR I-4737, paragraph 18). 
         
            
In those circumstances, the interests involved must be weighed having regard to all the circumstances of the case in order
         to determine whether a fair balance was struck between those interests. 
         
            
The competent authorities enjoy a wide margin of discretion in that regard. Nevertheless, it is necessary to determine whether
         the restrictions placed upon intra-Community trade are proportionate in the light of the legitimate objective pursued, namely,
         in the present case, the protection of fundamental rights. 
         
            
As regards the main case, it should be emphasised at the outset that the circumstances characterising it are clearly distinguishable
         from the situation in the case giving rise to the judgment in  
          Commission  v  
          France , cited above, referred to by Schmidberger as a relevant precedent in the course of its legal action against Austria. 
         
            
By comparison with the points of fact referred to by the Court at paragraphs to of the judgment in  
          Commission  v  
          France , cited above, it should be noted, first, that the demonstration at issue in the main proceedings took place following a request
         for authorisation presented on the basis of national law and after the competent authorities had decided not to ban it. 
         
            
Second, because of the presence of demonstrators on the Brenner motorway, traffic by road was obstructed on a single route,
         on a single occasion and during a period of almost hours.  Furthermore, the obstacle to the free movement of goods resulting
         from that demonstration was limited by comparison with both the geographic scale and the intrinsic seriousness of the disruption
         caused in the case giving rise to the judgment in  
          Commission  v  
          France , cited above. 
         
            
Third, it is not in dispute that by that demonstration, citizens were exercising their fundamental rights by manifesting in
         public an opinion which they considered to be of importance to society; it is also not in dispute that the purpose of that
         public demonstration was not to restrict trade in goods of a particular type or from a particular source.  By contrast, in
          
          Commission  v  
          France , cited above, the objective pursued by the demonstrators was clearly to prevent the movement of particular products originating
         in Member States other than the French Republic, by not only obstructing the transport of the goods in question, but also
         destroying those goods in transit to or through France, and even when they had already been put on display in shops in the
         Member State concerned. 
         
            
Fourth, in the present case various administrative and supporting measures were taken by the competent authorities in order
         to limit as far as possible the disruption to road traffic.  Thus, in particular, those authorities, including the police,
         the organisers of the demonstration and various motoring organisations cooperated in order to ensure that the demonstration
         passed off smoothly.  Well before the date on which it was due to take place, an extensive publicity campaign had been launched
         by the media and the motoring organisations, both in Austria and in neighbouring countries, and various alternative routes
         had been designated, with the result that the economic operators concerned were duly informed of the traffic restrictions
         applying on the date and at the site of the proposed demonstration and were in a position timeously to take all steps necessary
         to obviate those restrictions. Furthermore, security arrangements had been made for the site of the demonstration. 
         
            
Moreover, it is not in dispute that the isolated incident in question did not give rise to a general climate of insecurity
         such as to have a dissuasive effect on intra-Community trade flows as a whole, in contrast to the serious and repeated disruptions
         to public order at issue in the case giving rise to the judgment in  
          Commission  v  
          France , cited above. 
         
            
Finally, concerning the other possibilities envisaged by Schmidberger with regard to the demonstration in question, taking
         account of the Member States' wide margin of discretion, in circumstances such as those of the present case the competent
         national authorities were entitled to consider that an outright ban on the demonstration would have constituted unacceptable
         interference with the fundamental rights of the demonstrators to gather and express peacefully their opinion in public. 
         
            
The imposition of stricter conditions concerning both the site ─ for example by the side of the Brenner motorway ─ and the
         duration ─ limited to a few hours only ─ of the demonstration in question could have been perceived as an excessive restriction,
         depriving the action of a substantial part of its scope.  Whilst the competent national authorities must endeavour to limit
         as far as possible the inevitable effects upon free movement of a demonstration on the public highway, they must balance that
         interest with that of the demonstrators, who seek to draw the aims of their action to the attention of the public. 
         
            
An action of that type usually entails inconvenience for non-participants, in particular as regards free movement, but the
         inconvenience may in principle be tolerated provided that the objective pursued is essentially the public and lawful demonstration
         of an opinion. 
         
            
In that regard, the Republic of Austria submits, without being contradicted on that point, that in any event, all the alternative
         solutions which could be countenanced would have risked reactions which would have been difficult to control and would have
         been liable to cause much more serious disruption to intra-Community trade and public order, such as unauthorised demonstrations,
         confrontation between supporters and opponents of the group organising the demonstration or acts of violence on the part of
         the demonstrators who considered that the exercise of their fundamental rights had been infringed. 
         
            
Consequently, the national authorities were reasonably entitled, having regard to the wide discretion which must be accorded
         to them in the matter, to consider that the legitimate aim of that demonstration could not be achieved in the present case
         by measures less restrictive of intra-Community trade. 
         
            
In the light of those considerations, the answer to the first and fourth questions must be that the fact that the authorities
         of a Member State did not ban a demonstration in circumstances such as those of the main case is not incompatible with Articles
         and of the Treaty, read together with Article thereof. 
         The conditions for liability of the Member State
         
            
It follows from the answer given to the first and fourth questions that, having regard to all the circumstances of a case
         such as that before the referring court, the competent national authorities cannot be said to have committed a breach of Community
         law such as to give rise to liability on the part of the Member State concerned. 
         
            
In those circumstances, there is no need to rule on the other questions referred concerning some of the conditions necessary
         for a Member State to incur liability for damage caused to individuals by that Member State's infringement of Community law.
         
         
Costs
            
The costs incurred by the Austrian, Greek, Italian, Netherlands and Finnish Governments and by the Commission, which have
         submitted observations to the Court, are not recoverable.  Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main action,
         a step in the proceedings pending before the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT,
in answer to the questions referred to it by the Oberlandesgericht Innsbruck by order of February 2000, hereby rules: 
         
Rodríguez Iglesias
Puissochet 
Wathelet 
Schintgen
Gulmann 
Edward 
Jann
Skouris 
Macken 
Colneric
von Bahr 
Cunha Rodrigues 
Rosas 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on June 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
G.C. Rodríguez Iglesias  
Registrar
President
 –
            
 Language of the case: German.
Top  
 