
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-338/Fixtures Marketing Ltd
v
Svenska Spel AB
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Högsta domstolen)
(Directive 96/9/EC – Legal protection of databases – Sui generis right – Definition of investment in the obtaining, verification or presentation of the contents of a database – Football fixture lists – Betting)
Summary of the Judgment
Approximation of laws – Legal protection of databases – Directive 96/– Definition of investment in the obtaining, verification
            or presentation of the contents of a database – Resources used to draw up a football fixtures list – Not included 
(European Parliament and Council Directive 96/9, Art. 7(1))
The expression ‘investment in … the obtaining … of the contents’ of a database in Article 7(1) of Directive 96/on the legal
         protection of databases must be understood to refer to investment in the creation of that database. It thus refers to the
         resources used to seek out existing materials and collect them in the database but does not cover the resources used for the
         creation of materials which make up the contents of a database.
      
In the context of drawing up a fixture list for the purpose of organising football league fixtures, the resources used to
         establish the dates, times and the team pairings for the various matches in the league do not constitute such investment.
         Moreover, finding the data which make up such a list does not require any particular effort on the part of the professional
         leagues, which participate directly in the creation of those data. Nor should the resources used for the verification or presentation
         of the data making up the list be considered to represent substantial investment independent of the investment in the creation
         of those data.
      
(see paras 23-24, 31, 33-35, 37, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)November 2004(1)
(Directive 96/9/EC  –  Legal protection of databases  –  Sui generis right  –  Definition of investment in the obtaining, verification or presentation of the contents of a database  –  Football fixture lists  –  Betting)
 In Case C-338/02,REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC, from the Högsta domstolen (Sweden), by decision of September 2002, received at the Court on September 2002, in the proceedings
            
Fixtures Marketing Ltd
v
Svenska Spel AB,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),,
 composed of: V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas and K. Lenaerts (Rapporteur), Presidents of Chambers,
            J.-P. Puissochet, R. Schintgen, N. Colneric and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, Judges,
            
 Advocate General:  C. Stix-Hackl,Registrars:  M. Múgica Arzamendi and M.-F. Contet, Principal Administrators,
             having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on March 2004,after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
            
–
 Fixtures Marketing Ltd, by J. Ågren, advokat,
            
–
 Svenska Spel AB, by M. Broomé and S. Widmark, advokater,
            
–
 the Belgian Government, by A. Snoecx, acting as Agent, and P. Vlaemminck, advocaat,
            
–
 the German Government, by W.-D. Plessing, acting as Agent,
            
–
 the Netherlands Government, by S. Terstal, acting as Agent,
            
–
 the Portuguese Government, by A.P. Matos Barros and L. Fernandes, acting as Agents,
            
–
 the Finnish Government, by E. Bygglin and T. Pynnä, acting as Agents,
            
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by C. Tufvesson and K. Banks, acting as Agents,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on June 2004,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of the provisions of Directive 96/9/EC of the European
         Parliament and of the Council of March on the legal protection of databases (OJ L 77, p. 20, ‘the directive’).
         
            
 The reference was made in the course of proceedings brought by Fixtures Marketing Limited (‘Fixtures’) against Svenska Spel
         AB (‘Svenska Spel’). The litigation arose over the use by Svenska Spel, for the purpose of organising betting games, of information
         taken from the fixture lists for the English and Scottish football leagues. 
         
Legal background 
The Community legislation
            
 The directive, according to Article 1(1) thereof, concerns the legal protection of databases in any form. A database is defined,
         in Article 1(2) of the directive, as ‘a collection of independent works, data or other materials arranged in a systematic
         or methodical way and individually accessible by electronic or other means’.
         
            
 Article of the directive provides for copyright protection for databases which, ‘by reason of the selection or arrangement
         of their contents, constitute the author’s own intellectual creation’. 
         
            
 Article of the directive provides for a sui generis right in the following terms: 
         ‘Object of protection 
          1.       Member States shall provide for a right for the maker of a database which shows that there has been qualitatively and/or quantitatively
         a substantial investment in either the obtaining, verification or presentation of the contents to prevent extraction and/or
         re-utilisation of the whole or of a substantial part, evaluated qualitatively and/or quantitatively, of the contents of that
         database. 
          2.       For the purposes of this Chapter: 
         
(a)
“extraction” shall mean the permanent or temporary transfer of all or a substantial part of the contents of a database to
               another medium by any means or in any form; 
            
(b)
“re-utilisation” shall mean any form of making available to the public all or a substantial part of the contents of a database
               by the distribution of copies, by renting, by on-line or other forms of transmission. The first sale of a copy of a database
               within the Community by the rightholder or with his consent shall exhaust the right to control resale of that copy within
               the Community.
            
Public lending is not an act of extraction or re-utilisation. 
 3.       The right referred to in paragraph may be transferred, assigned or granted under contractual licence.
          4.       The right provided for in paragraph shall apply irrespective of the eligibility of that database for protection by copyright
         or by other rights. Moreover, it shall apply irrespective of eligibility of the contents of that database for protection by
         copyright or by other rights. Protection of databases under the right provided for in paragraph shall be without prejudice
         to rights existing in respect of their content. 
          5.       The repeated and systematic extraction and/or re-utilisation of insubstantial parts of the contents of the database implying
         acts which conflict with a normal exploitation of that database or which unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of
         the maker of the database shall not be permitted.’ 
         
The national legislation
            
 The protection of databases is governed, in Swedish law, by the lagen (1960:729) om upphovsrätt till litterära och konstnärliga
         verk (law on copyright over literary and artistic works, ‘the law’). 
         
            
 Under Paragraph 49(1) of the law, as amended by law 1997:790, implementing the directive in Swedish law (the law),
         the maker of a catalogue, a table or similar work in which a large quantity of data has been collected or which is the result
         of substantial investment has an exclusive right to produce copies of the work and provide public access to it. 
         
            
 The law contains no provision equivalent to Article 7(5) of the directive. However, according to the travaux préparatoires for the law, Paragraph of the law protects the work itself or a substantial part of it, and, accordingly, the
         exclusive right does not cover copies of specific data which form part of the work nor does it cover insubstantial parts of
         that work. However, according to those travaux préparatoires,  a repeated use of insubstantial parts of a work may be regarded as amounting to use of a substantial part of the work.
         
The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 In England professional football is organised by the Football Association Premier League Ltd and the Football League Ltd and
         in Scotland by the Scottish Football League. Fixture lists have to be drawn up for the matches to be played in the various
         divisions during the season, that is to say, about matches per season in England and matches per season in Scotland.
         The data are stored electronically and published inter alia in printed booklets, both chronologically and by reference to
         each team participating. 
         
            
 Work on the preparation of the fixture lists begins a year before the start of the season concerned. 
         
            
 The organisers of English and Scottish football retained Football Fixtures Limited to handle the exploitation of the fixture
         lists through licensing. FFFixtures was assigned the right to represent the holders of the intellectual property rights in those fixture lists.
         
            
 In Sweden Svenska Spel operates pools games in which bets can be placed on the results of football matches in inter alia the
         English and Scottish football leagues. For the purposes of those games it reproduces data concerning those matches on pools
         coupons.
         
            
 In February Fixtures, having first unsuccessfully offered Svenska Spel a licence to use the data in return for payment
         of a fee, brought an action against Svenska Spel before Gotlands tingsrätt (District Court, Gotland, Sweden), claiming reasonable
         compensation for the use of data from the fixture lists for the English and Scottish football leagues during the period from
         January to May 1999. In support of its action, Fixtures submitted that the databases containing data concerning
         the fixture lists were protected under Paragraph of the law and that the use by Svenska Spel of data from those fixture
         lists constituted a breach of the intellectual property rights of the football leagues. 
         
            
 By its judgment of April the Tingsrätt dismissed Fixture’s case, ruling that although the fixture lists were covered
         by catalogue protection since they constituted the result of a substantial investment, Svenska Spel’s use of the data from
         the fixture lists did not entail any infringement of the rights of Fixtures.
         
            
 On appeal, the Svea hovrätt (Svea Court of Appeal, Sweden), by judgment of May 2001, upheld the judgment at first instance.
         The Hovrätt did not expressly rule on the question whether fixture lists are protected under Paragraph of thelaw,
         but held that it was not proven that the data on Svenska Spel’s pools coupons had been extracted from the databases of the
         football leagues.
         
            
 Fixtures appealed before the Högsta domstolen, seeking to have the judgment on appeal set aside. 
         
            
 Pointing out that Paragraph of the law, as amended by the law, must, as an implementing measure, be interpreted
         in the light of the directive, the Högsta domstolen observes that the directive does not make clear whether, and if so, to
         what extent, the purpose of the database should be ascribed importance in determining whether it is protected under a sui generis right. It also raises the question of what sort of human or financial investment can be taken into account in assessing whether
         investment is substantial. In addition, it raises the question of the interpretation of the expressions ‘extraction and/or
         re-utilisation of the whole or a substantial part’ of the database and ‘normal exploitation’ and ‘unreasonable prejudice’
         in the case of extraction and/or re-utilisation of insubstantial parts of the database.
         
            
 Against that background, the Högsta domstolen decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court
         for a preliminary ruling:
         
‘1.
In assessing whether a database is the result of a “substantial investment” within the meaning of Article 7(1) of the directive
               can the maker of a database be credited with an investment primarily intended to create something which is independent of
               the database and which thus does not merely concern the “obtaining, verification or presentation” of the contents of the database?
               If so, does it make any difference if the investment or part of it nevertheless constitutes a prerequisite for the database?
            
2.
Does a database enjoy protection under the database directive only in respect of activities covered by the objective of the
               database maker in creating the database? 
            
3.
What do the terms “a substantial part, evaluated qualitatively and/or quantitatively, of the contents of that database” in
               Article 7(1) mean?
            
4.
Is the directive’s protection under Article 7(1) and Article 7(5) against “extraction and/or re-utilisation” of the contents
               of a database limited to such use as entails a direct exploitation of the base or does the protection also cover use in cases
               where the contents are available from another source (second-hand) or are generally accessible?
            
5.
How should the terms “normal exploitation” and “unreasonably prejudice” in Article 7(5) be interpreted?’
The questions referred
            
 As a preliminary point, it must be borne in mind that the protection provided for by Paragraph 49(1) of the law, as amended
         by the law, requires the existence of a catalogue, a table or similar work ‘in which a large quantity of data has been
         collected or which is the result of substantial investment’.
         
            
 According to the order for reference, the Högsta domstolen does not consider that the football fixture lists at issue constitute
         a catalogue of ‘a large quantity of data’ within the meaning of the above provision, which explains why it seeks clarification,
         by its first question, of the term ‘substantial investment’ as it must be interpreted under Article 7(1) of the directive.
         
         
            
 By that question, the referring court asks, inter alia, whether investment by the maker of a database in the creation as such
         of data must be taken into account in assessing whether there was substantial investment in the obtaining, verification or
         presentation of the contents of a database. It also seeks to know whether the directive is intended to protect a database
         which is derived from a principal activity which necessarily entails the creation of data. 
         
            
 Article 7(1) of the directive reserves the protection of the sui generis right to databases which meet a specific criterion, namely to those which show that there has been qualitatively and/or quantitatively
         a substantial investment in the obtaining, verification or presentation of their contents.
         
            
 Under the 9th, 10th and 12th recitals of the preamble to the directive, its purpose is to promote and protect investment in
         data ‘storage’ and ‘processing’ systems which contribute to the development of an information market against a background
         of exponential growth in the amount of information generated and processed annually in all sectors of activity. It follows
         that the expression ‘investment in … the obtaining, verification or presentation of the contents’ of a database must be understood,
         generally, to refer to investment in the creation of that database as such. 
         
            
 Against that background, the expression ‘investment in … the obtaining … of the contents’ of a database must, as Svenska Spel
         and the German, Netherlands and Portuguese Governments point out, be understood to refer to the resources used to seek out
         existing independent materials and collect them in the database, and not to the resources used for the creation as such of
         independent materials. As Svenska Spel and the German Government point out, the purpose of the protection by the sui generis right provided for by the directive is to promote the establishment of storage and processing systems for existing information
         and not the creation of materials capable of being collected subsequently in a database.
         
            
 That interpretation is backed up by the 39th recital of the preamble to the directive, according to which the aim of the sui generis right is to safeguard the results of the financial and professional investment made in ‘obtaining and collection of the contents’
         of a database. As the Advocate General points out in points to of her Opinion, despite slight variations in wording,
         all the language versions of the 39th recital support an interpretation which excludes the creation of the materials contained
         in a database from the definition of obtaining.
         
            
 The 19th recital of the preamble to the directive, according to which the compilation of several recordings of musical performances
         on a CD does not represent a substantial enough investment to be eligible under the sui generis right, provides an additional argument in support of that interpretation. Indeed, it appears from that recital that the resources
         used for the creation as such of works or materials included in the database, in this case on a CD, cannot be deemed equivalent
         to investment in the obtaining of the contents of that database and cannot, therefore, be taken into account in assessing
         whether the investment in the creation of the database was substantial.
         
            
 The expression ‘investment in … the … verification … of the contents’ of a database must be understood to refer to the resources
         used, with a view to ensuring the reliability of the information contained in that database, to monitor the accuracy of the
         materials collected when the database was created and during its operation. The expression ‘investment in … the … presentation
         of the contents’ of the database concerns, for its part, the resources used for the purpose of giving the database its function
         of processing information, that is to say those used for the systematic or methodical arrangement of the materials contained
         in that database and the organisation of their individual accessibility.
         
            
 Investment in the creation of a database may consist in the deployment of human, financial or technical resources but it must
         be substantial in quantitative or qualitative terms. The quantitative assessment refers to quantifiable resources and the
         qualitative assessment to efforts which cannot be quantified, such as intellectual effort or energy, according to the 7th,
         39th and 40th recitals of the preamble to the directive.
         
            
 In that light, the fact that the creation of a database is linked to the exercise of a principal activity in which the person
         creating the database is also the creator of the materials contained in the database does not, as such, preclude that person
         from claiming the protection of the sui generis right, provided that he establishes that the obtaining of those materials, their verification or their presentation, in the
         sense described in paragraphs to of this judgment, required substantial investment in quantitative or qualitative terms,
         which was independent of the resources used to create those materials.
         
            
 In those circumstances, although the search for data and the verification of their accuracy at the time a database is created
         do not require the maker of that database to use particular resources because the data are those he created and are available
         to him, the fact remains that the collection of those data, their systematic or methodical arrangement in the database, the
         organisation of their individual accessibility and the verification of their accuracy throughout the operation of the database
         may require substantial investment in quantitative and/or qualitative terms within the meaning of Article 7(1) of the directive.
         
            
 In the case in the main proceedings, the resources deployed for the purpose of determining, in the course of arranging the
         football league fixtures, the dates and times of and home and away teams playing in the various matches represent, as Svenska
         Spel and the Belgian, German and Portuguese Governments submit, an investment in the creation of the fixture list. Such an
         investment, which relates to the organisation as such of the leagues is linked to the creation of the data contained in the
         database at issue, in other words those relating to each match in the various leagues. It cannot, therefore, be taken into
         account under Article 7(1) of the directive.
         
            
 Accordingly, it must be ascertained, leaving aside the investment referred to in the previous paragraph, whether the obtaining,
         verification or presentation of the contents of a list of football fixtures constitutes a substantial investment in qualitative
         or quantitative terms.
         
            
 Finding and collecting the data which make up a football fixture list do not require any particular effort on the part of
         the professional leagues. As Fixtures itself points out in its observations, those activities are indivisibly linked to the
         creation of those data, in which the leagues participate directly as those responsible for the organisation of football league
         fixtures. Obtaining the contents of a football fixture list thus does not require any investment independent of that required
         for the creation of the data contained in that list.
         
            
 The professional football leagues do not need to put any particular effort into monitoring the accuracy of the data on league
         matches when the list is made up because those leagues are directly involved in the creation of those data. The verification
         of the accuracy of the contents of fixture lists during the season simply involves, according to the observations made by
         Fixtures, adapting certain data in those lists to take account of any postponement of a match or fixture date decided on by
         or in collaboration with the leagues. Such verification cannot, therefore, be regarded as requiring substantial investment.
         
            
 The presentation of a football fixture list, too, is closely linked to the creation as such of the data which make up the
         list, as is confirmed by the absence of any mention in the order for reference of work or resources specifically invested
         in such presentation. It cannot therefore be considered to require investment independent of the investment in the creation
         of its constituent data.
         
            
 It follows that neither the obtaining, nor the verification nor yet the presentation of the contents of a football fixture
         list attests to substantial investment which could justify protection by the sui generis right provided for by Article of the directive.
         
            
 In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the first question referred should be that the expression ‘investment in … the
         obtaining … of the contents’ of a database as defined in Article 7(1) of the directive must be understood to refer to the
         resources used to seek out existing independent materials and collect them in the database. It does not cover the resources
         used for the creation of materials which make up the contents of a database. In the context of drawing up a fixture list for
         the purpose of organising football league fixtures, therefore, it does not cover the resources used to establish the dates,
         times and the team pairings for the various matches in the league.
         
            
 In the light of the foregoing, there is no need to reply to the other questions referred.
         
Costs
            
 Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
         
 On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) rules as follows:
         The expression ‘investment in … the obtaining … of the contents’ of a database in Article 7(1) of Directive 96/9/EC of the
               European Parliament and of the Council of March on the legal protection of databases must be understood to refer to
               the resources used to seek out existing independent materials and collect them in the database. It does not cover the resources
               used for the creation of materials which make up the contents of a database. In the context of drawing up a fixture list for
               the purpose of organising football league fixtures, therefore, it does not cover the resources used to establish the dates,
               times and the team pairings for the various matches in the league. Signatures.
      
 –
            
Language of the case: Swedish.
Top  
 