
Case C-375/Prezes Urzędu Ochrony Konkurencji i Konsumentów
v
TelePolska sp. z o.o., now Netia SA
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Sąd Najwyższy)
(Competition – Regulation (EC) No 1/– Article – Abuse of a dominant position – Powers of the competition authorities of the Member States to find that there has been no breach of Article TFEU)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Competition – European Union rules – Application – Powers of the national competition authorities – Limits
(Arts TFEU and TFEU; Council Regulation No 1/2003, Arts and 10)
2.        Acts of the institutions – Regulations – Direct applicability – Article of Regulation No 1/– Consequences
(Arts TFEU and TFEU; Council Regulation No 1/2003, Art. 5(2))
1.        According to the second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 1/2003, where, on the basis of the information in their possession,
         the conditions for prohibition are not met, the national competition authorities may decide that there are no grounds for
         action on their part. 
      
The wording of that provision indicates clearly that, in such a situation, the power of the national competition authority
         is limited to the adoption of a decision stating that that are no grounds for action.
      
That limitation of the power of the national competition authorities is corroborated by the determination of the Commission’s
         decision-making power when there has been no breach of Articles TFEU and TFEU. According to Article of Regulation
         No 1/2003, the Commission may by decision find that Articles TFEU and TFEU are not applicable. 
      
Recital in the preamble to the regulation states that the Commission may adopt such a decision of a declaratory nature
         ‘in exceptional cases’. The purpose of such action, according to that recital, is ‘to [clarify] the law and ensur[e] its consistent
         application throughout the [Union], in particular with regard to new types of agreements or practices that have not been settled
         in the existing case-law and administrative practice’. 
      
Furthermore, in order to ensure the coherent application of the competition rules in the Member States, a cooperation mechanism
         between the Commission and the national competition authorities was set up by the regulation, as part of the general principle
         of sincere cooperation. 
      
Empowering national competition authorities to take decisions stating that there has been no breach of Article TFEU would
         call into question the system of cooperation established by the regulation and would undermine the power of the Commission.
         
      
Such a ‘negative’ decision on the merits would risk undermining the uniform application of Articles TFEU and TFEU,
         which is one of the objectives of the regulation highlighted by recital in its preamble, since such a decision might prevent
         the Commission from finding subsequently that the practice in question amounts to a breach of those provisions of Union law.
         
      
It is thus apparent from the wording and the scheme of the regulation and from the objective it pursues that the Commission
         alone is empowered to make a finding that there has been no breach of Article TFEU, even if that article is applied in
         a procedure undertaken by a national competition authority. 
      
Consequently, Article of Regulation No 1/must be interpreted as precluding a national competition authority, when,
         in order to apply Article TFEU, it examines whether the conditions for applying that article are satisfied and when, following
         that examination, it forms the view that there has been no abuse, from being able to take a decision stating that there has
         been no breach of that article. 
      
(see paras 22-30, operative part 1)
2.        Since the second paragraph of Article of the Regulation is directly applicable in all Member States, according to Article
         TFEU, it precludes the application of a rule of national law which would require a procedure relating to the application
         of Article TFEU to be brought to an end by a decision stating that there has been no breach of that article. 
      
(see paras 34-35, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
May (*)
      
(Competition – Regulation (EC) No 1/– Article – Abuse of a dominant position – Powers of the competition authorities of the Member States to find that there has been no breach of Article TFEU)
In Case C‑375/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Sąd Najwyższy (Poland), made by decision of July 2009,
         received at the Court on September 2009, in the proceedings
      
Prezes Urzędu Ochrony Konkurencji i Konsumentów
v
TelePolska sp. z o.o., now Netia SA,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, A. Tizzano, J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, K. Lenaerts, J.-C. Bonichot, D. Šváby, Presidents of
         Chambers, A. Rosas, E. Juhász (Rapporteur), J. Malenovský, E. Levits and A. Ó Caoimh, Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: K. Malacek, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on September 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        the Polish Government, by M. Dowgielewicz, K. Zawisza and M. Laszuk, acting as Agents,
–        the Czech Government, by M. Smolek, acting as Agent,
–        the European Commission, by F. Castillo de la Torre and K. Mojzesowicz, acting as Agents,
–        the EFTA Surveillance Authority, by X. Lewis and M. Schneider, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on December 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 1/of December
         on the implementation of the rules on competition laid down in Articles and of the Treaty (OJ L 1, p. 1; ‘the
         Regulation’).
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between Prezes Urzędu Ochrony Konkurencji i Konsumentów (President of the Office
         of Competition and Consumer Protection; the ‘Prezes Urzędu Ochrony Konkurencji’) and TelePolska sp. z o.o., now Netia SA,
         concerning a decision taken by the Prezes Urzędu Ochrony Konkurencji pursuant to Article EC.
      
 Legal context
 European Union legislation
The first sentence of recital in the preamble to the Regulation states:
      
‘In order to establish a system which ensures that competition in the common market is not distorted, Articles and of
         the Treaty must be applied effectively and uniformly in the Community.’
      
The first sentence of recital in the preamble to the Regulation states:
      
‘In order to ensure the effective enforcement of the Community competition rules and the proper functioning of the cooperation
         mechanisms contained in this Regulation, it is necessary to oblige the competition authorities and courts of the Member States
         to also apply Articles [EC] and [EC] where they apply national competition law to agreements and practices which may
         affect trade between Member States.’
      
According to recital in the preamble to the Regulation:
      
‘In exceptional cases where the public interest of the Community so requires, it may also be expedient for the Commission
         to adopt a decision of a declaratory nature finding that the prohibition in Article [EC] or Article [EC] does not apply,
         with a view to clarifying the law and ensuring its consistent application throughout the Community, in particular with regard
         to new types of agreements or practices that have not been settled in the existing case-law and administrative practice.’
      
Article 3(1) of the Regulation provides:
      
‘Where the competition authorities of the Member States or national courts apply national competition law to agreements, decisions
         by associations of undertakings or concerted practices within the meaning of Article 81(1) [EC] which may affect trade between
         Member States within the meaning of that provision, they shall also apply Article [EC] to such agreements, decisions or
         concerted practices. Where the competition authorities of the Member States or national courts apply national competition
         law to any abuse prohibited by Article [EC], they shall also apply Article [EC].’
      
Article of the Regulation, entitled ‘Powers of the competition authorities of the Member States’, provides:
      
‘The competition authorities of the Member States shall have the power to apply Articles [EC] and [EC] in individual
         cases. For this purpose, acting on their own initiative or on a complaint, they may take the following decisions:
      
–        requiring that an infringement be brought to an end,
–        ordering interim measures,
–        accepting commitments,
–        imposing fines, periodic penalty payments or any other penalty provided for in their national law.
Where on the basis of the information in their possession the conditions for prohibition are not met they may likewise decide
         that there are no grounds for action on their part.’
      
According to Article of the Regulation:
      
‘Where the Community public interest relating to the application of Articles [EC] and [EC] so requires, the Commission,
         acting on its own initiative, may by decision find that Article [EC] is not applicable to an agreement, a decision by an
         association of undertakings or a concerted practice, either because the conditions of Article 81(1) [EC] are not fulfilled,
         or because the conditions of Article 81(3) [EC] are satisfied.
      
The Commission may likewise make such a finding with reference to Article [EC].’
 National law
Article of the Law of December on competition and consumer protection (ustawa o ochronie konkurencji i konsumentów,
         Dz. U. 2005, No 244, item 2080), in the version applicable to the facts in the main proceedings (‘the Law on competition and
         consumer protection’), provides:
      
‘1.      The abuse of a dominant position in the relevant market by one or more undertakings shall be prohibited.
...
3.      Acts which constitute an abuse of a dominant position shall be void in their entirety or in respect of the relevant part.’
Article of the Law on competition and consumer protection provides:
      
‘(1) The [Prezes Urzędu Ochrony Konkurencji] shall give a decision stating that a practice does not restrict competition if
         he does not establish that a breach has been committed of the prohibitions laid down in Articles or 8.
      
...’
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
The Prezes Urzędu Ochrony Konkurencji, acting as the national competition authority for the purposes of Article 3(1) of the
         Regulation, initiated a procedure against Telekomunikacja Polska SA, which was suspected of having infringed Article of
         the Law on competition and consumer protection and Article EC. At the end of that procedure, the Prezes Urzędu Ochrony
         Konkurencji found that the conduct of the undertaking in question, which had a dominant position on the market, did not constitute
         an abuse of that position and that, therefore, that conduct did not amount to an infringement of the national law and of Article
         TFEU. Consequently, the Prezes Urzędu Ochrony Konkurencji took a decision under national law stating that the undertaking
         in question had not implemented any restrictive practice, whilst, with regard to the infringement of Article TFEU, he
         brought the procedure to an end on the ground that it was devoid of purpose.
      
TelePolska sp. z o.o., now Netia SA, contested that decision.
      
The Sąd Okręgowy – Sąd Ochrony Konkurencji i Konsumentów (District Court – Court for Competition and Consumer Protection)
         annulled that decision and the Sąd Apelacyjny w Warszawie (Court of Appeal, Warsaw) upheld the annulment of that decision,
         holding that the Prezes Urzędu Ochrony Konkurencji ought to have taken a decision stating that there was no restrictive practice
         under Article TFEU, since he had taken such a decision regarding the prohibition of abuse of a dominant position provided
         for by national law.
      
The Prezes Urzędu Ochrony Konkurencji brought an appeal on a point of law before the Sąd Najwyższy (Supreme Court), claiming
         that the Regulation did not allow him to take a negative decision on the merits as regards the assessment of the compatibility
         of the practices of the undertaking concerned with Article TFEU.
      
According to the Prezes Urzędu Ochrony Konkurencji, Article of the Regulation governs the powers of the national competition
         authorities and limits their decision-making abilities. Article does not confer on him any power to adopt a negative decision
         on the merits as regards the assessment of the compatibility of undertakings’ practices with Article TFEU. Thus, when
         it appeared, on conclusion of the procedure initiated against Telekomunikacja Polska SA, that that undertaking had not abused
         a dominant position within the meaning of Article TFEU, the Prezes Urzędu Ochrony Konkurencji took a decision bringing
         that procedure to an end without ruling on the merits. Article of the Regulation lists four types of substantive decisions,
         none of which provides that the national competition authority may find that there has been no infringement. In addition,
         Article of the Regulation, which recognises the right of the Commission to adopt a decision of its own initiative finding
         that Article TFEU is not applicable to certain conduct of an undertaking in the Community public interest, does not grant
         that right to the national competition authorities. In the opinion of the Prezes Urzędu Ochrony Konkurencji, the purpose of
         Article of the Regulation is to prevent national competition authorities from being able to block any possibility for the
         Commission to establish infringements of Articles TFEU or TFEU by taking decisions stating that there has been no
         breach of those provisions, regard being had to the principle of ne bis in idem.
      
The Sąd Najwyższy takes the view, first, that procedural autonomy is limited in this case and does not make it possible for
         the Prezes Urzędu Ochrony Konkurencji to take a decision stating that a practice does not restrict competition, since such
         a decision does not feature among the types of decision listed in the second sentence of the first paragraph of Article of the Regulation.
      
Second, the Sąd Najwyższy observes that a teleological and functional interpretation of the second paragraph of Article of the Regulation, read in conjunction with the second sentence of the first paragraph of Article of the Regulation and
         the other provisions thereof, might allow the national competition authority to take a decision such as that at issue. The
         wording of the second paragraph of Article of the Regulation, which mentions that the national competition authorities may
         decide ‘that there are no grounds for action on their part’ where the conditions for prohibition are not met, suggests that
         such a possibility cannot be ruled out.
      
In view of the foregoing, the Sąd Najwyższy decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to the Court
         of Justice for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)  Is Article of [the] Regulation … to be interpreted as meaning that a national competition authority cannot take a decision
         stating that a practice does not restrict competition within the meaning of Article EC in a case in which it has found,
         after conducting a procedure, that the undertaking did not breach the prohibition of abuse of a dominant position under that
         Treaty provision?
      
(2)      If the answer to the first question is in the affirmative: in a situation in which, under national competition law – if it
         should be established that the practice of an undertaking does not infringe the prohibition in Article EC – a national
         competition authority may bring antitrust proceedings to an end only by taking a decision which states that the practice does
         not restrict competition, is the [second paragraph] of Article of [the] Regulation ... to be interpreted as constituting
         a direct legal basis for that authority to decide that there are no grounds for action on its part?’
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling 
 The first question
By its first question, the national court asks, in essence, whether Article of the Regulation must be interpreted as precluding
         a national competition authority, in the case where, in order to apply Article TFEU, it examines whether the conditions
         for applying that article are satisfied and where, following that examination, it forms the view that there has been no abuse,
         from being able to take a decision stating that there has been no breach of that article.
      
It should be noted from the outset that, under Article 3(1) of the Regulation, where the national competition authorities
         apply national competition law to any abuse by an undertaking having a dominant position on the market which may affect trade
         between Member States, they must also apply Article TFEU.
      
The first paragraph of Article of the Regulation specifies the powers of the competition authorities of the Member States
         to apply Articles TFEU and TFEU in individual cases. According to the first paragraph of Article of the Regulation,
         those authorities, adjudicating on the substance, may, acting on their own initiative or on a complaint, take the following
         decisions: require that an infringement be brought to an end; order interim measures; accept commitments; and impose fines,
         periodic penalty payments or any other penalty provided for in their national law.
      
According to the second paragraph of Article of the Regulation, where on the basis of the information in their possession
         the conditions for prohibition are not met, the national competition authorities may decide that there are no grounds for
         action on their part.
      
The wording of the latter provision indicates clearly that, in such a situation, the power of the national competition authority
         is limited to the adoption of a decision stating that that are no grounds for action.
      
That limitation on the power of the national competition authorities is corroborated by the determination of the Commission’s
         decision-making power where there has been no breach of Articles TFEU and TFEU. According to Article of the Regulation,
         the Commission may by decision find that Articles EC and EC are not applicable.
      
Recital in the preamble to the Regulation states that the Commission may adopt such a decision of a declaratory nature
         ‘in exceptional cases’. The purpose of such action, according to that recital, is ‘to [clarify] the law and ensur[e] its consistent
         application throughout the [Union], in particular with regard to new types of agreements or practices that have not been settled
         in the existing case-law and administrative practice’.
      
Furthermore, the Court has held that, in order to ensure the coherent application of the competition rules in the Member States,
         a cooperation mechanism between the Commission and the national competition authorities was set up by the Regulation, as part
         of the general principle of sincere cooperation (see, to that effect, Case C‑429/X [2009] ECR I‑4833, paragraphs and 21).
      
Empowerment of national competition authorities to take decisions stating that there has been no breach of Article TFEU
         would call into question the system of cooperation established by the Regulation and would undermine the power of the Commission.
      
Such a ‘negative’ decision on the merits would risk undermining the uniform application of Articles TFEU and TFEU,
         which is one of the objectives of the Regulation highlighted by recital in its preamble, since such a decision might prevent
         the Commission from finding subsequently that the practice in question amounts to a breach of those provisions of European
         Union law.
      
It is thus apparent from the wording, the scheme of the Regulation and the objective which it pursues that the Commission
         alone is empowered to make a finding that there has been no breach of Article TFEU, even if that article is applied in
         a procedure undertaken by a national competition authority.
      
Consequently, the answer to the first question is that Article of the Regulation must be interpreted as precluding a national
         competition authority, in the case where, in order to apply Article TFEU, it examines whether the conditions for applying
         that article are satisfied and where, following that examination, it forms the view that there has been no abuse, from being
         able to take a decision stating that there has been no breach of that article.
      
 The second question
By its second question, the national court asks, in essence, whether the second paragraph of Article of the Regulation is
         directly applicable and whether, on that basis, a national competition authority which forms the view that the conditions
         for prohibiting a practice under Article TFEU are not satisfied may bring to an end the procedure initiated against an
         undertaking by taking a decision which states that there are no grounds for action on its part, even though national law provides
         in such circumstances only for the possibility of taking a negative decision on the merits.
      
It follows from the answer to the first question that a national competition authority cannot take a decision stating that
         there has been no breach of Article TFEU. According to the second paragraph of Article of the Regulation, such an authority
         may, however, decide, in cases where, on the basis of the information in its possession, the conditions for prohibiting a
         practice under Article TFEU are not met, that there are no grounds for action on its part.
      
It should be borne in mind in this respect that it is only where European Union law does not lay down a specific rule that
         a national competition authority may apply its national rules.
      
In the present case, since, by virtue of Article TFEU, Article of the Regulation is directly applicable in all Member
         States, Article precludes the application of a rule of national law which would require a procedure relating to the application
         of Article TFEU to be brought to an end by a decision stating that there has been no breach of that article.
      
Consequently, the answer to the second question is that the second paragraph of Article of the Regulation is directly applicable
         and precludes the application of a rule of national law which would require a procedure relating to the application of Article
         TFEU to be brought to an end by a decision stating that there has been no breach of that article.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article of Council Regulation (EC) No 1/of December on the implementation of the rules on competition laid
            down in Articles and of the Treaty must be interpreted as precluding a national competition authority, in the case where,
            in order to apply Article TFEU, it examines whether the conditions for applying that article are satisfied and where,
            following that examination, it forms the view that there has been no abuse, from being able to take a decision stating that
            there has been no breach of that article.
2.      The second paragraph of Article of Regulation No 1/is directly applicable and precludes the application of a rule of
            national law which would require a procedure relating to the application of Article TFEU to be brought to an end by a
            decision stating that there has been no breach of that article.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Polish.
      
Top  
 