
Case C-440/Commission of the European Communities
v
Council of the European Union
(Action for annulment – Articles 31(1)(e) EU, EU and EU – Framework Decision 2005/667/JHA – Enforcement of the law against ship-source pollution – Criminal penalties – Community competence – Legal basis – Article 80(2) EC)
Opinion of Advocate General Mazák delivered on June Judgment of the Court (Grand Chamber), October Summary of the Judgment
1.     Transport – Common policy – Competence of the Community 
(Arts EC, 71(1) EC and 80(2) EC)
2.     European Union – Police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters – Approximation of laws and regulations on maritime safety
            
(Art. 80(2) EC, Council Framework Decision 2005/667, Arts to 6)
1.     Article 80(2) EC does not lay down any explicit limitations as to the nature of the specific common rules which the Council
         may adopt on that basis. The Community legislature therefore has broad legislative powers under that provision and is competent,
         by virtue of that provision and in keeping with the other provisions of the Treaty relating to the common transport policy,
         in particular Article 71(1) EC, to lay down, inter alia, measures to improve transport safety and any other appropriate provisions
         in the field of maritime transport. The existence of that competence is, moreover, not dependent on the decision of the legislature
         actually to exercise it.
      
Since requirements relating to environmental protection, which is one of the essential objectives of the Community, must,
         according to Article EC, be integrated into the definition and implementation of Community policies and activities, such
         protection must be regarded as an objective which also forms part of the common transport policy. The Community legislature
         may therefore, on the basis of Article 80(2) EC and in the exercise of the powers conferred on it by that provision, decide
         to promote environmental protection. When the application of effective, proportionate and dissuasive criminal penalties by
         the competent national authorities is an essential measure for combating serious environmental offences, the Community legislature
         may require the Member States to introduce such penalties in order to ensure that the rules which it lays down in that field
         are fully effective.
      
(see paras 58-60, 66)
2.     Under Article EU, none of the provisions of the EC Treaty is to be affected by a provision of the EU Treaty. The same rule
         is laid down in the first paragraph of Article EU, which introduces Title VI of the EU Treaty, entitled ‘Provisions on
         police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters’. It is the task of the Court to ensure that acts which, according to
         the Council, fall within the scope of Title VI do not encroach upon the powers conferred by the EC Treaty on the Community.
      
Framework Decision 2005/to strengthen the criminal-law framework for the enforcement of the law against ship-source pollution,
         which requires Member States to apply criminal penalties to certain forms of conduct, is, as is demonstrated by its preamble
         and Articles 2, and thereof, intended to enhance maritime safety and improve protection of the marine environment against
         pollution and could, at least as regards those provisions, have been validly adopted on the basis of Article 80(2) EC, with
         the result that it infringes Article EU.
      
Provisions such as Articles and of Framework Decision 2005/667, which relate to the type and level of criminal penalties,
         do not fall within the Community’s sphere of competence and could not therefore have been validly adopted by it.
      
Since there is an inextricable link between Articles and of Framework Decision 2005/and Articles 2, and of that
         framework decision, and between all those articles and Articles to of the latter, the said framework decision must be
         annulled in its entirety.
      
(see paras 52-53, 62, 69-74)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Action for annulment – Articles 31(1)(e) EU, EU and EU – Framework Decision 2005/667/JHA – Enforcement of the law against ship-source pollution – Criminal penalties – Community competence – Legal basis – Article 80(2) EC)
In Case C‑440/05,
APPLICATION for annulment under Article 35(6) EU, brought on December 2005,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by W. Bogensberger and R. Troosters, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
supported by:
European Parliament, represented by M. Gómez-Leal, J. Rodrigues and A. Auersperger Matić, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
intervener,
v
Council of the European Union, represented by J.-C. Piris and J. Schutte, and by K. Michoel, acting as Agents,
      
defendant,
supported by:
Kingdom of Belgium, represented by M. Wimmer, acting as Agent,
      
Czech Republic, represented by T. Boček, acting as Agent,
      
Kingdom of Denmark, represented by J. Molde, acting as Agent,
      
Republic of Estonia, represented by L. Uibo, acting as Agent,
      
Hellenic Republic, represented by S. Chala and A. Samoni-Rantou, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
French Republic, represented by E. Belliard, G. de Bergues and S. Gasri, acting as Agents,
      
Ireland, represented by D. O’Hagan, E. Fitzsimons and N. Hyland, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
Republic of Latvia, represented by E. Balode-Buraka and E. Broks, acting as Agents,
      
Republic of Lithuania, represented by D. Kriaučiūnas, acting as Agent,
      
Republic of Hungary, represented by P. Gottfried, acting as Agent,
      
Republic of Malta, represented by S. Camilleri, acting as Agent, and P. Grech, Deputy Attorney General,
      
Kingdom of the Netherlands, represented by H.G. Sevenster and M. de Grave, acting as Agents,
      
Republic of Austria, represented by C. Pesendorfer, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
Republic of Poland, represented by E. Ośniecka-Tamecka, acting as Agent,
      
Portuguese Republic, represented by L. Fernandes and M.L. Duarte, acting as Agents,
      
Slovak Republic, represented by R. Procházka, acting as Agent,
      
Republic of Finland, represented by E. Bygglin, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
Kingdom of Sweden, represented by K. Wistrand, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, represented by E. O’Neill, D.J. Rhee and D. Anderson, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
      
interveners,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas, K. Lenaerts and A. Tizzano, Presidents of Chambers,
         R. Schintgen (Rapporteur), J.N. Cunha Rodrigues, M. Ilešič, J. Malenovský, T. von Danwitz, A. Arabadjiev and C. Toader, Judges,
         
      
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: R. Grass,
having regard to the written procedure,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on June 2007,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities is seeking annulment of Council Framework Decision 2005/667/JHA
         of July to strengthen the criminal-law framework for the enforcement of the law against ship-source pollution (OJ
         L 255, p. 164) (‘the Framework Decision’ or ‘Framework Decision 2005/667’).
      
 Legal context and background to the dispute
On July 2005, acting on the initiative of the Commission, the Council of the European Union adopted Framework Decision
         2005/667.
      
Based on Title VI of the EU Treaty, in particular on Articles 31(1)(e) EU and 34(2)(b) EU, the Framework Decision constitutes,
         as is clear from the first five recitals in its preamble, the instrument by which the European Union intends to approximate
         criminal-law legislation of the Member States by requiring them to provide for criminal penalties in order to combat ship-source
         pollution caused with intent or by serious negligence.
      
The Framework Decision supplements Directive 2005/35/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of September on ship-source pollution and on the introduction of penalties for infringements (OJ L 255, p. 11), with a view to strengthening
         maritime safety by approximating the legislation of the Member States.
      
Framework Decision 2005/provides that the Member States are to adopt a certain number of criminal-law-related measures
         with a view to attaining the objective pursued by Directive 2005/35, namely to ensure a high level of safety and environmental
         protection in relation to maritime transport.
      
Article of the Framework Decision states:
‘For the purposes of this framework decision, the definitions provided for in Article of Directive 2005/35/EC shall apply.’
Article of the Framework Decision provides:
‘1.      Subject to Article 4(2) of this framework decision, each Member State shall take the measures necessary to ensure that an
         infringement within the meaning of Articles and of Directive 2005/35/EC shall be regarded as a criminal offence.
      
2.      Paragraph shall not apply to crew members in respect of infringements that occur in straits used for international navigation,
         exclusive economic zones and on the high seas where the conditions set out in Annex I, Regulation 11(b) or in Annex II, Regulation
         6(b), of the Marpol 73/Convention are satisfied.’
      
Article of the Framework Decision provides:
‘Each Member State shall, in accordance with national law, take the measures necessary to ensure that aiding, abetting or
         inciting an offence referred to in Article is punishable.’
      
Article of the Framework Decision is worded as follows:
‘1.      Each Member State shall take the measures necessary to ensure that the offences referred to in Articles and are punishable
         by effective, proportionate and dissuasive criminal penalties which shall include, at least for serious cases, criminal penalties
         of a maximum of at least between one and three years of imprisonment.
      
2.      In minor cases, where the act committed does not cause a deterioration of the quality of the water, a Member State may provide
         for penalties of a different type from those laid down in paragraph 1.
      
3.      The criminal penalties provided for in paragraph may be accompanied by other penalties or measures, in particular fines,
         or the disqualification for a natural person from engaging in an activity requiring official authorisation or approval, or
         founding, managing or directing a company or a foundation, where the facts having led to his/her conviction show an obvious
         risk that the same kind of criminal activity may be pursued again.
      
4.      Each Member State shall take the measures necessary to ensure that the intentionally committed offence referred to in Article
         is punishable by a maximum of at least between five and ten years of imprisonment where the offence caused significant and
         widespread damage to water quality, to animal or vegetable species or to parts of them and the death or serious injury of
         persons.
      
5.      Each Member State shall take the measures necessary to ensure that the intentionally committed offence referred to in Article
         is punishable by a maximum of at least between two and five years of imprisonment where:
      
(a)      the offence caused significant and widespread damage to water quality, to animal or vegetable species or to parts of them;
         or
      
(b)      the offence was committed within the framework of a criminal organisation within the meaning of Council Joint Action 98/733/JHA
         of December on making it a criminal offence to participate in a criminal organisation in the Member States of the
         European Union [OJ L 351, p. 1], irrespective of the level of the penalty referred to in that Joint Action.
      
6.      Each Member State shall take the measures necessary to ensure that the offence referred to in Article 2, when committed with
         serious negligence, is punishable by a maximum of at least between two and five years of imprisonment where the offence caused
         significant and widespread damage to water quality, to animal or vegetable species or to parts of them and the death or serious
         injury of persons.
      
7.      Each Member State shall take the measures necessary to ensure that the offence referred to in Article 2, when committed with
         serious negligence, is punishable by a maximum of at least between one and three years of imprisonment where the offence caused
         significant and widespread damage to water quality, to animal or vegetable species or to parts of them.
      
8.      Regarding custodial penalties, this Article shall apply without prejudice to international law and in particular Article of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.’
      
According to Article of the Framework Decision:
‘1.      Each Member State shall take the measures necessary to ensure that legal persons can be held liable for the offences referred
         to in Articles and 3, committed for their benefit by any persons acting either individually or as part of an organ of the
         legal person, who have a leading position within the legal person, based on:
      
(a)      a power of representation of the legal person, or
(b)      an authority to take decisions on behalf of the legal person, or
(c)      an authority to exercise control within the legal person.
2.      Apart from the cases provided for in paragraph 1, Member States shall take the measures necessary to ensure that a legal person
         can be held liable where lack of supervision or control by a person referred to in paragraph has made possible the commission
         of the offence referred to in Article for the benefit of the legal person by a person under its authority.
      
3.      The liability of a legal person under paragraphs and shall not exclude criminal proceedings against natural persons who
         are involved as perpetrators, instigators or accessories in the offences referred to in Articles and 3.’
      
Article of the Framework Decision provides:
‘1.      Each Member State shall take the measures necessary to ensure that a legal person held liable pursuant to Article 5(1) is
         punishable by effective, proportionate and dissuasive penalties. The penalties:
      
(a)      shall include criminal or non-criminal fines, which, at least for cases where the legal person is held liable for offences
         referred to in Article 2, are:
      
(i)      of a maximum of at least between EUR and EUR 000;
(ii)      of a maximum of at least between EUR and EUR in the most serious cases, including at least the intentionally
         committed offences covered by Article 4(4) and (5);
      
(b)      may, for all cases, include penalties other than fines, such as:
(i)      exclusion from entitlement to public benefits or aid;
(ii)      temporary or permanent disqualification from engaging in commercial activities;
(iii) placing under judicial supervision;
(iv)      a judicial winding-up order;
(v)      the obligation to adopt specific measures in order to eliminate the consequences of the offence which led to the liability
         of the legal person.
      
2.      For the purpose of the implementation of paragraph 1(a), and without prejudice to the first sentence of paragraph 1, Member
         States in which the euro has not been adopted shall apply the exchange rate between the euro and their currency as published
         in the Official Journal of the European Union on July 2005.
      
3.      A Member State may implement paragraph 1(a) by applying a system, whereby the fine is proportionate to the turnover of the
         legal person, to the financial advantage achieved or envisaged by the commission of the offence, or to any other value indicating
         the financial situation of the legal person, provided that such system allows for maximum fines, which are at least equivalent
         to the minimum for the maximum fines established in paragraph 1(a).
      
4.      A Member State that implements the framework decision in accordance with paragraph shall notify the General Secretariat
         of the Council and the Commission that it intends to do so.
      
5.      Each Member State shall take the measures necessary to ensure that a legal person held liable pursuant to Article 5(2) is
         punishable by effective, proportionate and dissuasive penalties or measures.’
      
Article 7(1) of the Framework Decision specifies the factual characteristics of the offences in respect of which the Member
         States are to take the measures necessary to establish their jurisdiction, so far as is permitted by international law.
      
Under Article 7(4) of the Framework Decision, when an offence is subject to the jurisdiction of more than one Member State,
         the relevant Member States are to strive to coordinate their actions appropriately, in particular as regards the conditions
         for prosecution and the detailed arrangements for mutual assistance. Article 7(5) of the Framework Decision specifies the
         connecting factors to be taken into account in that context.
      
Article of the Framework Decision provides:
‘1.      Where a Member State is informed of the commission of an offence to which Article applies or of the risk of the commission
         of such an offence which causes or is likely to cause imminent pollution, it shall immediately inform such other Member States
         as are likely to be exposed to this damage, and the Commission.
      
2.      Where a Member State is informed of the commission of an offence to which Article applies or of the risk of the commission
         of such an offence which is likely to fall within the jurisdiction of a Member State, it shall immediately inform that other
         Member State.
      
3.      Member States shall without delay notify the flag State or any other State concerned of measures taken pursuant to this framework
         decision, and in particular Article 7.’
      
According to Article of the Framework Decision:
‘1.      Each Member State shall designate existing contact points, or, if necessary, create new contact points, in particular for
         the exchange of information as referred to in Article 8.
      
2.      Each Member State shall inform the Commission which of its departments acts or act as contact points in accordance with paragraph
         1. The Commission shall notify the other Member States of these contact points.’
      
Under Article thereof, the Framework Decision is to have the same territorial scope as Directive 2005/35.
Article of the Framework Decision provides:
‘1.      Member States shall adopt the measures necessary to comply with the provisions of this framework decision by January 2007.
2.      By January 2007, Member States shall transmit to the General Secretariat of the Council and to the Commission the texts
         of the provisions transposing into their national law the obligations imposed on them by this framework decision. On the basis
         of that information and a written report by the Commission, the Council shall, by January at the latest, assess the
         extent to which Member States have complied with this framework decision.
      
3.      By January 2012, the Commission shall, on the basis of information supplied by the Member States on the practical application
         of the provisions implementing this framework decision, submit a report to the Council and make any proposals it deems appropriate
         which may include proposals to the effect that Member States shall, concerning offences committed in their territorial sea
         or in their exclusive economic zone or equivalent zone, consider a ship flying the flag of another Member State not to be
         a foreign ship within the meaning of Article of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.’
      
In accordance with Article thereof, the Framework Decision entered into force on the day following that of its publication
         in the Official Journal of the European Union.
      
Article of Directive 2005/provides:
‘1.      The purpose of this Directive is to incorporate international standards for ship-source pollution into Community law and to
         ensure that persons responsible for discharges are subject to adequate penalties as referred to in Article 8, in order to
         improve maritime safety and to enhance protection of the marine environment from pollution by ships.
      
2.      This Directive does not prevent Member States from taking more stringent measures against ship-source pollution in conformity
         with international law.’
      
Article of Directive 2005/provides:
‘For the purpose of this Directive:
1.      “Marpol 73/78” shall mean the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, and its Protocol,
         in its up-to-date version;
      
2.      “polluting substances” shall mean substances covered by Annexes I (oil) and II (noxious liquid substances in bulk) to Marpol
         73/78;
      
3.      “discharge” shall mean any release howsoever caused from a ship, as referred to in Article of Marpol 73/78;
4.      “ship” shall mean a seagoing vessel, irrespective of its flag, of any type whatsoever operating in the marine environment
         and shall include hydrofoil boats, air-cushion vehicles, submersibles and floating craft.’
      
According to Article of that directive:
‘1.      This Directive shall apply, in accordance with international law, to discharges of polluting substances in:
(a)      the internal waters, including ports, of a Member State, in so far as the Marpol regime is applicable;
(b)      the territorial sea of a Member State;
(c)      straits used for international navigation subject to the regime of transit passage, as laid down in Part III, section 2, of
         the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, to the extent that a Member State exercises jurisdiction over such
         straits;
      
(d)      the exclusive economic zone or equivalent zone of a Member State, established in accordance with international law; and
(e)      the high seas.
2.      This Directive shall apply to discharges of polluting substances from any ship, irrespective of its flag, with the exception
         of any warship, naval auxiliary or other ship owned or operated by a State and used, for the time being, only on government
         non-commercial service.’
      
Article of that directive provides:
‘Member States shall ensure that ship-source discharges of polluting substances into any of the areas referred to in Article
         3(1) are regarded as infringements if committed with intent, recklessly or by serious negligence. These infringements are
         regarded as criminal offences by, and in the circumstances provided for in, Framework Decision 2005/… supplementing this
         Directive.’
      
According to Article of Directive 2005/35:
‘1.      Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that infringements within the meaning of Article are subject to
         effective, proportionate and dissuasive penalties, which may include criminal or administrative penalties.
      
2.      Each Member State shall take the measures necessary to ensure that the penalties referred to in paragraph apply to any person
         who is found responsible for an infringement within the meaning of Article 4.’
      
At the time of adoption both of Directive 2005/and the Framework Decision, the Commission made statements in order to dissociate
         itself from the ‘double-text’ approach taken by the Council. The statement relating to the Framework Decision reads as follows:
      
‘Given the importance of combating ship-source pollution, the Commission is in favour of the discharge of polluting substances
         by ships being made a criminal offence and of penalties being adopted at national level in the event of the infringement of
         Community regulations concerning ship-source pollution.
      
The Commission is, however, of the opinion that the Framework Decision is not the appropriate legal instrument with which
         to impose on Member States an obligation to criminalise the illicit discharge of polluting substances at sea and to establish
         corresponding criminal penalties at national level.
      
The Commission – as it is arguing in the Court of Justice in its appeal C‑176/[Case C‑176/Commission v Council [2005] ECR I‑7879] against the Framework Decision on the protection of the environment through criminal law – considers that,
         within the competences which it possesses for the purpose of achieving the objectives set out in Article of the Treaty establishing
         the European Community, the Community is empowered to require Member States to provide for penalties – including, if appropriate,
         criminal penalties – at national level, where this proves necessary in order to achieve a Community objective.
      
This is the case with regard to questions of ship-source pollution, for which Article 80(2) of the Treaty establishing the
         European Community constitutes the legal basis.
      
Pending the ruling on C‑176/03, if the Council adopts the Framework Decision in spite of this Community competence, the Commission
         reserves all the rights conferred upon it by the Treaty.’
      
Considering that the Framework Decision had not been adopted on the correct legal basis and that Article EU had thereby
         been infringed, the Commission brought the present action.
      
 The action
By order of the President of the Court of April 2006, leave to intervene in support of the forms of order sought by the
         Commission and the Council respectively was granted, on the one hand, to the European Parliament and, on the other, to the
         Kingdom of Belgium, the Czech Republic, the Kingdom of Denmark, the Republic of Estonia, the Hellenic Republic, the French
         Republic, Ireland, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the
         Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Republic of Austria, the Republic of Poland, the Portuguese Republic, the Slovak Republic,
         the Republic of Finland, the Kingdom of Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
      
By order of September 2006, the President of the Court granted the Republic of Slovenia leave to intervene in support of
         the forms of order sought by the Council.
      
 Arguments of the parties
The Commission considers that, by virtue of the legal basis used for its adoption, the Framework Decision infringes Article
         EU and must therefore be annulled.
      
According to the Commission, it is clear from the judgment in Case C‑176/Commission v Council, the implications of which extend beyond Community policy on environmental protection, that regard must be had to the aim
         and content of a measure in order to determine the appropriate legal basis for its adoption. Although the Court noted in that
         judgment that criminal law does not, as a rule, fall within the Community’s sphere of competence, it recognised that the Community
         does have an implied competence linked to a specific legal basis and may therefore adopt appropriate criminal-law measures,
         provided that there is a need to combat failure to implement Community objectives and that the aim of those measures is to
         ensure that the Community policy in question is fully effective. The Court did not define the scope of the Community legislature’s
         competence in criminal-law matters, since it did not draw any distinctions based on the nature of the criminal-law measures
         in question.
      
In the present case, the preamble to the Framework Decision states that its purpose is to supplement and thereby ensure the
         effectiveness of the system established by Directive 2005/35, which was adopted on the basis of Article 80(2) EC.
      
As to the content of the Framework Decision, the Commission submits that the measures provided for in Articles to thereof
         all relate to criminal law and concern conduct which must be regarded as reprehensible under Community law.
      
According to the Commission, the criterion requiring that there be a need, laid down by the Court in Case C‑176/Commission v Council, is also fulfilled in the present case. Firstly, the Council implicitly acknowledged as much in adopting the Framework Decision,
         since the third indent of the second paragraph of Article EU provides that the Member States may approximate their legislation
         on criminal matters only ‘where necessary’. Secondly, given the specific features of the conduct covered by Directive 2005/35,
         all the provisions of that framework decision are necessary in order to ensure that the system established by the directive
         is effective.
      
The Commission adds that, contrary to what the Council contends, the Court does not require an additional criterion, relating
         to the ‘transversal’ nature of the Community policy in question, to be satisfied in order for a degree of competence in criminal-law
         matters to be recognised as accruing to the Community. Moreover, such a criterion would, for most areas of Community law,
         preclude the possibility of any form of criminal-law protection under Community law, even where there was clearly a need for
         criminal-law measures to be taken. 
      
As to the argument that the Council was free to act on the basis of Title VI of the EU Treaty to adopt measures relating to
         the criminal law of the Member States, since it had decided, as it was entitled to do under Article 80(2) EC, not to specify
         the penalties further in Directive 2005/35, the Commission states that Article 80(2) EC does not contain conditions for the
         existence of Community competence as such, but only for the exercise of that competence. The Council could, of course, have
         decided that the Member States remained competent. If it had, however, the Member States would have had to take action separately,
         since Article EU precludes reliance on Title VI of the EU Treaty.
      
The Commission adds that the Framework Decision does not harmonise the type and level of applicable criminal penalty, as the
         Member States retain a certain latitude in that regard and the national courts have discretion to adjust the penalties to
         suit the individual case. Thus, the provisions of Framework Decision 2005/do not differ fundamentally from those of Article
         5(1) of Council Framework Decision 2003/80/JHA of January on the protection of the environment through criminal law
         (OJ L 29, p. 55), which was annulled by the Court in Case C‑176/Commission v Council.
      
Criminal law does not, of course, constitute an independent Community policy area. The fact remains, however, that the Community
         has an ancillary criminal-law competence, which it may exercise if necessary. The criterion of need, applied by the Court
         in Case C‑176/Commission v Council, applies only in relation to the exercise of that competence, not to the question whether such a competence exists.
      
In the light of the functional approach taken by the Court in Case C‑176/Commission v Council, and the fact that the measures provided for in Articles to of the Framework Decision are criminal-law rules which are
         necessary to ensure the effectiveness of the common transport policy, as elaborated upon in Directive 2005/35, the Commission
         considers that the Framework Decision as a whole infringes Article EU and must accordingly be annulled.
      
The Commission also observes that the terms ‘essential’ and ‘needed’, on the one hand, and the notion of ‘necessary’ within
         the meaning of Article EU, on the other, in fact reflect the same concept and that, at that level, there is no difference
         between the EC Treaty and the EU Treaty.
      
Lastly, the Commission submits that its interpretation of the judgment in Case C‑176/Commission v Council does not deprive Title VI of the EU Treaty of any useful purpose, since a great many areas coming within the scope of that
         title are not affected by that interpretation.
      
The European Parliament observes that the Framework Decision is a perfect match of the framework decision which was the subject-matter
         of the judgment in Case C‑176/Commission v Council. Firstly, its aim and content are wholly analogous to that of Framework Decision 2003/80, which was annulled by the Court
         in that judgment. As is clear from the preamble thereto, the fight against pollution and protection of the environment are
         not ancillary or secondary objectives of Framework Decision 2005/667. Likewise, its content is similar to that of Framework
         Decision 2003/80, since in both cases the criminal offences envisaged relate to the discharge of polluting substances. Although
         the two framework decisions diverge as regards the specific definition of the type and level of criminal penalty to be applied,
         that divergence is not such as to justify, in the present case, an outcome which is any different from that in Case C‑176/Commission v Council. In fact, in that judgment the Court has already held that the Community legislature’s competence in criminal-law matters
         extends to provisions such as Article 5(1) of Framework Decision 2003/concerning the type and level of criminal penalties.
      
Next, the criterion requiring that there be a need is also fulfilled in the present case. Lastly, since Articles to of
         the Framework Decision come within Community competence, that decision, being indivisible, should be regarded in its entirety
         as infringing Article EU.
      
The Council, by contrast, puts forward as its principal argument that, in adopting Directive 2005/together with the European
         Parliament under the co-decision procedure, it decided – in accordance with Article 80(2) EC – the question ‘whether’ and,
         if so, ‘to what extent’ the Community legislature must exercise its competence to adopt provisions on ship-source pollution,
         in particular provisions introducing penalties for infringement of the relevant rules. Through the adoption of that directive,
         the Community legislature wished to demarcate the limits of its own power to take action in matters involving maritime transport
         policy. This approach is entirely in keeping with Article 80(2) EC and the case-law of the Court.
      
The Community legislature could have decided to go further on the basis of Article 80(2) EC. However, in keeping with the
         powers conferred on it by the EC Treaty, it chose not to do so. It is also noteworthy that the European Parliament and the
         Council followed the Commission’s proposal concerning the legal basis to be used for Directive 2005/35. Although that directive
         also pursues objectives relating to protection of the environment, the Community legislature took the view that it essentially
         falls under the common transport policy and that the addition of a legal basis concerning environmental protection, in particular
         Article 175(1) EC, was not necessary. As it is, the legal basis chosen was not questioned by either the Parliament or the
         Commission.
      
Given the conditional nature of the competence in matters of transport policy conferred by Article EC on the Community
         and the fact that transport policy, unlike environmental policy which was the policy area at issue in Case C‑176/Commission v Council, does not pursue an objective that is essential, transversal and fundamental, the Council considers that the inferences to
         be drawn from that judgment need not necessarily be the same in respect of both policies.
      
In those circumstances, it cannot validly be claimed that the provisions laid down in Framework Decision 2005/ought to
         have been adopted by the Community legislature.
      
In the alternative, the Council contends that the Community is not competent to lay down binding rules on the type and level
         of criminal penalty which the Member States must provide for in their national law and that, accordingly, the Council did
         not infringe the EC and EU Treaties by adopting Articles 1, 4(1), (4), (5), (6) and (7) and 6(1)(a), (2) and (3), or Articles
         to of the Framework Decision.
      
The Council states that, in terms of its aim and content – the key elements for determining the appropriate legal basis for
         adopting a measure – the Framework Decision is designed to approximate the laws of the Member States relating to the fight
         against ship-source pollution by harmonising the type and level of the applicable criminal penalties. However, it is clear
         from Case C‑176/Commission v Council that such harmonisation, which goes far beyond that provided for in Framework Decision 2003/80, does not currently fall within
         the Community’s sphere of competence.
      
Since the approach adopted by the Court in that judgment must be regarded as marking an exception to the principle that criminal
         law falls outside the Community’s sphere of competence – as do, by the same token, the rules of criminal procedure – the Council
         considers that the criteria applied by the Court in support of that approach must be interpreted narrowly. That approach should
         therefore apply only where there is a ‘need’, a concept which is not identical to that of ‘necessary’ as referred to in the
         second paragraph of Article EU.
      
The Council adds, with regard to the interpretation of the judgment in Case C‑176/Commission v Council advocated by the Commission, that not only would it deprive Title VI of the EU Treaty of much of its useful purpose, it also
         manifestly disregards the fact that the Court opted for that approach in that judgment because the Community objective of
         environmental protection is essential, transversal and fundamental.
      
Lastly, the Council observes that, in Case C‑176/Commission v Council, the Court held that, in the light of their aim and content, the Community was competent to adopt Articles to of Framework
         Decision 2003/and that it would therefore have excluded Article on jurisdiction and Article on extraditions and prosecutions
         from that sphere of competence. Likewise, in the present case, Articles 7, and of Framework Decision 2005/cover areas
         in respect of which the EC Treaty has not conferred any competence on the Community.
      
The arguments put forward by the Member States which have intervened in the present proceedings are largely similar to those
         relied on by the Council.
      
 Findings of the Court
Under Article EU, none of the provisions of the EC Treaty is to be affected by a provision of the EU Treaty. The same rule
         is laid down in the first paragraph of Article EU, which introduces Title VI of the EU Treaty, entitled ‘Provisions on
         police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters’.
      
It is the task of the Court to ensure that acts which, according to the Council, fall within the scope of Title VI do not
         encroach upon the powers conferred by the EC Treaty on the Community (see Case C‑170/Commission v Council [1998] ECR I‑2763, paragraph 16, and Case C‑176/Commission v Council, paragraph 39).
      
It is therefore necessary to determine whether or not the provisions of Framework Decision 2005/affect the Community’s
         competence under Article 80(2) EC, in that they could have been adopted on the basis of that provision, as submitted by the
         Commission.
      
It should be borne in mind, firstly, that the common transport policy is one of the foundations of the Community, since Article
         EC, read together with Article 80(1) EC, provides that the objectives of the Treaty are, in matters of transport by rail,
         road or inland waterway, to be pursued by the Member States within the framework of that policy (see Case 97/Schumalla [1998] ECR 2311, paragraph 4).
      
Next, it should be noted that, under Article 80(2) EC, the Council may decide whether, to what extent and by what procedure
         appropriate provisions may be laid down for sea transport (see, inter alia, Case C‑18/Corsica Ferries [1994] ECR I‑1783, paragraph 25), and the procedural provisions of Article EC are to apply.
      
As evidenced by the Court’s case-law, far from excluding the application of the EC Treaty to sea transport, Article 80(2)
         EC merely provides that the specific rules of the Treaty relating to the common transport policy, which are set out in Title
         V thereof, will not automatically apply to that sphere of activity (see, inter alia, Case C‑178/Commission v Greece [2007] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 52). 
      
Since Article 80(2) EC does not lay down any explicit limitations as to the nature of the specific common rules which the
         Council may adopt on that basis in accordance with the procedural provisions laid down in Article EC, the Community legislature
         has broad legislative powers under Article 80(2) EC and is competent – by virtue of that provision and in keeping with the
         other provisions of the EC Treaty relating to the common transport policy, in particular Article 71(1) EC – to lay down, inter
         alia, ‘measures to improve transport safety’ and ‘any other appropriate provisions’ in the field of maritime transport (see,
         to that effect, in respect of road transport, Joined Cases C‑184/and C‑223/Spain and Finland v Parliament and Council [2004] ECR I‑7789, paragraph 28).
      
That finding, to the effect that, within the scope of the competence conferred on it by Article 80(2) EC, the Community legislature
         may adopt measures aimed at improving maritime transport safety, is not called into question by the fact that, in the present
         case, the Council has not considered it appropriate to adopt the provisions of Framework Decision 2005/on the basis of
         Article 80(2) EC. In fact, the existence of the legislative competence conferred by Article 80(2) EC is not dependent on a
         decision by the legislature actually to exercise that competence.
      
Moreover, since requirements relating to environmental protection, which is one of the essential objectives of the Community
         (see, inter alia, Case C‑176/Commission v Council, paragraph 41), must, according to Article EC, ‘be integrated into the definition and implementation of … Community policies
         and activities’, such protection must be regarded as an objective which also forms part of the common transport policy. The
         Community legislature may therefore, on the basis of Article 80(2) EC and in the exercise of the powers conferred on it by
         that provision, decide to promote environmental protection (see, by analogy, Case C‑336/Huber [2002] ECR I‑7699, paragraph 36).
      
Lastly, it must be borne in mind that, according to the Court’s settled case-law, the choice of legal basis for a Community
         measure must rest on objective factors which are amenable to judicial review, including in particular the aim and the content
         of the measure (see Case C‑300/Commission v Council (Titanium dioxide) [1991] ECR I‑2867,  paragraph 10; Huber, paragraph 30; and Case C‑176/Commission v Council, paragraph 45).
      
More specifically, in respect of Framework Decision 2005/667, the preamble thereto states that its purpose is to enhance maritime
         safety and improve protection of the marine environment against ship-source pollution. As evidenced by the second and third
         recitals in the preamble, that decision is intended to approximate certain legislation of the Member States in order to avoid
         a recurrence of damage like that brought about by the sinking of the oil tanker, the Prestige.
      
As is clear from the fourth recital in the preamble to Framework Decision 2005/and the sixth recital in the preamble to
         Directive 2005/35, the Framework Decision is intended to supplement the directive with detailed rules on criminal matters.
         As evidenced by the first and fifteenth recitals in the preamble to Directive 2005/and also in Article thereof, it also
         aims to ensure a high level of safety and environmental protection in maritime transport. Its purpose, according to the fifteenth
         recital in the preamble and Article 1, is to incorporate international ship-source pollution standards into Community law
         and to establish penalties — criminal and administrative — for infringement of those rules, in order to ensure that they are
         effective.
      
As to the content of Framework Decision 2005/667, by virtue of Articles 2, and thereof, it introduces the obligation for
         Member States to provide for criminal penalties for persons, natural or legal, who have committed, aided, abetted or incited
         one of the offences referred to in Articles and of Directive 2005/35.
      
Moreover, the Framework Decision, according to which the criminal penalties must be effective, proportionate and dissuasive,
         lays down, in Articles and 6, the type and level of criminal penalty to be applied according to the damage caused by the
         offences to water quality, to animal or vegetable species or to persons.
      
Although it is true that, as a general rule, neither criminal law nor the rules of criminal procedure fall within the Community’s
         competence (see, to that effect, Case 203/Casati [1981] ECR 2595, paragraph 27; Case C‑226/Lemmens [1998] ECR I‑3711, paragraph 19; and Case C‑176/Commission v Council, paragraph 47), the fact remains that when the application of effective, proportionate and dissuasive criminal penalties
         by the competent national authorities is an essential measure for combating serious environmental offences, the Community
         legislature may require the Member States to introduce such penalties in order to ensure that the rules which it lays down
         in that field are fully effective (see, to that effect, Case C‑176/Commission v Council, paragraph 48).
      
In the present case, the Court finds, firstly, that the provisions laid down in Framework Decision 2005/– like those of
         Framework Decision 2003/80, at issue in the proceedings which gave rise to the judgment in Case C‑176/Commission v Council – relate to conduct which is likely to cause particularly serious environmental damage as a result, in this case, of the
         infringement of the Community rules on maritime safety.
      
Secondly, it is clear from the third, fourth, fifth, seventh and eighth recitals in the preamble to Directive 2005/35, read
         in conjunction with the first five recitals in the preamble to Framework Decision 2005/667, that the Council took the view
         that criminal penalties were necessary to ensure compliance with the Community rules laid down in the field of maritime safety.
      
Accordingly, since Articles 2, and of Framework Decision 2005/are designed to ensure the efficacy of the rules adopted
         in the field of maritime safety, non-compliance with which may have serious environmental consequences, by requiring Member
         States to apply criminal penalties to certain forms of conduct, those articles must be regarded as being essentially aimed
         at improving maritime safety, as well as environmental protection, and could have been validly adopted on the basis of Article
         80(2) EC.
      
By contrast, and contrary to the submission of the Commission, the determination of the type and level of the criminal penalties
         to be applied does not fall within the Community’s sphere of competence.
      
It follows that the Community legislature may not adopt provisions such as Articles and of Framework Decision 2005/667,
         since those articles relate to the type and level of the applicable criminal penalties. Consequently, those provisions were
         not adopted in infringement of Article EU.
      
It should also be pointed out that the references made in Articles and of the Framework Decision to Articles 2, and
         thereof highlight the fact that, in the present case, those provisions are inextricably linked to the provisions concerning
         the criminal offences to which they relate.
      
As regards Articles to of Framework Decision 2005/– which respectively concern jurisdiction, notification of information
         between Member States, designation of contact points, territorial scope of application of the Framework Decision, the implementation
         obligation on Member States and the date of entry into force of the Framework Decision – it is sufficient to note, in the
         present case, that those articles are also inextricably linked to the provisions of the Framework Decision that are referred
         to in paragraphs and of this judgment, which means that it is not necessary to rule on the question whether they fall
         within the sphere of competence of the Community legislature.
      
In the light of the foregoing, it must be concluded that Framework Decision 2005/667, in encroaching on the competence which
         Article 80(2) EC attributes to the Community, infringes Article EU and, being indivisible, must be annulled in its entirety.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Council has been unsuccessful,
         the Council must be ordered to pay the costs. Pursuant to the first subparagraph of Article 69(4), the interveners in these
         proceedings must bear their own costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby:
1.      Annuls Council Framework Decision 2005/667/JHA of July to strengthen the criminal-law framework for the enforcement
            of the law against ship-source pollution;
2.      Orders the Council of the European Union to pay the costs;
3.      Orders the Kingdom of Belgium, the Czech Republic, the Kingdom of Denmark, the Republic of Estonia, the Hellenic Republic,
            the French Republic, Ireland, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of
            Malta, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Republic of Austria, the Republic of Poland, the Portuguese Republic, the Slovak
            Republic, the Republic of Finland, the Kingdom of Sweden, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
            also the European Parliament to bear their own costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: French.
      
Top  
 