
Case C-463/CLECE SA
v
María Socorro Martín Valor
and
Ayuntamiento de Cobisa
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the 
Tribunal Superior de Justicia de Castilla-La Mancha)
(Social policy – Directive 2001/23/EC – Transfers of undertakings – Safeguarding of employees’ rights – Concept of ‘transfer’ – Cleaning – Cleaning carried out directly by a municipal authority with recruitment of new staff)
Summary of the Judgment
Social policy – Approximation of laws – Transfers of undertakings – Safeguarding of employees’ rights – Directive 2001/– Scope
(Council Directive 2001/23, Art. 1(1)(a) and (b))
Article 1(1)(a) and (b) of Directive 2001/on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the safeguarding
         of employees’ rights in the event of transfers of undertakings, businesses or parts of undertakings or businesses must be
         interpreted as meaning that that directive does not apply to a situation in which a municipal authority which has contracted
         out the cleaning of its premises to a private company decides to terminate its contract with that company and to undertake
         the cleaning of those premises itself by hiring new staff for that purpose.
      
It is true that cleaning services can be regarded as an activity essentially based on manpower and, consequently, a group
         of employees who are permanently assigned to the common task of cleaning may, in the absence of other factors of production,
         amount to an economic entity. That entity’s identity must nonetheless be retained after the transfer in question. However,
         the mere fact that the activity carried out by a private company and that carried out by the municipal authority are similar,
         even identical, does not lead to the conclusion that an economic entity has retained its identity. An entity cannot be reduced
         to the activity entrusted to it. Its identity emerges from several indissociable factors, such as its workforce, its management
         staff, the way in which its work is organised, its operating methods or indeed, where appropriate, the operational resources
         available to it. In particular, the identity of an economic entity cannot be retained if the majority of its employees are
         not taken on by the supposed transferee.
      
(see paras 39, 41, 43, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
January (*)
      
(Social policy – Directive 2001/23/EC – Transfers of undertakings – Safeguarding of employees’ rights – Concept of ‘transfer’ – Cleaning – Cleaning carried out directly by a municipal authority with recruitment of new staff)
In Case C‑463/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Tribunal Superior de Justicia de Castilla-La Mancha (Spain),
         made by decision of October 2009, received at the Court on November 2009, in the proceedings
      
CLECE SA
v
María Socorro Martín Valor,
Ayuntamiento de Cobisa,
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, D. Šváby, R. Silva de Lapuerta, E. Juhász and J. Malenovský (Rapporteur),
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: V. Trstenjak,
Registrar: A. Calot Escobar,
having regard to the written procedure, 
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        the Spanish Government, by F. Díez Moreno, acting as Agent,
–        the European Commission, by J. Enegren and R. Vidal Puig, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on October 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 1(1) of Council Directive 2001/23/EC of March on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the safeguarding of employees’ rights in the
         event of transfers of undertakings, businesses or parts of undertakings or businesses (OJ L 82, p. 16).
      
The question has arisen in the course of legal proceedings brought by CLECE SA (‘CLECE’) against Mrs Martín Valor and the
         Ayuntamiento de Cobisa (municipal authority of Cobisa) concerning Mrs Martín Valor’s dismissal.
      
 Legal context
 European Union law
Directive 2001/codifies Council Directive 77/187/EEC of February on the approximation of the laws of the Member
         States relating to the safeguarding of employees’ rights in the event of transfers of undertakings, businesses or parts of
         undertakings or businesses (OJ L 61, p. 26) as amended by Council Directive 98/50/EC of June (OJ L 201,
         p. 88).
      
According to recital in the preamble to Directive 2001/23, ‘it is necessary to provide for the protection of employees in
         the event of a change of employer, in particular, to ensure that their rights are safeguarded’.
      
Article 1(1) of the Directive states:
      
‘(a) This Directive shall apply to any transfer of an undertaking, business, or part of an undertaking or business to another employer
         as a result of a legal transfer or merger.
      
(b)   Subject to subparagraph (a) and the following provisions of this Article, there is a transfer within the meaning of this Directive
         where there is a transfer of an economic entity which retains its identity, meaning an organised grouping of resources which
         has the objective of pursuing an economic activity, whether or not that activity is central or ancillary.
      
(c)   This Directive shall apply to public and private undertakings engaged in economic activities whether or not they are operating
         for gain. An administrative reorganisation of public administrative authorities, or the transfer of administrative functions
         between public administrative authorities, is not a transfer within the meaning of this Directive.’
      
The first subparagraph of Article 3(1) of the Directive provides:
      
‘The transferor’s rights and obligations arising from a contract of employment or from an employment relationship existing
         on the date of a transfer shall, by reason of such transfer, be transferred to the transferee.’
      
The first subparagraph of Article 4(1) of Directive 2001/states:
      
‘The transfer of the undertaking, business or part of the undertaking or business shall not in itself constitute grounds for
         dismissal by the transferor or the transferee. This provision shall not stand in the way of dismissals that may take place
         for economic, technical or organisational reasons entailing changes in the workforce.’
      
 National law
Directive 2001/was transposed into Spanish law by Article of Royal Legislative Decree No 1/of March approving
         the amended text of the Workers’ Statute (Real Decreto Legislativo 1/1995, por el que se aprueba el texto refundido de la
         Ley del Estatuto de los Trabajadores) (BOE No of March 1995, p. 9654, ‘the Workers’ Statute’).
      
Article 44(1) and (2) of the Workers’ Statute provides:
      
‘1.   The transfer of an undertaking, business or independent production unit of a business shall not in itself terminate the employment
         relationship; the new employer shall take over the former employer’s rights and obligations with respect to the employment
         contract and social security, including all commitments in respect of pensions, in the circumstances provided for by the relevant
         specific legislation and, generally, all obligations in relation to additional social protection which the transferor has
         undertaken.
      
2.     For the purposes of this article, there shall be a transfer of undertaking where there is a transfer of an economic entity
         which retains its identity, meaning an organised grouping of resources which has the objective of pursuing an economic activity,
         whether or not that activity is central or ancillary.’
      
Article of the Collective Agreement concerning workers employed in the cleaning of buildings and premises in Toledo provides:
      
‘When an undertaking whose cleaning services have been supplied by a contractor takes over those services itself, it is not
         obliged to keep on the staff who provided the services on behalf of the contractor if it employs its own staff to carry out
         the cleaning. It must, however, do so if it wishes to employ new staff to carry out the cleaning.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
On May 2003, CLECE, a company that supplies cleaning services, entered into a contract with the Ayuntamiento de Cobisa
         for the cleaning of schools and premises belonging to the council. It was not established that any ‘special equipment’ was
         required for the provision of services in question.
      
Pursuant to that contract, Mrs Martín Valor was employed by CLECE as a cleaner from March 2004.
      
On November 2007, the Ayuntamiento de Cobisa informed CLECE that it was terminating its contract with that company with
         effect from December 2007.
      
On January 2008, CLECE informed Mrs Martín Valor that, as of January 2008, she would become a member of the staff of the
         Ayuntamiento de Cobisa, since that body would henceforth carry out the cleaning of the premises in question. According to
         CLECE, pursuant to Article of the Collective Agreement concerning workers employed in the cleaning of buildings and premises
         in Toledo, the Ayuntamiento de Cobisa had taken over from that company all the rights and obligations relating to the employment
         relationship forming the subject of the dispute in the main proceedings.
      
On the same day, Mrs Martín Valor presented herself for work at the premises of the Ayuntamiento de Cobisa, but was not permitted
         to carry out her work there. CLECE, for its part, did not offer her an alternative job.
      
On January 2008, the Ayuntamiento de Cobisa hired five workers to clean its premises, through an employment agency.
      
Mrs Martín Valor then brought an action before the Juzgado de lo Social No de Toledo against CLECE and the Ayuntamiento
         de Cobisa, seeking a finding of unlawful dismissal.
      
By a judgment of May 2008, the Juzgado de lo Social No de Toledo held that Article of the Collective Agreement concerning
         workers employed in the cleaning of buildings and premises in Toledo did not apply and that, therefore, the Ayuntamiento de
         Cobisa could not be sued. That court also found that CLECE had unlawfully dismissed Mrs Martín Valor and ordered CLECE either
         to reinstate Mrs Martín Valor on the terms she enjoyed prior to her dismissal or to compensate her in the amount of EUR 507.10.
         In either case, CLECE had also to pay Mrs Martín Valor the ordinary earnings that she had not received.
      
On December 2008, CLECE brought an appeal against that judgment before the Tribunal Superior de Justicia de Castilla-La
         Mancha. In that appeal, CLECE claims, in particular, that the Ayuntamiento de Cobisa is subrogated in the employment relationship
         with Mrs Martín Valor, pursuant to Article of the Collective Agreement concerning workers employed in the cleaning of buildings
         and premises in Toledo in conjunction with Article of the Workers’ Statute and with the case-law which it cites.
      
The referring court points out that it is clear, in essence, from case-law consolidated by a judgment of the Tribunal Supremo
         (Supreme Court) of December 2008, that the provisions of a collective agreement in the sector for the cleaning of buildings
         and premises do not apply to a main undertaking, performing a different activity, which terminates a contract with a cleaning
         company and decides to carry out the cleaning of its premises itself, since the main undertaking cannot be regarded as falling
         within the scope of that collective agreement.
      
In those circumstances, the referring court asks whether a situation in which a municipal authority takes over the cleaning
         of its premises, using its own staff, in circumstances where that work was previously carried out by a cleaning company under
         a contract which has been terminated, the main undertaking has hired new staff to carry out the cleaning work, and the Collective
         Agreement on the cleaning of buildings and premises, which creates a subrogation obligation in such situations, does not apply
         to it, falls within the scope of Article 1(1)(a) and (b) of Directive 2001/23.
      
In particular, the referring court asks whether, in the dispute in the main proceedings, it is necessary to draw the appropriate
         conclusions from the application of Article 1(1)(a) and (b) of Directive 2001/23, even though the Collective Agreement in
         question does not apply to the Ayuntamiento de Cobisa and that body is a public employer, which means that its employment
         relations are coloured by special features, in accordance with Article 103(3) of the Spanish Constitution.
      
In those circumstances, the Tribunal Superior de Justicia de Castilla-La Mancha decided to stay the proceedings and to refer
         to the Court the following question for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘Does a situation in which a municipal authority resumes or takes over the activity of cleaning its premises, which was previously
         carried out by a contractor, and for which new staff are hired, fall within the scope of Directive 2001/23, as defined in
         Article 1(1)(a) and (b) thereof?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
By its question, the referring court asks, in essence, if Article 1(1)(a) and (b) of Directive 2001/must be interpreted
         as meaning that that directive applies to a situation in which a municipal authority which has contracted out the cleaning
         of its premises to a private company decides to terminate its contract with that company and to undertake those cleaning services
         itself, by hiring new staff for that purpose.
      
It must be noted that, pursuant to Article 1(1)(c) of Directive 2001/23, that directive applies to public undertakings engaged
         in economic activities whether or not they are operating for gain.
      
The Court has therefore held that the mere fact that the person to whom the activity is transferred is a public-law body,
         in this case a municipal authority, cannot be a ground for excluding the existence of a transfer within the scope of that
         directive (see Case C‑175/Mayeur [2000] ECR I‑7755, paragraphs 29, and 34, and Case C‑151/UGT-FSP [2010] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 23).
      
Therefore, the fact that, as in the dispute in the main proceedings, one of the parties is a municipal authority does not,
         of itself, prevent Directive 2001/from applying.
      
Pursuant to Article 1(1)(a) of Directive 2001/23, that directive applies to any transfer of an undertaking, business or part
         of an undertaking or business to another employer as a result of a legal transfer or merger.
      
It is clear from the settled case-law that the scope of that provision cannot be determined solely on the basis of a textual
         interpretation. On account of the differences between the language versions of that directive and the divergences between
         the laws of the Member States with regard to the concept of legal transfer, the Court has given that concept a sufficiently
         flexible interpretation in keeping with the objective of that directive, which is, as stated in recital of the preamble,
         to safeguard employees in the event of a transfer of their undertaking (see, to that effect, Case C‑458/Jouini and Others [2007] ECR I‑7301, paragraph and case-law cited).
      
The Court has therefore held that Directive 77/187, codified by Directive 2001/23, is applicable wherever, in the context
         of contractual relations, there is a change in the legal or moral person who is responsible for carrying on the undertaking
         and who incurs the obligations of an employer towards employees of the undertaking (see Joined Cases C‑171/and C‑172/Merckx and Neuhuys [1996] ECR I‑1253, paragraph 28, and Joined Cases C‑127/96, C‑229/and C‑74/Hernández Vidal and Others [1998] ECR I‑8179, paragraph 23).
      
Similarly, the Court has held that Directive 77/is capable of applying to a situation in which an undertaking, which used
         to have recourse to another undertaking for the cleaning of its premises or part of them, decides to terminate its contract
         with that other undertaking and in future to carry out that work itself (see Hernández Vidal and Others, paragraph 25).
      
Accordingly, it cannot automatically be excluded that Directive 2001/might apply in circumstances such as those of the
         dispute in the main proceedings, where a municipal authority unilaterally decides to terminate a contract with a private undertaking
         and to carry out itself the cleaning work it used to contract out to that undertaking.
      
Nonetheless, according to Article 1(1)(b) of Directive 2001/23, a condition for the application of that directive is that
         the transfer must concern an economic entity which retains its identity after the change of employer.
      
In order to determine whether such an entity retains its identity, it is necessary to consider all the facts characterising
         the transaction in question, including in particular the type of undertaking or business concerned, whether or not its tangible
         assets, such as buildings and movable property, are transferred, the value of its intangible assets at the time of the transfer,
         whether or not the majority of its employees are taken over by the new employer, whether or not its customers are transferred,
         the degree of similarity between the activities carried on before and after the transfer, and the period, if any, for which
         those activities were suspended. However, all those circumstances are merely single factors in the overall assessment which
         must be made and cannot therefore be considered in isolation (see, inter alia, Case 24/Spijkers [1986] ECR 1119, paragraph 13; Case C‑29/Redmond Stichting [1992] ECR I‑3189, paragraph 24; Case C‑13/Süzen [1997] ECR I‑1259, paragraph 14; and Case C‑340/Abler and Others [2003] ECR I‑14023, paragraph 33).
      
The Court has previously stated that an economic entity is able, in certain sectors, to function without any significant tangible
         or intangible assets, and therefore the maintenance of the identity of such an entity following the transaction affecting
         it cannot, logically, depend on the transfer of such assets (see Süzen, paragraph 18; Hernández Vidal and Others, paragraph 31; and UGT-FSP, paragraph 28).
      
The Court has accordingly held that inasmuch as, in certain labour-intensive sectors, a group of workers engaged in a joint
         activity on a permanent basis may constitute an economic entity, such an entity is capable of maintaining its identity after
         it has been transferred where the new employer does not merely pursue the activity in question but also takes over a major
         part, in terms of their numbers and skills, of the employees specially assigned by his predecessor to that task. In those
         circumstances, the new employer takes over a body of assets enabling him to carry on the activities or certain activities
         of the transferor undertaking on a regular basis (see Süzen, paragraph 21; Hernández Vidal and Others, paragraph 32; Joined Cases C‑173/and C‑247/Hidalgo and Others [1998] ECR I‑8237, paragraph 32; Case C‑51/Temco [2002] ECR I‑969, paragraph 33; and UGT-FSP, paragraph 29).
      
It is of no consequence, as is clear from paragraph of this judgment, whether the majority of employees are taken on following
         a legal transfer negotiated between the transferor and the transferee, or whether it is the result of a unilateral decision
         made by the former employer to terminate the employment contracts of the transferred employees, followed by a unilateral decision
         made by the new employer to take on the majority of the same employees to carry out the same work.
      
If, in circumstances where the majority of employees are taken on, it was a condition for the existence of a transfer within
         the meaning of Directive 2001/that the taking on of staff must be pursuant to a contract, the protection of workers, which
         is the aim of that directive, would be left to the discretion of employers, for whom it would be open, by not agreeing a contract,
         to avoid application of the Directive, which would be detrimental to the maintenance of transferred employees’ rights that
         is required by Article 3(1) of Directive 2001/23.
      
It is true that, according to the Court’s case-law, cleaning services, such as those at issue in the dispute in the main proceedings,
         can be regarded as an activity essentially based on manpower (see, to that effect, Hernández Vidal and Others, paragraph 27; Hidalgo and Others, paragraph 26; and Jouini and Others, paragraph 32) and, consequently, a group of employees who are permanently assigned to the common task of cleaning may, in
         the absence of other factors of production, amount to an economic entity (see, to that effect, Hernández Vidal and Others, paragraph 27). That entity’s identity must nonetheless be retained after the transfer in question.
      
According to the order for reference, the Ayuntamiento de Cobisa, in order to carry out itself the cleaning of its schools
         and premises previously undertaken by CLECE, employed new staff, and did not take on the employees who previously carried
         out that work for CLECE, nor, moreover, did it take over any tangible or intangible assets of that undertaking. In those circumstances,
         the only factor creating a link between the activities carried out by CLECE and the Ayuntamiento de Cobisa is the activity
         in question, namely the cleaning of premises.
      
However, the mere fact that the activity carried out by CLECE and that carried out by the Ayuntamiento de Cobisa are similar,
         even identical, does not lead to the conclusion that an economic entity has retained its identity. An entity cannot be reduced
         to the activity entrusted to it. Its identity emerges from several indissociable factors, such as its workforce, its management
         staff, the way in which its work is organised, its operating methods or indeed, where appropriate, the operational resources
         available to it (see, to that effect, Süzen, paragraph 15; Hernández Vidal and Others, paragraph 30; and Hidalgo and Others, paragraph 30). In particular, the identity of an economic entity, such as that forming the subject of the dispute in the
         main proceedings, which is essentially based on manpower, cannot be retained if the majority of its employees are not taken
         on by the alleged transferee.
      
It follows that, notwithstanding any national protection rules, the mere taking over by the Ayuntamiento de Cobisa, in the
         dispute in the main proceedings, of the cleaning work that was previously carried out by CLECE, cannot, of itself, indicate
         the existence of a transfer pursuant to Directive 2001/23.
      
Therefore, the answer to the question referred is that Article 1(1)(a) and (b) of Directive 2001/must be interpreted as
         meaning that that directive does not apply to a situation in which a municipal authority which has contracted out the cleaning
         of its premises to a private company decides to terminate its contract with that company and to undertake the cleaning of
         those premises itself, by hiring new staff for that purpose.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
Article 1(1)(a) and (b) of Council Directive 2001/23/EC of March on the approximation of the laws of the Member States
            relating to the safeguarding of employees’ rights in the event of transfers of undertakings, businesses or parts of undertakings
            or businesses must be interpreted as meaning that the directive does not apply to a situation in which a municipal authority
            which has contracted out the cleaning of its premises to a private company decides to terminate its contract with that company
            and to undertake the cleaning of those premises itself by hiring new staff for that purpose.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Spanish.
      
Top  
 