
Order of the Court (Fifth Chamber) of February — Internationaler Hilfsfond v Commission
(Case C‑208/P)
Appeal — Access to documents — Action for annulment of the Commission’s decisions refusing access to documents concerning a contract for the co-financing
         of a medical aid programme in Kazakhstan — Action inadmissible because brought out of time — Incorrect determination of the moment from which the time allowed for bringing the action began to run
      
1.                     Actions for annulment — Actionable measures — Definition — Measures producing binding legal effects — Preparatory measures —
            Not included — Position originally adopted in the procedure for access for the public to Commission documents — Preparatory
            act (Art. TFEU; European Parliament and Council Regulation No 1049/2001) (see paras 29-30)
2.                     Appeals — Grounds — Inadmissibility of the action before the General Court — Ground involving a question of public policy —
            Considered of the Court’s own motion (see para. 34)
3.                     Appeals — Pleas in law — Grounds of a judgment vitiated by an infringement of Union law — Operative part sound on other legal
            grounds — Rejection (see para. 35)
Re:
Appeal against the order of the General Court (Fourth Chamber) of March in Case T‑36/Internationaler Hilfsfonds
 v 
Commission
, by which that court dismissed as inadmissible in part the application for annulment of the Commission’s decisions of October
                  and December refusing Internationaler Hilfsfonds full access to the file concerning contract LIEN 97-for
                  the co-financing of a medical aid programme in Kazakhstan — Application inadmissible as being out of time — Incorrect determination
                  of the starting-point of the period allowed for bringing proceedings.
               
Operative part 
1.
	The appeal is dismissed.
2.
	Internationaler Hilfsfonds eV is ordered to pay the costs.
Top  
 