
Joined Cases C-468/to C-478/Sot. Lélos kai Sia EE and Others 
v
GlaxoSmithKline AEVE Farmakeftikon Proionton, formerly Glaxowellcome AEVE
(References for a preliminary ruling from the Efetio Athinon)
(Article EC – Abuse of dominant position – Pharmaceutical products – Refusal to supply wholesalers engaging in parallel exports – Ordinary orders)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Competition – Dominant position – Abuse – Refusal to supply wholesalers which export to other Member States – Conditions –
            Refusal liable to eliminate all effective competition 
(Art. EC)
2.        Competition – Dominant position – Abuse – Refusal to supply – Conditions
(Arts 3(1)(g) EC and EC)
3.        Competition – Dominant position – Abuse – Refusal to supply wholesalers which export to other Member States – Pharmaceuticals
            sector – Impact of the effects of parallel trade of medicinal products for the final consumer on the abusive nature of the
            refusal
(Art. EC)
4.        Competition – Community rules – Scope ratione materiae – Practices aimed at preventing or restricting parallel exports – Included
(Arts 3(1)(g) EC, EC and EC)
5.        Competition – Community rules – Scope ratione materiae – Pharmaceutical sector subject to national price regulation – Included
(Arts EC and EC)
6.        Competition – Dominant position – Abuse – Refusal to supply wholesalers which export to other Member States – Pharmaceutical
            sector – Effect of national regulation concerning prices of medicinal products on the abusive nature of the refusal 
(Arts 3(1)(g) and (t) EC and EC)
1.        The refusal by an undertaking occupying a dominant position on the market of a given product to meet the orders of an existing
         customer constitutes abuse of that dominant position under Article EC where, without any objective justification, that
         conduct is liable to eliminate a trading party as a competitor. With regard to a refusal by an undertaking to deliver its
         products in one Member State to wholesalers which export those products to other Member States, such an effect on competition
         may exist not only if the refusal impedes the activities of those wholesalers in that first Member State, but equally if it
         leads to the elimination of effective competition from them in the distribution of the products on the markets of the other
         Member States.
      
(see paras 34-35)
2.        An undertaking in a dominant position for the purpose of marketing a product – which cashes in on the reputation of a brand
         name known to and valued by consumers – cannot stop supplying a long-standing customer who abides by regular commercial practice,
         if the orders placed by that customer are in no way out of the ordinary. Such conduct is inconsistent with the objectives
         laid down in Article 3(1)(g) EC, which are set out in detail in Article EC, particularly in points (b) and (c) of the second
         paragraph of that article, since the refusal to sell would limit the markets to the prejudice of consumers and would amount
         to discrimination which might in the end eliminate a trading party from the relevant market.
      
(see para. 49)
3.        In order to determine whether the refusal by a pharmaceuticals company occupying a dominant position on the national distribution
         market for certain medicinal products to meet the orders of wholesalers involved in parallel exports to other Member States
         where the selling prices of those medicines are set at a higher level indeed falls within the prohibition laid down in Article
         EC, in particular at point (b) of the second paragraph of that article, it must be examined whether there are objective
         considerations based on which such a practice cannot be regarded as an abuse of the dominant position occupied by that undertaking.
      
In that connection, such an undertaking cannot rely on the fact that the parallel exports which it seeks to limit are of only
         minimal benefit to the final consumers. Parallel exports of medicinal products from a Member State where the prices are low
         to other Member States in which the prices are higher open up in principle an alternative source of supply to buyers of the
         medicinal products in those latter States, which necessarily brings some benefits to the final consumer of those products.
         The attraction of the other source of supply which arises from parallel trade in the importing Member State lies in the fact
         that that trade is capable of offering the same products on the market of that Member State at lower prices than those applied
         on the same market by the pharmaceuticals companies. As a result, even in the Member States where the prices of medicines
         are subject to State regulation, parallel trade is liable to exert pressure on prices and, consequently, to create financial
         benefits not only for the social health insurance funds, but equally for the patients concerned, for whom the proportion of
         the price of medicines for which they are responsible will be lower. At the same time, parallel trade in medicines from one
         Member State to another is likely to increase the choice available to entities in the latter Member State which obtain supplies
         of medicines by means of a public procurement procedure, in which the parallel importers can offer medicines at lower prices.
      
(see paras 38-39, 51, 53, 55-57)
4.        In relation to the application of Article EC, an agreement between producer and distributor which might tend to restore
         the national divisions in trade between Member States might be such as to frustrate the objective of the Treaty to achieve
         the integration of national markets through the establishment of a single market. Thus, agreements aimed at partitioning national
         markets according to national borders or making the interpenetration of national markets more difficult, in particular those
         aimed at preventing or restricting parallel exports, have been held by the Community judicature to be agreements whose object
         is to restrict competition within the meaning of that article of the Treaty. In the light of the abovementioned Treaty objective
         as well as that of ensuring that competition in the internal market is not distorted, there can be no escape from the prohibition
         laid down in Article EC for the practices of an undertaking in a dominant position which are aimed at avoiding all parallel
         exports from a Member State to other Member States, practices which, by partitioning the national markets, neutralise the
         benefits of effective competition in terms of the supply and the prices that those exports would obtain for final consumers
         in the other Member States. 
      
(see paras 65-66)
5.        The fact that there is a degree of State price regulation in the pharmaceuticals sector cannot preclude the Community rules
         on competition from applying. First, the control exercised by Member States over the selling prices or the reimbursement of
         those products does not entirely remove their prices from the law of supply and demand. Secondly, where a pharmaceutical product
         is protected by a patent which confers a temporary monopoly on its holder, the price competition which may exist between a
         producer and its distributors, or between parallel traders and national distributors, is, until the expiry of that patent,
         the only form of competition which can be envisaged.
      
(see paras 61, 64, 67)
6.        The intensity of the regulation regarding the price of medicines cannot prevent any refusal by a pharmaceuticals company in
         a dominant position to meet orders sent to it by wholesalers involved in parallel exports from constituting an abuse. Nevertheless
         such a company must be in a position to take steps that are reasonable and in proportion to the need to protect its own commercial
         interests. 
      
It cannot be ignored that, in Member States with a system of price regulation in the pharmaceuticals sector, such State intervention
         is one of the factors liable to create opportunities for parallel trade. Furthermore, in the light of the Treaty objectives
         to protect consumers by means of undistorted competition and the integration of national markets, the rules on competition
         are incapable of being interpreted in such a way that, in order to defend its own commercial interests, the only choice left
         for a pharmaceuticals company in a dominant position is not to place its medicines on the market at all in a Member State
         where the prices of those products are set at a relatively low level. 
      
In order to appraise whether the refusal by such a pharmaceuticals company to supply wholesalers involved in parallel exports
         constitutes a reasonable and proportionate measure in relation to the threat that those exports represent to its legitimate
         commercial interests, it must therefore be ascertained whether the orders of the wholesalers are out of the ordinary in the
         light of both the previous business relations between the company and the wholesalers concerned and the size of the orders
         in relation to the requirements of the market in the Member State concerned.
      
Although such a company, in a Member State where prices are relatively low, cannot be allowed to cease to honour the ordinary
         orders of an existing customer for the sole reason that that customer, in addition to supplying the market in that Member
         State, exports part of the quantities ordered to other Member States with higher prices, it is none the less permissible for
         that company to counter in a reasonable and proportionate way the threat to its own commercial interests potentially posed
         by the activities of an undertaking which wishes to be supplied in the first Member State with significant quantities of products
         that are essentially destined for parallel export.
      
Article EC must therefore be interpreted as meaning that an undertaking occupying a dominant position on the relevant market
         for medicinal products which, in order to put a stop to parallel exports carried out by certain wholesalers from one Member
         State to other Member States, refuses to meet ordinary orders from those wholesalers, is abusing its dominant position. It
         is for the national court to ascertain whether the orders are ordinary in the light of both the size of those orders in relation
         to the requirements of the market in the first Member State and the previous business relations between that undertaking and
         the wholesalers concerned.
      
(see paras 67-71, 73, 77, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Grand Chamber)
September (*)
      
(Article EC – Abuse of dominant position – Pharmaceutical products – Refusal to supply wholesalers engaging in parallel exports – Ordinary orders)
In Joined Cases C‑468/to C‑478/06,
REFERENCES for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Efetio Athinon (Greece), made by decisions of March (C‑468/to C‑474/06), March (C‑475/and C‑476/06) and April (C‑477/and C‑478/06), received at the Court
         on November 2006, in the proceedings
      
Sot. Lelos kai Sia EE (C‑468/06),
Farmakemporiki AE Emporias kai Dianomis Farmakeftikon Proionton (C‑469/06),
Konstantinos Xidias kai Sia OE (C-470/06),
Farmakemporiki AE Emporias kai Dianomis Farmakeftikon Proionton (C‑471/06),
Ionas Stroumsas EPE (C‑472/06),
Ionas Stroumsas EPE (C‑473/06),
Farmakapothiki Farma-Group Messinias AE (C‑474/06),
K.P. Marinopoulos AE Emporias kai Dianomis Farmakeftikon Proionton (C‑475/06),
K.P. Marinopoulos AE Emporias kai Dianomis Farmakeftikon Proionton (C‑476/06),
Kokkoris D. Tsanas K. EPE and Others (C-477/06),
Kokkoris D. Tsanas K. EPE and Others (C-478/06),
v
GlaxoSmithKline AEVE Farmakeftikon Proionton, formerly Glaxowellcome AEVE,
THE COURT (Grand Chamber),
composed of V. Skouris, President, P. Jann, C.W.A. Timmermans, A. Rosas, K. Lenaerts (Rapporteur) and A. Tizzano, Presidents
         of Chambers, R. Silva de Lapuerta, K. Schiemann, J. Makarczyk, P. Lindh, J.-C. Bonichot, T. von Danwitz and A. Arabadjiev,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,
Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on January 2008,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Sot. Lelos kai Sia EE (C-468/06), by S.E. Kiliakovou, dikigoros,
–        Farmakemporiki AE Emporias kai Dianomis Farmakeftikon Proionton (C‑469/and C-471/06), Konstantinos Xidias kai Sia OE (C-470/06),
         Ionas Stroumsas EPE (C-472/and C-473/06), Farmakapothiki Farma-Group Messinias AE (C-474/06) and K.P. Marinopoulos AE Emporias
         kai Dianomis Farmakeftikon Proionton (C-475/and C-476/06), by L. Roumanias and G. Papaïoannou, dikigoroi,
      
–        Kokkoris D. Tsanas K. EPE and Others (C-477/and C-478/06), by G. Mastorakos, dikigoros,
–        GlaxoSmithKline AEVE Farmakeftikon Proionton, by A. Komninos, D. Kyriakis, T. Kloukinas and S. Zervoudaki, dikigoroi, and
         by I. Forrester QC and A. Schulz, Rechtsanwalt,
      
–        the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by F. Arena, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Polish Government, by E. Ośniecka-Tamecka, P. Kucharski and T. Krawczyk, acting as Agents,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by T. Christoforou, F. Castillo de la Torre and E. Gippini Fournier, acting as
         Agents,
      
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on April 2008,
gives the following
Judgment
These references for a preliminary ruling concern the interpretation of Article EC. 
      
The references were made in proceedings brought by Sot. Lelos kai Sia EE, Farmakemporiki AE Emporias kai Dianomis Farmakeftikon
         Proionton, Konstantinos Xidias kai Sia OE, Ionas Stroumsas EPE, Farmakapothiki Farma-Group Messinias AE, K.P. Marinopoulos
         AE Emporias kai Dianomis Farmakeftikon Proionton, and Kokkoris D. Tsanas K. EPE and Others, pharmaceuticals wholesalers, (‘the
         appellants in the main proceedings’) against GlaxoSmithKline AEVE Farmakeftikon Proionton, formerly Glaxowellcome AEVE, (‘GSK
         AEVE’) in respect of the latter’s refusal to meet those wholesalers’ orders for certain medicinal products. 
      
 The legal framework
 Community legislation
Council Directive 89/105/EEC of December relating to the transparency of measures regulating the prices of medicinal
         products for human use and their inclusion in the scope of national health insurance systems (OJ L 40, p. 8) lays down
         certain requirements for Member States when applying national measures to control the prices of medicinal products for human
         use or to restrict the range of medicinal products covered by their national health insurance systems. 
      
The second to fourth recitals to that directive read as follows: 
      
‘Whereas Member States have adopted measures of an economic nature on the marketing of medicinal products in order to control
         public health expenditure on such products; whereas such measures include direct and indirect controls on the prices of medicinal
         products as a consequence of the inadequacy or absence of competition in the medicinal products market and limitations on
         the range of products covered by national health insurance systems;
      
Whereas the primary objective of such measures is the promotion of public health by ensuring the availability of adequate
         supplies of medicinal products at a reasonable cost; whereas, however, such measures should also be intended to promote efficiency
         in the production of medicinal products and to encourage research and development into new medicinal products, on which the
         maintenance of a high level of public health within the Community ultimately depends;
      
Whereas disparities in such measures may hinder or distort intra-Community trade in medicinal products and thereby directly
         affect the functioning of the common market in medicinal products[.]’
      
Article of Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of November on the Community code
         relating to medicinal products for human use (OJ L 311, p. 67), as amended by Directive 2004/27/EC of the European Parliament
         and of the Council of March (OJ L 136, p. 34), (‘Directive 2001/83’) provides:
      
‘With regard to the supply of medicinal products to pharmacists and persons authorised or entitled to supply medicinal products
         to the public, Member States shall not impose upon the holder of a distribution authorisation which has been granted by another
         Member State any obligation, in particular public service obligations, more stringent than those they impose on persons whom
         they have themselves authorised to engage in equivalent activities. 
      
The holder of a marketing authorisation for a medicinal product and the distributors of the said medicinal product actually
         placed on the market in a Member State shall, within the limits of their responsibilities, ensure appropriate and continued
         supplies of that medicinal product to pharmacies and persons authorised to supply medicinal products so that the needs of
         patients in the Member State in question are covered. 
      
The arrangements for implementing this Article should, moreover, be justified on grounds of public health protection and be
         proportionate in relation to the objective of such protection, in compliance with the Treaty rules, particularly those concerning
         the free movement of goods and competition.’ 
      
 National legislation
Article of Greek Law 703/on the control of monopolies and oligopolies and the protection of free competition (FEK A’
         278) essentially corresponds to the provisions of Article EC. 
      
Under Article of Greek Law 1316/1983, holders of an authorisation to market pharmaceutical products are required to supply
         the market regularly with the goods which they manufacture or import. 
      
Furthermore, Greek legislation requires persons carrying out the business of pharmaceuticals wholesaler to obtain a specific
         licence and to supply the needs of a defined geographical area with a range of pharmaceutical products. 
      
 The main proceedings and the reference for a preliminary ruling
GSK AEVE is the Greek subsidiary of GlaxoSmithKline plc, a pharmaceuticals research and manufacturing company established
         in the United Kingdom (‘GSK plc’). GSK AEVE imports, warehouses and distributes pharmaceutical products of the GSK group (‘GSK’)
         in Greece. As such, it holds the marketing authorisation in Greece inter alia for the medicinal products Imigran, Lamictal
         and Serevent for the treatment, respectively, of migraines, epilepsy and asthma (‘the medicinal products in dispute’), which
         are available in Greece only on prescription. 
      
Each of the appellants in the main proceedings had for a number of years bought those medicinal products in all their forms
         from GSK AEVE, in order to distribute them both on the Greek market and in other Member States. 
      
Towards the end of October 2000, GSK AEVE altered its system of distribution on the Greek market, citing a shortage, for which
         it denied responsibility, of those medicines. From November it stopped meeting the orders of the appellants in the
         main proceedings for the medicinal products in dispute and began itself to distribute those products to Greek hospitals and
         pharmacies through the company Farmacenter AE (‘Farmacenter’).
      
In December GSK AEVE applied to the Epitropi Antagonismou (Competition Commission) for negative clearance in the form
         of a declaration that its new policy of selling the medicines directly to Greek hospitals and pharmacies did not infringe
         Article of Law 703/1977. 
      
In February 2001, taking the view that the supply of medicines on the Greek market had to some extent normalised and that
         stocks at hospitals and pharmacies had been reconstituted, GSK AEVE started once more to supply the appellants in the main
         proceedings and other wholesalers with limited quantities of the medicinal products in dispute and shortly afterwards brought
         its cooperation with Farmacenter to an end. 
      
GSK AEVE then withdrew its application for negative clearance but in the course of February filed a new application for
         negative clearance in respect of its sales policy, which in turn was replaced in December by another such application.
         Following discussions with the Epitropi Antagonismou, GSK AEVE agreed to deliver quantities of medicines equivalent to national
         consumption plus 18%. 
      
Meanwhile, the appellants in the main proceedings and other pharmaceuticals wholesalers, as well as some Greek associations
         of pharmacists and wholesalers, applied to the Epitropi Antagonismou for a declaration that the sales policy of GSK AEVE and
         GSK plc in respect of the medicinal products in dispute constituted an abuse of a dominant position under Article of Law
         703/and Article EC.
      
On August 2001, a decision of the Epitropi Antagonismou ordering interim measures required GSK AEVE to meet the orders of
         the appellants in the main proceedings for the medicinal products in dispute pending adoption of a final decision in the case.
         GSK AEVE lodged applications with the Diikitiko Efetio Athinon (Administrative Appeal Court, Athens) for a stay of execution
         and an annulment of that decision, which that court rejected. 
      
Having been informed by GSK AEVE of the difficulties it faced in supplying the wholesalers with the quantities requested,
         the Ethnikos Organismos Farmakon (National Organisation for Medicines) published a circular on November which obliged
         pharmaceuticals companies and all distributors of medicines to deliver quantities equivalent to those required for prescription
         medicines plus 25%. 
      
Between April and November 2002, each of the appellants in the main proceedings brought an action before the Polimeles
         Protodikio Athinon (Court of First Instance, Athens), claiming that the conduct of GSK AEVE in interrupting supplies of medicinal
         products which had been ordered and distributing them through Farmacenter constituted unfair and anticompetitive acts and
         an abuse of the dominant position occupied by GSK AEVE on the markets for the medicinal products in dispute. In their applications,
         those appellants asked for GSK AEVE to be ordered, first, to supply them with quantities of medicines corresponding to the
         monthly average of those it had delivered to them in the period from January to October and, second, to pay them damages and compensate them for loss of profits. Some of the applications
         contained a more specific request for GSK AEVE to be ordered to continue supplies by providing quantities corresponding to
         the monthly average of medicines that it had delivered to them during the same period plus a certain percentage.  
      
In view of both the complaints mentioned in paragraph of this judgment and the request for negative clearance that were
         pending before it, the Epitropi Antagonismou by decision of January asked the Court a series of questions relating
         to the interpretation of Article EC in a reference for a preliminary ruling, which was registered at the Court Registry
         under the number C‑53/03.
      
Between January and October 2003, the Polimeles Protodikio Athinon gave judgment on the actions commenced by the appellants
         in the main proceedings against GSK AEVE. Although it ruled that the actions were admissible, with the exception of the claims
         for compensation for loss of profits, that court dismissed them as unfounded, on the ground that the refusal on the part of
         GSK AEVE to supply was not unjustified and could thus not constitute abuse of that company’s dominant position. 
      
The appellants in the main proceedings appealed against those judgments before the Efetio Athinon (Court of Appeal, Athens).
         GSK AEVE cross-appealed in some of the cases. That court however suspended its examination of some of the cases before it
         pending the Court’s decision in respect of the reference for a preliminary ruling made by the Epitropi Antagonismou.
      
By its judgment of May in Case C‑53/Syfait and Others [2005] ECR I‑4609, the Court ruled that it had no jurisdiction to answer the questions referred by the Epitropi Antagonismou,
         since the latter was not a court or tribunal within the meaning of Article EC. 
      
Considering that, in order to deliver its judgments, it is necessary to have answers to the same questions which the Epitropi
         Antagonismou  had referred to the Court, the Efetio Athinon has decided to stay the appeal proceedings and to refer the following
         questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.       Where the refusal of an undertaking holding a dominant position to meet fully the orders sent to it by pharmaceuticals wholesalers
         is due to its intention to limit their export activity and, thereby, the harm caused to it by parallel trade, does the refusal
         constitute per se an abuse within the meaning of Article EC? Is the answer to that question affected by the fact that the
         parallel trade is particularly profitable for the wholesalers because of the different prices, resulting from State intervention,
         in the Member States of the European Union, that is to say by the fact that pure conditions of competition do not prevail
         in the pharmaceuticals market, but a regime which is governed to a large extent by State intervention? Is it ultimately the
         duty of a national competition authority to apply Community competition rules in the same way to markets which function competitively
         and those in which competition is distorted by State intervention?
      
2.       If the Court holds that limitation of parallel trade, for the reasons set out above, does not constitute an abusive practice
         in every case where it is engaged in by an undertaking holding a dominant position, how is possible abuse to be assessed?
         
      
In particular:
(a)       Do the percentage by which normal domestic consumption is exceeded and/or the loss suffered by an undertaking holding a dominant
         position compared with its total turnover and total profits constitute appropriate criteria? If so, how are the level of that
         percentage and the level of that loss determined (the latter as a percentage of turnover and total profits), above which the
         conduct in question may be abusive?
      
(b)       Is an approach entailing the balancing of interests appropriate, and, if so, what are the interests to be compared?
In particular: 
(i)       is the answer affected by the fact that the ultimate consumer/patient derives limited financial advantage from the parallel
         trade and 
      
(ii)  is account to be taken, and to what extent, of the interests of social insurance bodies in cheaper medicinal products?
(c)       What other criteria and approaches are considered appropriate in the present case?’
By Decision 318/V/of September 2006, the Epitropi Antagonismou ruled on the complaints lodged with it against GSK.
         In the decision it found that GSK did not occupy a dominant position on the markets for Imigran and Serevent in view of their
         interchangeability with other medicinal products, but that a dominant position existed with respect to Lamictal, on account
         of the fact that epilepsy sufferers may find it difficult to adjust to other medicines which treat that condition. 
      
In the same decision, the Epitropi Antagonismou found that GSK had infringed Article of Law 703/during the period from
         November to February 2001, but that there had been no infringement of that article in the period after February and no infringement of Article EC during either of those periods. 
      
The appellants in the main proceedings have applied to the Diikitiko Efetio Athinon for an annulment of that decision.
      
By order of the President of the Court of January 2007, Cases C‑468/to C‑478/were joined for the purposes of the
         written and oral procedures and the judgment.
      
 The questions referred for a preliminary ruling
By its questions, which it is appropriate to examine together, the referring court essentially asks whether there is an abuse
         of a dominant position contrary to Article EC if a pharmaceuticals company occupying such a position on the national market
         for certain medicinal products refuses to meet orders sent to it by wholesalers on account of the fact that those wholesalers
         are involved in parallel exports of those products to other Member States. 
      
In that context, the referring court asks the Court about the relevance of a series of factors, such as the degree of regulation
         to which the pharmaceuticals sector is subject in Member States, the impact of parallel trade on the pharmaceuticals companies’
         revenues, and the question whether that parallel trade is capable of generating financial benefits for the ultimate consumers
         of the medicinal products. 
      
In its observations lodged before the Court, GSK AEVE contends that its refusal to supply the requested quantities of medicinal
         products to the appellants in the main proceedings does not constitute an abuse. First, it was not a case of an actual refusal
         inasmuch as, apart from a period of a few weeks between November and February 2001, GSK AEVE was always prepared to supply
         the wholesalers with sufficient quantities. Second, it did not put the wholesalers at risk of being eliminated from the market,
         since its supplies enabled them to cover all the requirements of the Greek market, and even requirements that went beyond
         those of that market. 
      
According to GSK AEVE, the decisive factors for the question whether the conduct of a company that refuses to supply certain
         goods is abusive depend on the economic and regulatory context of the situation in question. Thus, in the case of a supply
         restriction in medicinal products in order to limit parallel trade, it is necessary to take into account the omnipresent regulation
         of prices and distribution in the pharmaceuticals sector, the negative consequences of an unlimited parallel trade upon the
         investments of pharmaceuticals companies in the field of research and development, and the minimal benefit of that trade for
         the final consumers of those products.  
      
By contrast, the appellants in the main proceedings, as well as the Italian and Polish Governments and the Commission of the
         European Communities, maintain in their observations that the refusal by an undertaking in a dominant position to supply medicinal
         products to wholesalers with the aim of restricting parallel trade constitutes in principle an abuse of a dominant position
         within the meaning of Article EC. According to them, none of the factors raised by the referring court and which were taken
         up by GSK AEVE to justify its refusal to supply is capable of altering  the abusive nature of that practice. 
      
 The existence of a refusal to supply liable to eliminate competition
Article EC prohibits any abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position within the common market or in a substantial
         part of it as incompatible with the common market in so far as it may affect trade between Member States. According to point
         (b) of the second paragraph of that article, such abuse may, in particular, consist in limiting production, markets or technical
         development to the prejudice of consumers.
      
The established case-law of the Court shows that the refusal by an undertaking occupying a dominant position on the market
         of a given product to meet the orders of an existing customer constitutes abuse of that dominant position under Article EC where, without any objective justification, that conduct is liable to eliminate a trading party as a competitor (see, to
         that effect, Joined Cases 6/and 7/Istituto Chemioterapico Italiano and Commercial Solvents v Commission [1974] ECR 223, paragraph 25, and Case 27/United Brands and United Brands Continentaal v Commission [1978] ECR 207, paragraph 183).
      
With regard to a refusal by an undertaking to deliver its products in one Member State to wholesalers which export those products
         to other Member States, such an effect on competition may exist not only if the refusal impedes the activities of those wholesalers
         in that first Member State, but equally if it leads to the elimination of effective competition from them in the distribution
         of the products on the markets of the other Member States. 
      
In this case it is common ground between the parties in the main proceedings that, by refusing to meet the Greek wholesalers’
         orders, GSK AEVE aims to limit parallel exports by those wholesalers to the markets of other Member States in which the selling
         prices of the medicinal products in dispute are higher. 
      
In respect of sectors other than that of pharmaceutical products, the Court has held that a practice by which an undertaking
         in a dominant position aims to restrict parallel trade in the products that it puts on the market constitutes abuse of that
         dominant position, particularly when such a practice has the effect of curbing parallel imports by neutralising the more favourable
         level of prices which may apply in other sales areas in the Community (see, to that effect, Case 26/General Motors Continental v Commission [1975] ECR 1367, paragraph 12) or when it aims to create barriers to re-importations which come into competition with the
         distribution network of that undertaking (Case 226/British Leyland v Commission [1986] ECR 3263, paragraph 24). Indeed, parallel imports enjoy a certain amount of protection in Community law because they
         encourage trade and help reinforce competition (Case C‑373/X [1992] ECR I‑131, paragraph 12).
      
In its written observations, GSK AEVE contends that the factors mentioned by the referring court in its questions constitute
         objective considerations, on the basis of which it cannot be regarded as an abuse for a pharmaceuticals company to limit supplies
         of medicines to the needs of a given national market when confronted with orders from wholesalers involved in parallel exports
         to other Member States where the selling prices of those medicines are set at a higher level. 
      
In order to determine whether the refusal by a pharmaceuticals company to supply medicinal products to such wholesalers indeed
         falls within the prohibition laid down in Article EC, in particular at point (b) of the second paragraph of that article,
         it must be examined whether, as GSK AEVE maintains, there are objective considerations based on which such a practice cannot
         be regarded as an abuse of the dominant position occupied by that undertaking (see, to that effect, United Brands and United Brands Continentaal v Commission, paragraph 184, and Case C‑95/P British Airways v Commission [2007] ECR I‑2331, paragraph 69). 
      
 The abusive nature of the refusal to supply
As a preliminary point, GSK AEVE observes, citing United Brands Continentaal v Commission, that a dominant undertaking is not under an obligation to honour orders that are out of the ordinary and that it may take
         reasonable steps in order to protect its legitimate commercial interests. 
      
With regard more specifically to the pharmaceuticals sector, GSK AEVE argues, first, that the general logic behind protecting
         competition within a brand does not function in that sector, where the intervention of the public authorities of Member States
         prevents the manufacturers of medicines from developing their activities in normal competitive conditions.  
      
On the one hand, the pharmaceuticals companies do not control the prices of their products, those prices being fixed at various
         levels by the public authorities, which are, at the same time, the buyers of the medicines wherever there are national health
         systems. Even where those prices are the result of negotiations between the authorities and the pharmaceuticals companies,
         the fact that those companies accept them does not in itself imply that the prices cover all the fixed costs connected with
         the development of the pharmaceutical products. Moreover, even if such a system of agreed prices exists, Member States are
         still in a position to impose cuts in those prices. 
      
On the other hand, the producers of medicines are subject to precise obligations with regard to their distribution. While
         pharmaceuticals companies are required by law to deliver their products in all Member States where they are authorised to
         do so, parallel exporters are free to shift their activities from one product or market to the next if the latter product
         or market offers a higher profit margin, which can lead to shortages in some exporting Member States. Thus parallel trade
         has negative consequences for the planning of production and distribution of medicines. 
      
Second, GSK AEVE points out that parallel trade in medicines reduces the profits that pharmaceuticals companies can invest
         in research and development activities on which they depend in order to remain competitive and attractive to investors. By
         contrast, distributors which profit from parallel trade make no contribution to pharmaceutical innovation. Furthermore, in
         the Member States where the prices of medicines are fixed at relatively low levels, the marketing of new medicines might be
         affected if it became impossible for pharmaceuticals companies to hold back supplies with the aim of limiting parallel trade.
         In such circumstances, those companies would have an interest in delaying the launch of new products in Member States where
         the prices are low. 
      
Third, GSK AEVE contends that parallel trade provides no genuine benefit to the ultimate consumers. Since the greater part
         of the price difference which makes the business profitable is taken up by intermediaries, parallel trade does not result
         in genuine pressure on the prices of medicines in the Member States where those prices are higher. Equally, in the case of
         Member States where certain medicinal requirements are covered by public tender, parallel importers are not in a position
         to reduce price levels in view of their sporadic presence on the market. 
      
While recognising that the prohibition in Article EC does not apply when the conduct of an undertaking in a dominant position
         is objectively justified, the Polish Government and the Commission point out that it is for that undertaking to establish
         that there are circumstances that are capable of justifying its practice. 
      
The appellants in the main proceedings, as well as the Polish Government and the Commission, consider that Article EC cannot
         be applied differently in the pharmaceuticals sector simply because the prices in that sector are directly or indirectly fixed
         by the public authorities. Even in the Member States where prices are low, the price of a medicinal product is the result
         of negotiations with the pharmaceuticals companies, which will not put their products on the market if the prices proposed
         are not acceptable to them. Furthermore, there is no causal link between the repercussions of parallel trade on the revenues
         of pharmaceuticals companies and those companies’ investments in research and development. Finally, parallel trade in medicinal
         products brings clear advantages to patients and is likely to enable national social security systems to make savings. 
      
The appellants in the main proceedings add that taking into account the justifications advanced by GSK AEVE would run counter
         to the Court’s case-law relating to the free movement of goods, which accepts only the justifications listed in Article EC. 
      
It should be recalled that in paragraph of its judgment in United Brands and United Brands Continentaal v Commission the Court held that an undertaking in a dominant position for the purpose of marketing a product – which cashes in on the
         reputation of a brand name known to and valued by consumers – cannot stop supplying a long-standing customer who abides by
         regular commercial practice, if the orders placed by that customer are in no way out of the ordinary. In paragraph of
         the same judgment, the Court held that such conduct is inconsistent with the objectives laid down in Article 3(f) of the EEC
         Treaty (Article 3(g) of the EC Treaty, and now Article 3(1)(g) EC), which are set out in detail in Article of the EEC Treaty
         (Article of the EC Treaty, and now Article EC), particularly in points (b) and (c) of the second paragraph of that article,
         since the refusal to sell would limit the markets to the prejudice of consumers and would amount to discrimination which might
         in the end eliminate a trading party from the relevant market.
      
In paragraph of the judgment in United Brands and United Brands Continentaal v Commission, the Court stated that, although the fact that an undertaking is in a dominant position cannot deprive it of its right to
         protect its own commercial interests if they are attacked, and that such an undertaking must be conceded the right to take
         such reasonable steps as it deems appropriate to protect those interests, such behaviour cannot be accepted if its purpose
         is specifically to strengthen that dominant position and abuse it.  
      
It must be examined in this context whether, as GSK AEVE claims, particular circumstances are present in the pharmaceuticals
         sector, by reason of which the refusal by an undertaking in a dominant position to supply clients in a given Member State
         who engage in parallel exports to other Member States where prices for medicines are higher does not, generally speaking,
         constitute an abuse. 
      
 The consequences of parallel trade for the ultimate consumers
The first thing to consider is GSK AEVE’s argument that parallel trade in any event brings only few financial benefits to
         the ultimate consumers. 
      
In that connection, it should be noted that parallel exports of medicinal products from a Member State where the prices are
         low to other Member States in which the prices are higher open up in principle an alternative source of supply to buyers of
         the medicinal products in those latter States, which necessarily brings some benefits to the final consumer of those products.
         
      
It is true, as GSK AEVE has pointed out, that, for medicines subject to parallel exports, the existence of price differences
         between the exporting and the importing Member States does not necessarily imply that the final consumer in the importing
         Member State will benefit from a price corresponding to the one prevailing in the exporting Member State, inasmuch as the
         wholesalers carrying out the exports will themselves make a profit from that parallel trade. 
      
Nevertheless, the attraction of the other source of supply which arises from parallel trade in the importing Member State
         lies precisely in the fact that that trade is capable of offering the same products on the market of that Member State at
         lower prices than those applied on the same market by the pharmaceuticals companies.  
      
As a result, even in the Member States where the prices of medicines are subject to State regulation, parallel trade is liable
         to exert pressure on prices and, consequently, to create financial benefits not only for the social health insurance funds,
         but equally for the patients concerned, for whom the proportion of the price of medicines for which they are responsible will
         be lower. At the same time, as the Commission notes, parallel trade in medicines from one Member State to another is likely
         to increase the choice available to entities in the latter Member State which obtain supplies of medicines by means of a public
         procurement procedure, in which the parallel importers can offer medicines at lower prices. 
      
Accordingly, without it being necessary for the Court to rule on the question whether it is for an undertaking in a dominant
         position to assess whether its conduct vis-à-vis a trading party constitutes abuse in the light of the degree to which that
         party’s activities offer advantages to the final consumers, it is clear that, in the circumstances of the main proceedings,
         such an undertaking cannot base its arguments on the premiss that the parallel exports which it seeks to limit are of only
         minimal benefit to the final consumers. 
      
 The impact of State price and supply regulation in the pharmaceuticals sector
Turning, next, to the argument based on the degree of regulation of the pharmaceuticals markets in the Community, it must
         first be examined whether State regulation of the prices of medicinal products has an impact on the assessment of whether
         a refusal to supply those products constitutes abuse. 
      
It is clear that, in the majority of Member States, medicines, in particular those available only on prescription, are subject
         to regulation aimed at setting, at the request of the manufacturers concerned and on the basis of information provided by
         them, selling prices for those medicines and/or the scales of reimbursement of the cost of prescription medicines by the relevant
         social health insurance systems. The price differences between Member States for certain medicines are thus the result of
         the different levels at which the prices and/or the scales to be applied to those medicines are fixed.  
      
The main proceedings relate to a non-harmonised area in which the Community legislature has limited itself, in adopting Directive
         89/105, to placing Member States under a duty to guarantee that decisions in respect of the regulation of prices and reimbursement
         are taken with complete transparency, without discrimination and within certain specific time-limits. 
      
In that respect, it should be noted, on one hand, that the control exercised by Member States over the selling prices or the
         reimbursement of medicinal products does not entirely remove the prices of those products from the law of supply and demand.
         
      
Thus, in some Member States, the public authorities do not intervene in the process of setting prices or limit themselves
         to setting the scale of reimbursement of the cost of prescription medicines by the national health insurance systems, thereby
         leaving to the pharmaceuticals companies the task of deciding their selling prices. Furthermore, even though the public authorities
         in other Member States set the selling prices of medicines as well, that does not in itself mean that the manufacturers of
         the medicines concerned have no influence upon the level at which the selling prices are set or the proportion of those prices
         which is reimbursed. 
      
As the Commission has pointed out, even in the Member States where the selling prices or the amounts of reimbursement of medicines
         are set by the public authorities, the producers of the medicines concerned take part in the negotiations which are initiated
         by those producers and take their price proposals as a starting point and end with the setting of the prices and the amounts
         of reimbursement to be applied. As the second and third recitals to Directive 89/state, the task of the authorities when
         setting prices of medicines is not only to control expenditure connected with public health systems and to ensure the availability
         of adequate supplies of medicinal products at a reasonable cost, but also to promote efficiency in the production of medicinal
         products and to encourage research and development into new medicinal products. As the Advocate General indicated in points
         to of his Opinion, the level at which the selling price or the amount of reimbursement of a given medicinal product
         is fixed reflects the relative strength of both the public authorities of the relevant Member State and the pharmaceuticals
         companies at the time of the price negotiations for that product.
      
On the other hand, it should be recalled that, where a medicine is protected by a patent which confers a temporary monopoly
         on its holder, the price competition which may exist between a producer and its distributors, or between parallel traders
         and national distributors, is, until the expiry of that patent, the only form of competition which can be envisaged. 
      
In relation to the application of Article of the EEC Treaty (Article of the EC Treaty, now Article EC), the Court
         has held that an agreement between producer and distributor which might tend to restore the national divisions in trade between
         Member States might be such as to frustrate the objective of the Treaty to achieve the integration of national markets through
         the establishment of a single market. Thus on a number of occasions the Court has held agreements aimed at partitioning national
         markets according to national borders or making the interpenetration of national markets more difficult, in particular those
         aimed at preventing or restricting parallel exports, to be agreements whose object is to restrict competition within the meaning
         of that Treaty article (see, for example, Joined Cases 96/to 102/82, 104/82, 105/82, 108/and 110/IAZ International Belgium and Others v Commission [1983] ECR 3369, paragraphs to 27; Case C‑306/Javico [1998] ECR I‑1983, paragraphs and 14; and Case C‑551/P General Motors v Commission [2006] ECR I‑3173, paragraphs to 69). 
      
In the light of the abovementioned Treaty objective as well as that of ensuring that competition in the internal market is
         not distorted, there can be no escape from the prohibition laid down in Article EC for the practices of an undertaking
         in a dominant position which are aimed at avoiding all parallel exports from a Member State to other Member States, practices
         which, by partitioning the national markets, neutralise the benefits of effective competition in terms of the supply and the
         prices that those exports would obtain for final consumers in the other Member States. 
      
Although the degree of price regulation in the pharmaceuticals sector cannot therefore preclude the Community rules on competition
         from applying, the fact none the less remains that, when assessing, in the case of Member States with a system of price regulation,
         whether the refusal of a pharmaceuticals company to supply medicines to wholesalers involved in parallel exports constitutes
         abuse, it cannot be ignored that such State intervention is one of the factors liable to create opportunities for parallel
         trade. 
      
Furthermore, in the light of the Treaty objectives to protect consumers by means of undistorted competition and the integration
         of national markets, the Community rules on competition are also incapable of being interpreted in such a way that, in order
         to defend its own commercial interests, the only choice left for a pharmaceuticals company in a dominant position is not to
         place its medicines on the market at all in a Member State where the prices of those products are set at a relatively low
         level. 
      
It follows that, even if the degree of regulation regarding the price of medicines cannot prevent any refusal by a pharmaceuticals
         company in a dominant position to meet orders sent to it by wholesalers involved in parallel exports from constituting an
         abuse, such a company must nevertheless be in a position to take steps that are reasonable and in proportion to the need to
         protect its own commercial interests.  
      
In that respect, and without it being necessary to examine the argument raised by GSK AEVE that it is necessary for pharmaceuticals
         companies to limit parallel exports in order to avoid the risk of a reduction in their investments in the research and development
         of medicines, it is sufficient to state that, in order to appraise whether the refusal by a pharmaceuticals company to supply
         wholesalers involved in parallel exports constitutes a reasonable and proportionate measure in relation to the threat that
         those exports represent to its legitimate commercial interests, it must be ascertained whether the orders of the wholesalers
         are out of the ordinary (see, to that effect, United Brands and United Brands Continentaal v Commission, paragraph 182). 
      
Thus, although a pharmaceuticals company in a dominant position, in a Member State where prices are relatively low, cannot
         be allowed to cease to honour the ordinary orders of an existing customer for the sole reason that that customer, in addition
         to supplying the market in that Member State, exports part of the quantities ordered to other Member States with higher prices,
         it is none the less permissible for that company to counter in a reasonable and proportionate way the threat to its own commercial
         interests potentially posed by the activities of an undertaking which wishes to be supplied in the first Member State with
         significant quantities of products that are essentially destined for parallel export. 
      
In the present cases, the orders for reference show that, in the disputes which gave rise to those orders, the appellants
         in the main proceedings have demanded not that GSK AEVE should fulfil the orders sent to it in their entirety, but that it
         should deliver them quantities of medicines corresponding to the monthly average sold during the first months of 2000.
         In of the actions in the main proceedings, the appellants asked for those quantities to be increased by a certain percentage,
         which was fixed by some of them at 20%. 
      
In those circumstances, it is for the referring court to ascertain whether the abovementioned orders are ordinary in the light
         of both the previous business relations between the pharmaceuticals company holding a dominant position and the wholesalers
         concerned and the size of the orders in relation to the requirements of the market in the Member State concerned (see, to
         that effect, United Brands and United Brands Continentaal v Commission, paragraph 182, and Case 77/Benzine en Petroleum Handelsmaatschappij and Others v Commission [1978] ECR 1513, paragraphs to 32). 
      
Those considerations equally deal with the argument raised by GSK AEVE, namely the impact of State regulation on the supply
         of medicinal products, and more particularly the argument that undertakings that engage in parallel exports are not subject
         to the same obligations regarding distribution and warehousing as the pharmaceuticals companies and are therefore liable to
         disrupt the planning of production and distribution of medicines.  
      
It is true that in Greece, as is apparent from paragraph of this judgment, national legislation places pharmaceuticals wholesalers
         under an obligation to supply the needs of a defined geographical area with a range of pharmaceutical products. It is equally
         true that, in cases where parallel trade would effectively lead to a shortage of medicines on a given national market, it
         would not be for the undertakings holding a dominant position but for the national authorities to resolve the situation, by
         taking appropriate and proportionate steps that were consistent with national legislation as well as with the obligations
         flowing from Article of Directive 2001/83. 
      
However, a producer of pharmaceutical products must be in a position to protect its own commercial interests if it is confronted
         with orders that are out of the ordinary in terms of quantity. Such could be the case, in a given Member State, if certain
         wholesalers order from that producer medicines in quantities which are out of all proportion to those previously sold by the
         same wholesalers to meet the needs of the market in that Member State. 
      
In view of the foregoing, the answer to the questions referred should be that Article EC must be interpreted as meaning
         that an undertaking occupying a dominant position on the relevant market for medicinal products which, in order to put a stop
         to parallel exports carried out by certain wholesalers from one Member State to other Member States, refuses to meet ordinary
         orders from those wholesalers is abusing its dominant position. It is for the national court to ascertain whether the orders
         are ordinary in the light of both the size of those orders in relation to the requirements of the market in the first Member
         State and the previous business relations between that undertaking and the wholesalers concerned.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Grand Chamber) hereby rules:
Article EC must be interpreted as meaning that an undertaking occupying a dominant position on the relevant market for
            medicinal products which, in order to put a stop to parallel exports carried out by certain wholesalers from one Member State
            to other Member States, refuses to meet ordinary orders from those wholesalers, is abusing its dominant position. It is for
            the national court to ascertain whether the orders are ordinary in the light of both the size of those orders in relation
            to the requirements of the market in the first Member State and the previous business relations between that undertaking and
            the wholesalers concerned.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Greek.
      
Top  
 