
Case C-45/Commission of the European Communities
v
Hellenic Republic
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Articles EC, EC and 80(2) EC – Maritime safety – Monitoring of ships and port facilities – International agreements – Division of powers between the Community and the Member States)
Summary of the Judgment 
1.        Member States – Obligations – Obligation to cooperate in good faith with the Community institutions – Ship and port facility
            security
(Arts EC, EC and 80(2) EC; European Parliament and Council Regulation No 725/2004)
2.        European Communities – Institutions – Obligations – Obligation to cooperate in good faith – Reciprocity
(Arts EC, EC and 80(2) EC)
3.        International agreements – Community not a member of an international organisation – Area falling within the external competence
            of the Community
4.        International agreements – Agreements concluded by the Member States – Agreements predating the EC Treaty – Article EC
            – Scope 
(Art. 307(1) EC)
1.        To the extent to which Community rules are promulgated for the attainment of the objectives of the Treaty, the Member States
         cannot, outside the framework of the Community institutions, assume obligations which might affect those rules or alter their
         scope. The provisions of Regulation No 725/on enhancing ship and port facility security, which has as its legal basis
         Article 80(2) EC, the second subparagraph of which refers to Article EC, are Community rules promulgated for the attainment
         of the objectives of the Treaty.
      
In asking the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) Maritime Safety Committee to examine the creation of check lists or
         other appropriate tools for assisting the Contracting States of the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea
         in monitoring whether ships and port facilities comply with the requirements of Chapter XI-of the Annex to that convention
         and the International Ship and Port Facility Security Code, a Member State submits to that committee a proposal which initiates
         a procedure which could lead to the adoption by the IMO of new rules. The adoption of such new rules would as a consequence
         have an effect on the regulation, the Community legislature having decided to incorporate in substance both of those international
         instruments into Community law.
      
In those circumstances, the Member State which sets in motion such a procedure takes an initiative likely to affect the provisions
         of the regulation, which is an infringement of the obligations under Articles EC, EC and 80(2) EC. 
      
(see paras 17-18, 21-23)
2.        Any breach by the Commission of Article EC cannot entitle a Member State to take initiatives likely to affect Community
         rules promulgated for the attainment of the objectives of the Treaty, in breach of that State’s obligations, which arise under
         Articles EC, EC and 80(2) EC. Indeed, a Member State may not unilaterally adopt, on its own authority, corrective or
         protective measures designed to obviate any breach by an institution of rules of Community law. 
      
(see para. 26)
3.        The mere fact that the Community is not a member of an international organisation in no way authorises a Member State, acting
         individually in the context of its participation in an international organisation, to assume obligations likely to affect
         Community rules promulgated for the attainment of the objectives of the Treaty.
      
The fact that the Community is not a member of an international organisation does not prevent its external competence from
         being in fact exercised, in particular through the Member States acting jointly in the Community’s interest.
      
(see paras 30-31)
4.        Article 307(1) EC is designed to apply only if there is an incompatibility between, on the one hand, an obligation arising
         under an international convention and, on the other, an obligation arising under Community law.
      
(see para. 35)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
February (*)
      
(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Articles EC, EC and 80(2) EC – Maritime safety – Monitoring of ships and port facilities – International agreements – Division of powers between the Community and the Member States)
In Case C‑45/07,
ACTION under Article EC for failure to fulfil obligations, brought on February 2007,
Commission of the European Communities, represented by K. Simonsson, M. Konstantinidis, F. Hoffmeister and I. Zervas, acting as Agents, with an address for service
         in Luxembourg,
      
applicant,
v
Hellenic Republic, represented by A. Samoni-Rantou and S. Chala, acting as Agents,
      
defendant,
supported by:
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, represented by I. Rao, acting as Agent, and D. Anderson QC,
      
intervener,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans (Rapporteur), President of the Chamber, J.‑C. Bonichot, K. Schiemann, J. Makarczyk and C. Toader,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: Y. Bot,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on November 2008,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on November 2008,
gives the following
Judgment
By its application, the Commission of the European Communities seeks a declaration from the Court that, by submitting to the
         International Maritime Organisation (IMO) a proposal (MSC 80/5/11, ‘the contested proposal’) for monitoring the compliance
         of ships and port facilities with the requirements of Chapter XI-of the International Convention for the Safety of Life
         at Sea, concluded in London on November (‘the SOLAS Convention’) and the International Ship and Port Facility Security
         Code (‘the ISPS Code’), the Hellenic Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles EC, EC and 80(2) EC.
      
By order of the President of the Court of August 2007, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was granted
         leave to intervene in support of the form of order sought by the Hellenic Republic.
      
 Legal framework 
Article of Regulation (EC) No 725/of the European Parliament and of the Council of March on enhancing ship
         and port facility security (OJ L 129, p. 6; ‘the Regulation’), entitled ‘Objectives’, provides as follows:
      
‘1.      The main objective of this Regulation is to introduce and implement Community measures aimed at enhancing the security of
         ships used in international trade and domestic shipping and associated port facilities in the face of threats of intentional
         unlawful acts.
      
2.      The Regulation is also intended to provide a basis for the harmonised interpretation and implementation and Community monitoring
         of the special measures to enhance maritime security adopted by the Diplomatic Conference of the IMO on December 2002,
         which amended the [SOLAS Convention] and established the [ISPS Code].’
      
Article of the Regulation, entitled ‘Joint measures and scope’, provides as follows:
      
‘1.      In respect of international shipping, Member States shall apply in full, by July 2004, the special measures to enhance maritime
         security of the SOLAS Convention and Part A of the ISPS Code, in accordance with the conditions and with respect to the ships,
         companies and port facilities referred to therein.
      
2.      In respect of domestic shipping, Member States shall apply, by July 2005, the special measures to enhance maritime security
         of the SOLAS Convention and Part A of the ISPS Code to Class A passenger ships within the meaning of Article of Council
         Directive 98/18/EC of March on safety rules and standards for passenger ships [OJ L 144, p. 1, as last amended
         by Commission Directive 2003/75/EC of July (OJ L 190, p. 6)] operating domestic services and to their companies,
         as defined in regulation IX-of the SOLAS Convention, and to the port facilities serving them.
      
3.      Member States shall, after a mandatory security risk assessment, decide the extent to which they will apply, by July 2007,
         the provisions of this Regulation to different categories of ships operating domestic services other than those referred to
         in paragraph 2, their companies and the port facilities serving them. The overall level of security should not be compromised
         by such a decision.
      
…
4.      When implementing the provisions required pursuant to paragraphs 1, and 3, Member States shall take fully into account the
         guidelines contained in Part B of the ISPS Code.
      
5.       Member States shall conform to the following paragraphs of Part B of the ISPS Code as if they were mandatory:
…’
Article of the Regulation, entitled ‘Implementation and conformity checking’, provides in paragraph 1:
      
‘Member States shall carry out the administrative and control tasks required pursuant to the provisions of the special measures
         to enhance maritime security of the SOLAS Convention and of the ISPS Code. They shall ensure that all necessary means are
         allocated and effectively provided for the implementation of the provisions of this Regulation.’
      
Article of the Regulation, entitled ‘Committee procedure’ provides in paragraph that ‘[t]he Commission shall be assisted
         by a Committee’.
      
Annex I to the Regulation contains the amendments inserting the new Chapter XI‑into the Annex to the SOLAS Convention in
         its amended version. The amended version of the ISPS Code is to be found in Annex II to the regulation.
      
The first subparagraph of Article 7(1) of Council Decision 1999/468/EC of June laying down the procedures for the
         exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission (OJ L 184, p. 23) provides as follows:
      
‘Each committee shall adopt its own rules of procedure on the proposal of its chairman, on the basis of standard rules of
         procedure which shall be published in the Official Journal of the European Communities.’
      
Article of the Standard rules of procedure – Council Decision 1999/(OJ C 38, p. 3; ‘the Standard rules of procedure’),
         entitled ‘Agenda’, provides in paragraph 2:
      
‘The agenda shall make a distinction between:
…
(b)      other issues put to the committee for information or a simple exchange of views, either on the Chairman’s initiative, or at
         the written request of a committee member …’
      
 The pre-litigation procedure 
On March 2005, the Hellenic Republic submitted the contested proposal to the IMO Maritime Safety Committee. By that proposal,
         that Member State asked the committee to examine the creation of check lists or other appropriate tools for assisting the
         Contracting States of the SOLAS Convention in monitoring whether ships and port facilities complied with the requirements
         of Chapter XI-of the Annex to that convention and the ISPS Code. 
      
Taking the view that the Hellenic Republic had thus submitted a national position within an international organisation in
         an area falling within the exclusive external competence of the European Community, on May the Commission sent to
         that Member State a letter of formal notice, to which the latter responded on July 2005. 
      
Since it was unsatisfied with that response, the Commission issued a reasoned opinion on December 2005, to which the Hellenic
         Republic responded on February 2006.
      
Unconvinced by the Hellenic Republic’s response to the reasoned opinion, the Commission decided to bring the present action.
      
 The action
The Commission argues that, since the adoption of the Regulation, integrating both Chapter XI-of the Annex to the SOLAS
         Convention and the ISPS Code into Community law, the Community has enjoyed exclusive competence to assume international obligations
         in the area covered by that regulation. It follows, in its submission, that the Community alone is competent to ensure that
         the standards on the subject are properly applied at Community level and to discuss with other IMO Contracting States the
         correct implementation of or subsequent developments in those standards, in accordance with the two measures referred to.
         The Member States therefore no longer have competence to submit to the IMO national positions on matters falling within the
         exclusive competence of the Community, unless expressly authorised to do so by the Community.
      
In that connection, it must first be observed that, under Article 3(1)(f) EC, the setting of a common policy in the sphere
         of transport is specifically mentioned as one of the objectives of the Community (see also Case 22/Commission v Council [1971] ECR 263, paragraph 20, ‘AETR’).
      
Second, under Article EC, the Member States must both take all appropriate measures to ensure fulfilment of the obligations
         arising out of the EC Treaty or resulting from action taken by the institutions and also abstain from any measure which might
         jeopardise the attainment of the objectives of the Treaty (AETR, paragraph 21).
      
If those two provisions are read in conjunction, it follows that to the extent to which Community rules are promulgated for
         the attainment of the objectives of the Treaty, the Member States cannot, outside the framework of the Community institutions,
         assume obligations which might affect those rules or alter their scope (AETR, paragraph 22).
      
It is common ground that the provisions of the Regulation, which has as its legal basis Article 80(2) EC, the second subparagraph
         of which refers to Article EC, are Community rules promulgated for the attainment of the objectives of the Treaty.
      
It is thus necessary to examine whether, by submitting to the IMO Maritime Safety Committee the contested proposal, which
         the Hellenic Republic does not dispute is a national proposal, that Member State may be regarded as having assumed obligations
         which might affect the provisions of the Regulation.
      
The Commission argues that the case-law arising from AETR applies to non-binding measures such as the contested proposal, whereas the Hellenic Republic submits that, by making such
         a proposal in the context of its active participation in an international organisation, it did not assume an obligation within
         the meaning of that case-law. That Member State adds that, in any event, the fact that it submitted the contested proposal
         to the IMO did not lead to the adoption of new rules within that international organisation.
      
However, as the Advocate General noted at point of his Opinion, in asking the IMO Maritime Safety Committee to examine
         the creation of check lists or other appropriate tools for assisting the Contracting States of the SOLAS Convention in monitoring
         whether ships and port facilities complied with the requirements of Chapter XI-of the Annex to that convention and the ISPS
         Code, the Hellenic Republic submitted to that committee a proposal which initiates a procedure which could lead to the adoption
         by the IMO of new rules in respect of Chapter XI-and or/the ISPS code. 
      
The adoption of such new rules would as a consequence have an effect on the Regulation, the Community legislature having decided,
         as is apparent from both Article of that regulation and Annexes I and II thereto, to incorporate in substance both of those
         international instruments into Community law.
      
In those circumstances, since it set in motion such a procedure with the contested proposal, the Hellenic Republic took an
         initiative likely to affect the provisions of the Regulation, which is an infringement of the obligations under Articles EC, EC and 80(2) EC.
      
That interpretation cannot be undermined by the Hellenic Republic’s argument that the Commission infringed Article EC by
         refusing to include the contested proposal on the agenda for the meeting on March of the Maritime Safety Committee
         (Marsec committee), which is provided for in Article 11(1) of the Regulation and chaired by the Commission’s representative.
      
It is true that, in order to fulfil its duty of genuine cooperation under Article EC, the Commission could have endeavoured
         to submit that proposal to the Maritime Safety Committee and allowed a debate on the subject. As is apparent from Article
         2(2)(b) of the Standard rules of procedure, such a committee is also a forum enabling exchanges of views between the Commission
         and the Member States. The Commission, in chairing that committee, may not prevent such an exchange of views on the sole ground
         that a proposal is of a national nature.
      
None the less, any breach by the Commission of Article EC cannot entitle a Member State to take initiatives likely to affect
         Community rules promulgated for the attainment of the objectives of the Treaty, in breach of that State’s obligations, which,
         in a case such as the present, arise under Articles EC, EC and 80(2) EC. Indeed, a Member State may not unilaterally
         adopt, on its own authority, corrective or protective measures designed to obviate any breach by an institution of rules of
         Community law (see, by analogy, Case C-5/Hedley Lomas [1996] ECR I-2553, paragraph and case‑law cited).
      
In support of its argument, the Hellenic Republic also invokes a gentleman’s agreement allegedly adopted by the Council of
         the European Union in under which Member States are permitted to submit proposals to the IMO, not only collectively but
         also individually, where no common position has been established beforehand.
      
However, the documents comprising that alleged gentleman’s agreement do not bear out the Hellenic Republic’s argument. As
         the Advocate General noted in point of his Opinion, it is apparent in essence from those documents that the exclusive competence
         of the Community does not preclude the Member States from actively participating in the IMO, provided that the positions adopted
         by those States within that international organisation are coordinated at Community level beforehand. It is common ground,
         in the present case, that no such coordination occurred.
      
Moreover, a gentleman’s agreement, even if it had the scope ascribed to it by the Hellenic Republic, could not, in any event,
         affect the division of powers between the Member States and the Community, such as it results from the provisions of the Treaty;
         it cannot permit a Member State, acting individually in the context of its participation in an international organisation,
         to assume obligations likely to affect Community rules promulgated for the attainment of the objectives of the Treaty (see,
         to that effect, Case 204/Greece v Council [1988] ECR 5323, paragraph 17).
      
Similarly, the Hellenic Republic’s argument that an obligation to abstain from active participation in the IMO will not ensure
         that the Community interest is protected, since the Community is not a member of that international organisation, cannot be
         accepted. The mere fact that the Community is not a member of an international organisation in no way authorises a Member
         State, acting individually in the context of its participation in an international organisation, to assume obligations likely
         to affect Community rules promulgated for the attainment of the objectives of the Treaty.
      
Moreover, the fact that the Community is not a member of an international organisation does not prevent its external competence
         from being in fact exercised, in particular through the Member States acting jointly in the Community’s interest (see, to
         that effect, Opinion 2/[1993] ECR I-1061, paragraph 5).
      
The Hellenic Republic also relies on Article 9(1) of the Regulation, which in its submission confers exclusive competence
         on the Member States for implementing the safety requirements laid down by that regulation, which are based on the amendments
         to the SOLAS Convention and the ISPS Code.
      
In that connection, it is sufficient to note that the competence of the Member States, which stems from that provision, does
         not imply that they have an external competence to take initiatives likely to affect the provisions of the regulation.
      
At the hearing, the Hellenic Republic also invoked Article 307(1) EC, arguing that, since it became an IMO member before it
         joined the Community, its obligations towards the IMO and, more specifically, its obligation to participate actively in that
         international organisation as a member of it are not affected by the provisions of the Treaty.
      
However, it must be borne in mind that Article 307(1) EC is designed to apply only if there is an incompatibility between,
         on the one hand, an obligation arising under the international convention, concluded by the Hellenic Republic before its accession
         to the Community and by which that State became an IMO member, and, on the other, an obligation arising under Community law
         (see, to that effect, Case C‑62/98, Commission v Portugal [2000] ECR I-5171, paragraphs and 47).
      
First, the whole thrust of the Hellenic Republic’s argument is that its submission of the contested proposal to the IMO Maritime
         Safety Committee is not at variance with that Member State’s obligations under Community law, which rules out precisely the
         possibility of relying on Article 307(1) EC.
      
Second, the Hellenic Republic does not establish that it was required to submit the contested proposal to that committee by
         virtue of the IMO’s founding documents and/or legal instruments drawn up by that international organisation.
      
Consequently, it must be declared that, by submitting the contested proposal to the IMO, the Hellenic Republic has failed
         to fulfil its obligations under Articles EC, EC and 80(2) EC.
      
 Costs
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party’s pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Hellenic Republic has
         been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby:
1.      Declares that, by submitting to the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) a proposal (MSC 80/5/11) for monitoring the
            compliance of ships and port facilities with the requirements of Chapter XI-of the International Convention for the Safety
            of Life at Sea, concluded in London on November 1974, and the International Ship and Port Facility Security Code, the Hellenic
            Republic has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles EC, EC and 80(2) EC;
2.      Orders the Hellenic Republic to pay the costs.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Greek.
      
Top  
 