
Case C-257/Roby Profumi Srl
v
Comune di Parma
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Corte suprema di cassazione)
(Article EC – Directive 76/768/EEC – Protection of health – Cosmetic products – Importation – Communication of information on cosmetic products to the authorities of the State of importation)
Summary of the Judgment
Approximation of laws – Cosmetic products – Packaging and labelling – Directive 76/(Art. EC; Council Directive 76/768, Art. 7)
Article of Council Directive 76/on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to cosmetic products,
         as amended by Directive 93/35, does not preclude a national provision which, in the interests of prompt and appropriate medical
         treatment in the event of difficulties, requires the importer of cosmetic products to communicate to the Ministry of Health
         and to the Region the name or the corporate name of the business, its registered office and that of the manufacturing plant,
         and a full and detailed list of the substances used and the substances contained in those products.
      
Such an obligation to provide information is proportionate to the objective of protecting human health, contained in Article
         7(3) of Directive 76/768, since it ensures that the competent national authorities have at their disposal detailed information
         on the relevant product. 
      
(see paras 24-25, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
January (*)
      
(Article EC – Directive 76/768/EEC – Protection of health – Cosmetic products – Importation – Communication of information on cosmetic products to the authorities of the State of importation)
In Case C‑257/06,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Corte suprema di cassazione (Italy), made by decision of
         July 2005, received at the Court on June 2006, in the proceedings
      
Roby Profumi Srl
v
Comune di Parma,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of C.W.A. Timmermans, President of the Chamber, J. Makarczyk (Rapporteur), P. Kūris, J.-C. Bonichot and C. Toader,
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: J. Mazák,
Registrar: L. Hewlett, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on May 2007,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Roby Profumi Srl, by M. Pozzi, avvocato,
–        the Belgian Government, by L. Van den Broeck, acting as Agent,
–        the French Government, by R. Loosli-Surrans, acting as Agent,
–        the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, assisted by G. Albenzio, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Polish Government, by E. Ośniecka-Tamecka, acting as Agent,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by A. Caeiros and D. Recchia, acting as Agents, 
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article EC and Article of Council Directive 76/768/EEC
         of July on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to cosmetic products (OJ L 262, p. 169),
         as amended by Council Directive 93/35/EEC of June (OJ L 151, p. 32) (‘Directive 76/768’).
      
The reference has been made in proceedings between the company Roby Profumi Srl (‘Roby Profumi’) and the Comune di Parma (Municipality
         of Parma) regarding the upholding by the mayor of that municipality of penalties imposed on Roby Profumi by reason of its
         non-compliance with national laws on cosmetic products.
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
Directive 76/has the objective of approximating the laws of the Member States on cosmetic products in order to guarantee
         the free movement of those products within the European Community. With a view to safeguarding public health, the directive
         establishes common rules regarding the composition, labelling and packaging of cosmetic products.
      
Article of Directive 76/provides:
      
‘1.      Member States may not, for reasons related to the requirements laid down in this Directive and the Annexes thereto, refuse,
         prohibit or restrict the marketing of any cosmetic products which comply with the requirements of this Directive and the Annexes
         thereto.
      
2.      They may, however, require that the particulars provided for in Article 6(1)(b), (c), (d) and (f) be expressed at least in
         their own national or official language or languages; they may also require that the particulars provided for in Article 6(1)(g)
         be expressed in a language easily understood by the consumer. To that end, the Commission shall adopt a common ingredients
         nomenclature in accordance with the Article procedure. 
      
3.      Furthermore, a Member State may, for purposes of prompt and appropriate medical treatment in the event of difficulties, require
         that appropriate and adequate information on substances used in cosmetic products be made available to the competent authority,
         which shall ensure that that information is used only for the purposes of such treatment.
      
Each Member State shall designate a competent authority and send details thereof to the Commission, which shall publish that
         information in the Official Journal of the European Communities.’
      
 National legislation
Article of Law No 713, on the rules for implementing directives of the European Economic Community on the production and
         sale of cosmetic products (norme per l’attuazione delle direttive della Comunità economica europea sulla produzione e la vendita
         dei cosmetici) of October (Ordinary Supplement to GURI No of October 1986), as amended by Legislative Decree
         No of April (GURI No of May 1997) (‘Law No 713/86’) provides:
      
‘…
3a. The importation of cosmetic products from countries which are not members of the European Union shall take place under
         the responsibility of an expert fulfilling the conditions referred to in paragraphs and 2. He shall be required to assess
         the manufacturing process used for the products. 
      
4.      Good practice in the manufacture of cosmetic products, which is also based on Community rules, shall be determined and updated
         by decree of the Minister for Health, acting in conjunction with the Ministers for Industry, Trade, Crafts and Employment
         and the Minister for Social Welfare.
      
5.      Any person who intends to produce or package the products referred to in Article 1, on his own behalf or for a third party,
         shall communicate that in writing to the Ministry of Health and to the Region at least days before the start of that activity.
      
6.      The communication must contain:
(a)      the name or the corporate name and the registered office of the business and of the manufacturing plant;
(b)      a description of the premises and equipment making possible confirmation that they have the necessary technical and hygienic
         features for the type of manufacture referred to and the documents confirming the purchase or lease of that equipment; 
      
(c)      the identity and qualifications of the technical director;
(d)      a full and detailed list of the substances used and the substances contained in the commercial product.
7.      Any amendment to the information referred to in paragraphs 6(a), (b) and (c) shall require a fresh preliminary communication.
8.      A similar communication dealing with paragraphs 6(a) to (d) only shall be made by importers of pre-packaged, ready-for-sale,
         products coming from Member States of the European Union, while importers of those products coming from countries which are
         not members of the European Union shall be required also to communicate the identity and qualifications of the expert referred
         to in paragraph 3a.
      
…’
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred for a preliminary ruling
Roby Profumi is a company established under Italian law and operating in the import-export sector for cosmetic products within
         the Community market.
      
On October Roby Profumi had a fine of ITL imposed on it by a local administrative health authority on account
         of  non-compliance with its obligation, set down in Article 10(8) of Law No 713/86, to communicate to the Ministry of Health
         and to the Region specific information relating to imported cosmetic products. Following an administrative appeal brought
         by Roby Profumi against that decision, the mayor of the Comune di Parma issued an order of injunction on July confirming
         the penalty imposed and raising the amount of the fine to ITL 000.
      
Roby Profumi appealed against that order of injunction to the Tribunale di Parma (Parma District Court) (Italy). That court,
         while taking the view that the obligation under Article 10(8) of Law No 713/– which it considers compatible with Community
         law – had not been met by Roby Profumi, nevertheless partially upheld the appeal by reducing the amount of the fine to ITL
         000.
      
Roby Profumi lodged an appeal on a point of law against the decision of the Tribunale di Parma. It contends, inter alia, that
         that court should not have applied the aforementioned national provision on the ground that it is contrary to Article EC
         and Article of Directive 76/768.
      
The Corte suprema di cassazione (Supreme Court of Cassation) (Italy), having doubts as regards the compatibility of the Italian
         provision with the aforementioned Community law provisions, decided to stay proceedings and to refer the following question
         to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘Is Article 10(8) of Law No 713/86, as amended by Article 9(4) of Legislative Decree No 126/1997, compatible with Article
         EC and Article of Directive 76/768?’
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
 Initial observations
First, it must be borne in mind that, in accordance with settled case-law, although in a reference for a preliminary ruling
         the Court cannot give a ruling either on questions which fall within the national law of the Member States or on the compatibility
         of national provisions with Community law, it can, however, supply a ruling on the interpretation of Community law so as to
         enable the national court to decide the case before it (see, inter alia, Case C-150/Eau de Cologne & Parfümerie-Fabrik [1989] ECR 3891, paragraph 12, and Case C-124/Borawitz [2000] ECR I-7293, paragraph 17). 
      
It must also be remembered that, in the question referred, the national court is asking, in essence, whether Article EC
         and Article of Directive 76/preclude a national provision which requires the importer of cosmetic products to communicate
         to the Ministry of Health and to the Region, inter alia, the name or corporate name of the business, its registered office
         and that of the manufacturing plant and a full and detailed list of the substances used and contained in those products.
      
Secondly, it must also be borne in mind that Directive 76/provided exhaustively for the harmonisation of national rules
         on the packaging and labelling of cosmetic products (see, inter alia, Case C-77/Unilever [1999] ECR I-431, paragraph 24; Case C-220/Estée Lauder [2000] ECR I-117, paragraph 23, and Case C-99/Linhart and Biffl [2002] ECR I-9375, paragraph 17).
      
As the Court has already held, when the question referred concerns harmonisation at Community level, the national measures
         relating thereto must be assessed in the light of the provisions of that harmonising measure and not those of the EC Treaty
         (see, to that effect, Eau de Cologne & Parfümerie-Fabrik 4711, paragraph 28; Case C-37/Vanacker and Lesage [1993] ECR I-4947, paragraph 9, and Case C-324/DaimlerChrysler [2001] ECR I-9897, paragraph 32).
      
It follows that, in order to reply to the question referred, the Court must restrict itself to the interpretation of Directive
         76/768.
      
 Reply of the Court
It should, first, be stated that, in adopting Directive 76/768, the Community legislature sought to reconcile the objective
         of achieving the free movement of cosmetic products and that of safeguarding public health (see Case C-169/Schwarzkopf [2001] ECR I-5901, paragraph 27).
      
As is clear from the second and third recitals in the preamble to Directive 76/768, the Community legislature, although finding
         that the differences between national laws on cosmetic products obliged Community cosmetic producers to vary their production
         according to the Member State for which the products were intended and that those differences impeded free movement of those
         products, concluded that those national provisions had the aim of safeguarding public health and that, consequently, Community
         harmonisation in that area must pursue the same objective.  The amendments subsequently made to Directive 76/were guided
         by those same considerations (see Schwarzkopf, paragraph 28).
      
The rules laid down by Directive 76/include the obligation, laid down in Article 7(1), on Member States not to refuse,
         prohibit or restrict the marketing of any cosmetic products which comply with the requirements of that directive and the annexes
         thereto.
      
Next, under Article 7(3) of the directive a Member State may require, for purposes of prompt and appropriate medical treatment
         in the event of difficulties, that adequate and sufficient information regarding substances contained in cosmetic products
         be made available to the competent authority (see Case C-246/Commission v France [1993] ECR I‑2289, paragraph 9).
      
That provision, which is incorporated in a directive primarily designed (according to, in particular, the second and third
         recitals in its preamble) to ensure freedom of trade in cosmetic products, also seeks to protect human health, within the
         meaning of Article EC (see, to that effect, Estée Lauder, paragraph 25). 
      
The measures which the Member States are required to take for the implementation of Article 7(3) of Directive 76/must
         however be consistent with the principle of proportionality (see, to that effect, Unilever, paragraph 27; Estée Lauder, paragraph 26, and Linhart and Biffl, paragraph 26).
      
In this instance, in the case in the main proceedings, it is clear from the national legislation that importers of cosmetic
         products are required to communicate to the authorities responsible for protection of health and life of humans the name or
         corporate name of the manufacturer, its registered office and that of the manufacturing plant and a full and detailed list
         of the substances contained in the product being marketed.
      
That obligation to provide information allows the competent authorities, in the event of difficulties, to send to the medical
         services as quickly as possible the necessary information for prompt and appropriate treatment.
      
Such an obligation to provide information is proportionate to the objective of protecting human health, contained in Article
         7(3) of Directive 76/768, since it ensures that the competent national authorities have at their disposal detailed information
         on the relevant product. It is only on the basis of that information that appropriate treatment can be prescribed. 
      
Having regard to the foregoing, the reply must be that Article of Directive 76/does not preclude a national provision
         which, in the interests of prompt and appropriate medical treatment in the event of difficulties, requires the importer of
         cosmetic products to communicate to the Ministry of Health and to the Region the name or the corporate name of the business,
         its registered office and that of the manufacturing plant, and a full and detailed list of the substances used and the substances
         contained in those products.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
Article of Council Directive 76/768/EEC of July on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to
            cosmetic products, as amended by Council Directive 93/35/EEC of June 1993, does not preclude a national provision which,
            in the interests of prompt and appropriate medical treatment in the event of difficulties, requires the importer of cosmetic
            products to communicate to the Ministry of Health and to the Region the name or the corporate name of the business, its registered
            office and that of the manufacturing plant, and a full and detailed list of the substances used and the substances contained
            in those products.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Italian.
      
Top  
 