
Order of the Court (Seventh Chamber) of February — Total and Elf Aquitaine v Commission 
(Case C‑421/P)
Appeal — Regulation (EC) No 1/— Competition — Cartel — Market for methacrylates — Concept of ‘undertaking’ — Presumption of decisive influence — Obligation to state reasons — Principle of sound administration — Extension of the authority of a final decision — Deterrent multiplying factor — Indivisible nature of the fine — Unlimited jurisdiction
1.                     Appeals — Grounds — Specific criticism of a point of the General Court’s reasoning necessary (Art. TFEU; Statute of the
            Court of Justice, Art. 58; Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, Art. 112(1)(c)) (see paras 17, 31, 69-71)
2.                     Competition — Union rules — Infringements — Attribution — Parent company and subsidiaries — Economic unit — Criteria for assessment —
            Presumption that a parent company wields decisive influence over its wholly-owned subsidiaries (Art. TFEU; Council Regulation
            No 1/2003, Art. 23(2)) (see paras 25, 28, 30, 33, 38, 46-50, 62)
3.                     Appeals — Grounds — Inadequate statement of reasons — Reliance by the General Court on implied reasoning — Whether permissible —
            Conditions (Art. TFEU; Statute of the Court of Justice, Arts and 53, first para.) (see paras 41-42)
4.                     Appeals — Jurisdiction of the Court — Challenge on grounds of fairness to the General Court’s assessment concerning the amount
            of a fine imposed on an undertaking — Excluded (Art. TFEU; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58; Council Regulation
            No 1/2003, Art. 23) (see para. 87)
Re: 
Appeal brought against the judgment of the General Court (Fourth Chamber) of June in Case T‑206/Total and Elf Aquitaine
 v 
Commission
, in which the General Court dismissed the action for annulment of Commission Decision C(2006) final of May relating
                  to a proceeding pursuant to Article EC and Article of the EEA Agreement (Case COMP/F/38.— Methacrylates) — Competition —
                  Cartel — Infringement of the principle that the institutions must act within the limits of their powers and of the principle
                  of proportionality — Manifestly erroneous interpretation — Infringement of the rights of the defence and of the principles
                  of equity and of equality of arms — Duty to state reasons — Infringement of the principle of sound administration.
               
Operative part
1.
	The appeal is dismissed.
2.
	Total SA and Elf Aquitaine SA are ordered to pay the costs.
Top  
 