
Case C-429/Inspecteur van de Belastingdienst
v
X BV
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Gerechtshof te Amsterdam)
(Competition policy – Articles EC and EC – Article 15(3) of Regulation (EC) No 1/– Written observations submitted by the Commission – National dispute concerning the deductibility from tax of a fine imposed by a Commission decision)
Summary of the Judgment
Competition – Community rules – Application – Cooperation between the Commission and the national courts – Intervention by
            the Commission in proceedings pending before a national court 
(Arts EC, EC and EC; Council Regulation No 1/2003, Art. 15(3))
Article of Regulation No 1/on the implementation of the rules on competition laid down in Articles and of the
         Treaty, entitled ‘Cooperation with national courts’, establishes a system for the mutual exchange of information between the
         Commission and the courts of the Member States, and provides, in specific circumstances, for the possibility of intervention
         by the Commission and the competition authorities of the Member States in proceedings pending before national courts.
      
A literal interpretation of the first subparagraph of Article 15(3) of Regulation No 1/leads to the conclusion that the
         option for the Commission, acting on its own initiative, to submit written observations to the courts of the Member States
         is subject to the sole condition that the coherent application of Articles EC or EC so requires. That condition may
         be fulfilled even if the proceedings concerned do not pertain to issues relating to the application of Article EC or Article
         EC.
      
Moreover, Articles to EC must be understood as forming part of a comprehensive set of provisions designed to prohibit
         and punish anti‑competitive practices, the purpose of Article EC being inter alia to ensure the effective supervision of
         cartels and abuses of dominant positions. To dissociate the principle of prohibition of anti‑competitive practices from the
         penalties provided for where that principle has not been observed would deprive of any effectiveness the action taken by the
         authorities responsible for monitoring compliance with that prohibition and punishing such practices. Thus, the provisions
         of Articles EC and EC would be ineffective if they were not accompanied by enforcement measures provided for in Article
         83(2)(a) EC. There is an intrinsic link between the fines and the application of Articles EC and EC. The effectiveness
         of the penalties imposed by the national or Community competition authorities on the basis of Article 83(2)(a) EC is therefore
         a condition for the coherent application of Articles EC and EC.
      
The decision that the court of a Member State must give in proceedings relating to the deductibility from taxable profits
         of the amount of a fine or a part thereof imposed by the Commission for infringement of Articles EC or EC is capable
         of impairing the effectiveness of the penalty in respect of anti‑competitive practices provided for in Article 83(2)(a) EC
         and therefore might compromise the coherent application of Articles EC or EC. 
      
The third sentence of the first subparagraph of Article 15(3) of Regulation No 1/must therefore be interpreted as meaning
         that it permits the Commission to submit on its own initiative written observations to a court of a Member State in proceedings
         relating to the deductibility from taxable profits of the amount of a fine or a part thereof imposed by the Commission for
         infringement of Articles EC or EC.
      
(see paras 24, 30, 33-34, 36-38, 40, operative part)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Fourth Chamber)
June (*)
      
(Competition policy – Articles EC and EC – Article 15(3) of Regulation (EC) No 1/– Written observations submitted by the Commission – National dispute concerning the deductibility from tax of a fine imposed by a Commission decision)
In Case C‑429/07,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Gerechtshof te Amsterdam (Netherlands), made by decision
         of September 2007, received at the Court on September 2007, in the proceedings
      
Inspecteur van de Belastingdienst
v
X BV,
THE COURT (Fourth Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, T. von Danwitz, E. Juhász (Rapporteur), G. Arestis and J. Malenovský, Judges,
Advocate General: P. Mengozzi,
Registrar: N. Nanchev, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on December 2008,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        X BV, by G.Th.K. Meussen, advocaat,
–        the Netherlands Government, by Y. de Vries and M. de Grave, acting as Agents,
–        the Italian Government, by I.M. Braguglia, acting as Agent, and F. Arena, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by A. Bouquet and W. Wils, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on March 2009,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 15(3) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1/of December on the implementation of the rules on competition laid down in Articles and of the Treaty (OJ L 1, p. 1).
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between the Inspecteur van de Belastingdienst (Inspector of Taxes, ‘the
         Inspector’) and X BV, a company incorporated under Netherlands law whose principal office is established at P, concerning
         the tax deductibility of fines imposed by the Commission of the European Communities for infringement of the Community competition
         rules. 
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation 
According to recital in the preamble to Regulation No 1/2003:
      
‘Consistency in the application of the competition rules also requires that arrangements be established for cooperation between
         the courts of the Member States and the Commission. This is relevant for all courts of the Member States that apply Articles
         and of the [EC] Treaty, whether applying these rules in lawsuits between private parties, acting as public enforcers
         or as review courts. In particular, national courts should be able to ask the Commission for information or for its opinion
         on points concerning the application of Community competition law. The Commission and the competition authorities of the Member
         States should also be able to submit written or oral observations to courts called upon to apply Article or Article of the Treaty. These observations should be submitted within the framework of national procedural rules and practices including
         those safeguarding the rights of the parties. Steps should therefore be taken to ensure that the Commission and the competition
         authorities of the Member States are kept sufficiently well informed of proceedings before national courts.’
      
Article of Regulation No 1/provides: 
      
‘Cooperation with national courts
1.      In proceedings for the application of Article or Article of the Treaty, courts of the Member States may ask the Commission
         to transmit to them information in its possession or its opinion on questions concerning the application of the Community
         competition rules.
      
2.      Member States shall forward to the Commission a copy of any written judgment of national courts deciding on the application
         of Article or Article of the Treaty. Such copy shall be forwarded without delay after the full written judgment is notified
         to the parties.
      
3.      Competition authorities of the Member States, acting on their own initiative, may submit written observations to the national
         courts of their Member State on issues relating to the application of Article or Article of the Treaty. With the permission
         of the court in question, they may also submit oral observations to the national courts of their Member State. Where the coherent
         application of Article or Article of the Treaty so requires, the Commission, acting on its own initiative, may submit
         written observations to courts of the Member States. With the permission of the court in question, it may also make oral observations.
      
For the purpose of the preparation of their observations only, the competition authorities of the Member States and the Commission
         may request the relevant court of the Member State to transmit or ensure the transmission to them of any documents necessary
         for the assessment of the case.
      
4.      This Article is without prejudice to wider powers to make observations before courts conferred on competition authorities
         of the Member States under the law of their Member State.’ 
      
According to points to of the Commission Notice on the cooperation between the Commission and the courts of the EU Member
         States in the application of Articles and EC (OJ C 101, p. 54):
      
‘31.      According to Article 15(3) of [Regulation No 1/2003], the national competition authorities and the Commission may submit observations
         on issues relating to the application of Articles [EC] or EC to a national court which is called upon to apply those
         provisions. That regulation distinguishes between written observations, which the national competition authorities and the
         Commission may submit on their own initiative, and oral observations, which can only be submitted with the permission of the
         national court … 
      
32.      The regulation specifies that the Commission will only submit observations when the coherent application of Articles [EC]
         or EC so requires. That being the objective of its submission, the Commission will limit its observations to an economic
         and legal analysis of the facts underlying the case pending before the national court. 
      
33.      In order to enable the Commission to submit useful observations, national courts may be asked to transmit or ensure the transmission
         to the Commission of a copy of all documents that are necessary for the assessment of the case. In line with Article 15(3),
         second subparagraph, of [R]egulation [No 1/2003], the Commission will only use those documents for the preparation of its
         observations … 
      
34.      Since [that] regulation does not provide for a procedural framework within which the observations are to be submitted, Member
         States’ procedural rules and practices determine the relevant procedural framework. Where a Member State has not yet established
         the relevant procedural framework, the national court has to determine which procedural rules are appropriate for the submission
         of observations in the case pending before it. 
      
35.      The procedural framework should respect the principles set out in point of this notice. That implies amongst others that
         the procedural framework for the submission of observations on issues relating to the application of Articles [EC] or EC
      
(a)      has to be compatible with the general principles of Community law, in particular the fundamental rights of the parties involved
         in the case; 
      
(b)      cannot make the submission of such observations excessively difficult or practically impossible (the principle of effectiveness)
         …; and 
      
(c)      cannot make the submission of such observations more difficult than the submission of observations in court proceedings where
         equivalent national law is applied ( … principle of equivalence).’
      
 National legislation
The Netherlands Law introducing new rules on economic competition (Law on competition) (wet houdende nieuwe regels omtrent
         de economische mededinging (Mededingingswet)) of May (Stb. 1997, No 242), as amended by the law of December (Stb. 2005, No 172; ‘the Law on competition’), provides, in Article 89h thereof: 
      
‘1. The [Administrative] Board [of the Nederlandse Mededingingsautoriteit (Netherlands competition authority, “the NMa”)]
         or the Commission of the European Communities may, when not acting as a party, submit written observations in appeal proceedings
         before the Administrative Court, pursuant to the first subparagraph of Article 15(3) of Regulation No 1/2003, if the Board
         [of the NMa] or the Commission of the European Communities has expressed its wish to do so. The court may set a time‑limit
         for this. With the permission of the court, they may also submit oral observations during the hearing.
      
2.      Following an application, pursuant to the second subparagraph of Article 15(3) of Regulation No 1/2003, the court shall provide
         the Board [of the NMa] and the Commission of the European Communities with all documents referred to in the aforementioned
         provision. The parties may give their opinions on the documents to be issued within a time-limit to be determined by the court.
         
      
3.      The parties may respond to observations submitted by the Board [of the NMa] or the Commission of the European Communities
         within a time-limit to be determined by the court. The court may provide the parties with an opportunity to respond to each
         other’s observations.’ 
      
Article 89h is the result of the Law amending the Law on competition and certain other laws relating to the implementation
         of Regulations (EC) Nos 1/and 139/(wet tot wijziging van de Mededingingswet en van enige andere wetten in verband
         met de implementatie van EG-verordeningen 1/en 139/2004) of June (Stb. 2004, No 345). It is apparent from the
         order for reference that the explanatory memorandum to that law (Kamerstukken II, session 2003-2004, 29276, No 3) contains
         the following explanations: 
      
‘2.Cooperation with national courts 
The cooperation between the Commission and the national courts is set out in Article of, and in recital in the preamble
         to, [Regulation No 1/2003]. 
      
… 
Article 15(3) thereof also provides that the Commission and the national competition authorities may submit written and oral
         observations during examination of a case by the court (amicus curiae). Those observations have the status of an opinion and the purpose of promoting the coherent application of the competition
         rules. 
      
To that end, the Commission and the national competition authorities must comply with the Netherlands rules of procedure.
         In proceedings between two parties, the court is passive and determines the rhythm of the proceedings. Moreover, the court
         is not bound by the Commission’s opinion (recital 21). The court’s independence is not therefore called into question. The
         Commission and the national competition authorities must respect the rights of the parties and ensure that confidential business
         information remains confidential. Finally, in accordance with Article 15(1) of Regulation [No 1/2003], the national court
         is empowered to ask the Commission to transmit to it information in its possession or its opinion. 
      
…
3.Cooperation between the director‑general of the NMa, the Commission and the courts 
Article 15(3) of Regulation [No 1/2003] provides that the national competition authorities of the Member States and the Commission,
         acting on their own initiative, may submit, with regard to the application of Articles and EC, written observations
         and, with the permission of the court in question, oral observations to the national courts. 
      
In addition, Article 15(1) of Regulation [No 1/2003] provides for the possibility that the court may ask the Commission for
         information or its opinion with regard to the application of Articles and of the Treaty … 
      
… The implementation of Article of Regulation [No 1/2003] takes place before the administrative courts by amendment of
         the Law on competition (Article 1(g) [of the amending law,] Articles 89h, 89i and 89j) [of the Law on competition] and, before
         the civil courts, by amendment of the Code of Civil Procedure [(Wetboek van Burgerlijke Rechtsvordering)] (Article III).’
         
      
Entitled ‘Non‑deductible general charges’, Article 3.of the Law on income tax (Wet Inkomstenbelasting 2001), in the
         version applicable to income received in 2002, provided: 
      
‘1.      When assessing profits, the charges and costs relating to the following headings shall not be deductible: 
… 
c.      fines imposed by a Netherlands court and the sums paid to the State to avoid judicial proceedings in the Netherlands or to
         fulfil a condition linked to a decision on remission of a penalty, fines imposed by an institution of the European Union and
         fines and increases imposed pursuant to the General Law on national taxation [(Algemene wet inzake rijksbelastingen)], the
         Law on customs [(Douanewet)], the Law on the coordination of social insurance [(Coördinatiewet Sociale Verzekering)], the
         Law on the administrative enforcement of traffic regulations [(Wet administratiefrechtelijke handhaving verkeersvoorschriften)]
         and the Law on competition;
      
…’ 
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the question referred 
By Commission Decision 2005/471/EC of November relating to proceedings under Article of the EC Treaty against BPB
         PLC, Gebrüder Knauf Westdeutsche Gipswerke KG, Société Lafarge SA and Gyproc Benelux NV (Case No COMP/E-1/37.– Plasterboard)
         (OJ L 166, p. 8), BPB, Knauf, Lafarge and Gyproc received fines of EUR 138.million, 85.million, 249.million and
         4.million respectively. The fines were paid provisionally or secured by a bank guarantee.
      
The penalties thus imposed by the Commission were confirmed by the judgments of the Court of First Instance in Case T‑50/Saint-Gobain Gyproc Belgium v Commission [2008] ECR II‑0000, Case T‑52/Knauf Gips v Commission [2008] ECR II‑0000, Case T‑53/BPB v Commission [2008] ECR II‑0000, and Case T‑54/Lafarge v Commission [2008] ECR II‑0000. Knauf and Lafarge lodged an appeal before the Court of Justice against the judgments of the Court of
         First Instance dismissing their actions (Cases C‑407/P and C‑413/P).
      
Before those judgments of the Court of First Instance were delivered, one of the companies concerned, which the file shows
         was established in Germany, called X KG by the referring court, passed on part of the fine imposed on it within the group
         of which it is the parent company, and in particular to one of its Netherlands subsidiaries, X BV.
      
On March 2004, an assessment to corporation tax was made on X BV by the Netherlands tax authority in respect of the financial
         year 2002. By letter of April 2004, the company lodged an objection to that assessment with the Inspector, disputing that
         the fine imposed by the Commission and passed on to it in part by its parent company constitutes a fine within the meaning
         of Article 3.14(1)(c) of the Law on income tax 2001, which does not permit the deduction of fines imposed by the Community
         institutions for the purpose of calculating the taxable profits of a company. The Inspector dismissed that complaint by decision
         of March 2005. 
      
On April 2005, X BV brought an action before the Rechtbank Haarlem (Haarlem District Court) (Netherlands). 
      
By judgment of May 2006, that court held that the fine was partially deductible. 
      
The Inspector brought an appeal against that judgment before the Gerechtshof te Amsterdam (Court of Appeal, Amsterdam) (Netherlands)
         by notice of June 2006.
      
The Commission, having been informed by the press and through the national competition authorities, notified the referring
         court, by letter of March 2007, that it wished to intervene as amicus curiae pursuant to Article 15(3) of Regulation No 1/and in accordance with Article 89h of the Law on competition. In addition,
         the Commission requested that a time-limit be set for that purpose and that any documents necessary for the assessment of
         the case be transmitted to it.
      
At the hearing of the Gerechtshof te Amsterdam of August 2007, the parties to the main proceedings and the Commission were
         asked to express their views on the question whether the Commission was competent under Article 15(3) of Regulation No 1/to submit, on its own initiative, written observations in the proceedings pending before that court. 
      
It is against that background that the Gerechtshof te Amsterdam decided to stay proceedings and refer the following question
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling: 
      
‘Is the Commission competent, under Article 15(3) of Regulation … No 1/2003, to submit, on its own initiative, written observations
         in proceedings relating to the deductibility from the (taxable) profit realised by the party concerned in of a fine for
         infringement of Community competition law, which was imposed by the Commission on X KG and (partially) passed on to the party
         concerned?’ 
      
 The question referred for a preliminary ruling
By its question, the referring court essentially asks whether the Commission is competent, under Article 15(3) of Regulation
         No 1/2003, to submit, on its own initiative, written observations to a national court in proceedings relating to the deductibility
         from taxable profits of the amount of a fine or a part thereof imposed by the Commission for infringement of Articles EC
         or EC. 
      
In order to ensure the coherent application of the competition rules in the Member States, a cooperation mechanism between
         the Commission, the national competition authorities and the courts of the Member States was set up in Chapter IV of Regulation
         No 1/2003. 
      
That cooperation is part of the general principle of sincere cooperation, referred to in Article EC, which governs the
         relationships between the Member States and the Community institutions. As the Court has held, the duty of sincere cooperation
         imposed on the Community institutions is of particular importance where that cooperation involves the judicial authorities
         of a Member State who are responsible for ensuring that Community law is applied and respected in the national legal system
         (see order in Case C‑2/IMM Zwartveld and Others [1990] ECR I-3365, paragraph 18). 
      
In that context, the national courts, on the one hand, and the Commission and the Community Courts, on the other, act on the
         basis of the role assigned to them by the Treaty (see, to that effect, Case C‑344/Masterfoods and HB [2000] ECR I‑11369, paragraph 56).
      
Articles to of Regulation No 1/provide for various forms of cooperation between the Commission and the national
         competition authorities.
      
Article of that regulation, entitled ‘Cooperation with national courts’, establishes a system for the mutual exchange of
         information between the Commission and the courts of the Member States, and provides, in specific circumstances, for the possibility
         of intervention by the Commission and the competition authorities of the Member States in proceedings pending before national
         courts. 
      
As recital in the preamble to Regulation No 1/mentions, the cooperation mechanism between the Commission and the courts
         of the Member States is relevant for all courts of the Member States that apply Articles EC and EC, whether in lawsuits
         between private parties, acting as public enforcers or as review courts. 
      
Article 15(1) of Regulation No 1/provides, on the one hand, that those courts may ask the Commission to transmit to them
         information in its possession or its opinion on questions concerning the application of the Community competition rules. Article
         15(2) thereof states, on the other hand, that the Member States are to forward to the Commission a copy of any written judgment
         of national courts deciding on the application of Articles EC or EC. 
      
The first and second sentences of the first subparagraph of Article 15(3) permit the competition authorities of the Member
         States to submit written observations on their own initiative, and, with the permission of the court concerned, oral observations
         to the national courts of their Member State on issues relating to the application of Articles EC or EC. The third and
         fourth sentences of that provision also permit the Commission to submit written observations on its own initiative, and, with
         the permission of the court in question, oral observations to courts of the Member States where the coherent application of
         Articles EC or EC so requires. 
      
Thus, the first subparagraph of Article 15(3) of Regulation No 1/refers to two different types of intervention with separate
         fields of application: intervention by the national competition authorities before the national courts of their Member State
         on issues relating to the application of Articles EC or EC, and intervention by the Commission before courts of the
         Member States where the coherent application of Articles EC or EC so requires. 
      
The four sentences of that subparagraph, and above all the fact that the second and fourth sentences are almost entirely identical,
         emphasises the fact that the Community legislature intended to draw a distinction between those two situations, despite the
         fact that they appear in the same subparagraph.
      
Consequently, a literal interpretation of the first subparagraph of Article 15(3) of Regulation No 1/leads to the conclusion
         that the option for the Commission, acting on its own initiative, to submit written observations to courts of the Member States
         is subject to the sole condition that the coherent application of Articles EC or EC so requires. That condition may
         be fulfilled even if the proceedings concerned do not pertain to issues relating to the application of Article or Article
         of the Treaty. 
      
That interpretation is not called in question by the fourth sentence of recital in the preamble to Regulation No 1/2003,
         according to which the Commission and the competition authorities of the Member States should be able to submit written or
         oral observations to courts called upon to apply Articles EC or EC. That recital refers merely to a typical situation
         but does not exclude other situations in which the Commission may intervene. Moreover, whilst a recital in the preamble to
         a regulation may cast light on the interpretation to be given to a legal rule, it cannot in itself constitute such a rule
         (Case 215/Casa Fleischhandels [1989] ECR 2789, paragraph 31, and Case C‑136/Deutsches Milch‑Kontor [2005] ECR I‑10095, paragraph and case‑law cited). 
      
Moreover, contrary to what X BV and the Netherlands Government submit, the interpretation of the first subparagraph of Article
         15(3) of Regulation No 1/given in paragraph of this judgment is not contradicted by points to of the Commission
         Notice on the cooperation between the Commission and the courts of the EU Member States in the application of Articles and EC, which state that the Commission may submit observations on issues relating to the application of Articles EC
         or EC. The general concept of ‘issues relating to the application of Articles … EC or [EC]’ adopted by that notice
         includes the possibility for the Commission to submit written observations to national courts where the coherent application
         of Articles EC or EC so requires. In any event, the content of a Commission notice cannot prevail over the provisions
         of a regulation. 
      
Community law has established a comprehensive system for monitoring cartels and abuses of dominant positions which sets out
         a principle of prohibition, contained in Articles EC and EC, and sanctions for its infringement, on the basis of Article
         EC. Those articles must be understood as forming part of a comprehensive set of provisions designed to prohibit and punish
         anti‑competitive practices. 
      
It is apparent from Article 83(2)(a) EC that the fines and periodic penalty payments which may be imposed on undertakings
         in connection with the application of Community competition law are designed to ‘ensure compliance with the prohibitions laid
         down in Article 81(1) [EC] and in Article [EC]’. The purpose of Article EC is therefore inter alia to ensure the effective
         supervision of cartels and abuses of dominant positions.
      
The Commission’s power to impose fines on undertakings which intentionally or negligently commit an infringement of Articles
         81(1) EC or EC is one of the means conferred on the Commission in order to enable it to carry out the task of supervision
         entrusted to it by Community law (see, to that effect, Joined Cases 100/to 103/Musique Diffusion française and Others v Commission [1983] ECR 1825, paragraph 105, and Case C‑76/P Britannia Alloys & Chemicals v Commission [2007] ECR I‑4405, paragraph 22). 
      
To dissociate the principle of prohibition of anti‑competitive practices from the penalties provided for where that principle
         has not been observed would therefore deprive of any effectiveness the action taken by the authorities responsible for monitoring
         compliance with that prohibition and punishing such practices. Thus, the provisions of Articles EC and EC would be ineffective
         if they were not accompanied by enforcement measures provided for in Article 83(2)(a) EC. As the Advocate General stated at
         point of his Opinion, there is an intrinsic link between the fines and the application of Articles and EC. 
      
The effectiveness of the penalties imposed by the national or Community competition authorities on the basis of Article 83(2)(a)
         EC is therefore a condition for the coherent application of Articles EC and EC. 
      
In proceedings relating to the penalties in respect of anti‑competitive practices provided for in Article 83(2)(a) EC, the
         decision that the court seised must give is capable of impairing the effectiveness of those penalties and therefore might
         compromise the coherent application of Articles EC or EC. 
      
In the circumstances of the action in the main proceedings, it is quite clear that the outcome of the dispute relating to
         the tax deductibility of part of a fine imposed by the Commission is capable of impairing the effectiveness of the penalty
         imposed by the Community competition authority. The effectiveness of the Commission’s decision by which it imposed a fine
         on a company might be significantly reduced if the company concerned, or at least a company linked to that company, were allowed
         to deduct fully or in part the amount of that fine from the amount of its taxable profits, since such a possibility would
         have the effect of offsetting the burden of that fine with a reduction of the tax burden. 
      
It follows from all of the foregoing that the third sentence of the first subparagraph of Article 15(3) of Regulation No 1/must be interpreted as meaning that it permits the Commission to submit on its own initiative written observations to a national
         court of a Member State in proceedings relating to the deductibility from taxable profits of the amount of a fine or a part
         thereof imposed by the Commission for infringement of Articles EC or EC. 
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the referring court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Fourth Chamber) hereby rules:
The third sentence of the first subparagraph of Article 15(3) of Council Regulation (EC) No 1/of December on
            the implementation of the rules on competition laid down in Articles and of the Treaty must be interpreted as meaning
            that it permits the Commission of the European Communities to submit on its own initiative written observations to a national
            court of a Member State in proceedings relating to the deductibility from taxable profits of the amount of a fine or a part
            thereof imposed by the Commission for infringement of Articles EC or EC. 
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 