
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-30/Recheio – Cash & Carry SA
v
Fazenda Pública/Registo Nacional de Pessoas Colectivas
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Tribunal Tributário de Primeira Instância de Lisboa)
(Recovery of sums paid though not due – Period of days for the bringing of an action – Principle of effectiveness)
Summary of the Judgment
Community law – Direct effect – National charges incompatible with Community law – Reimbursement – Procedures – Application
            of national law – Conditions – Observance of the principles of equivalence and effectiveness – Limitation period of days
            – Permissible 
Given the lack of Community rules on the refund of national charges levied though not due, it is for the domestic legal system
         of each Member State to designate the courts and tribunals having jurisdiction and to lay down the detailed procedural rules
         governing actions for safeguarding rights which individuals derive from Community law, provided, first, that such rules are
         not less favourable than those governing similar domestic actions (principle of equivalence) and, second, that they do not
         render virtually impossible or excessively difficult the exercise of rights conferred by Community law (principle of effectiveness).
         
      
In respect of the principle of effectiveness, it is compatible with Community law to lay down reasonable limitation periods
         in the interests of legal certainty, which protects both the taxpayer and the administration concerned. In that regard, a
         time-limit of days for bringing national proceedings, which is reckoned from the end of the period allowed for voluntary
         payment of the charges, appears reasonable inasmuch as it represents a sufficient length of time to enable the taxpayer to
         take the decision to bring an action for annulment in full awareness of all the facts and for that purpose to gather all the
         matters of fact or law required.
      
Accordingly, with regard to a claim for repayment of charges levied in breach of Community law, the principle of effectiveness
         of Community law does not militate against the fixing of a limitation period of days reckoned from the end of the period
         prescribed for voluntary payment of those charges. 
      
(see paras 17-18, 21-22, 26, operative part)
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (First Chamber)June 2004(1)
(Recovery of sums paid though not due  –  Period of days for the bringing of an action  –  Principle of effectiveness)
 In Case C-30/REFERENCE to the Court under Article EC by the Tribunal Tributário de Primeira Instância de Lisboa (Portugal) for a preliminary
            ruling in the proceedings pending before that court between
            
Recheio – Cash & Carry SA
and
Fazenda Pública/Registo Nacional de Pessoas Colectivas, intervener:Ministério Público,
 on the interpretation of Community law concerning recovery of sums paid though not due,
THE COURT (First Chamber),,
 composed of: P. Jann, President of the Chamber, A. La Pergola, S. von Bahr (Rapporteur), R. Silva de Lapuerta and K. Lenaerts,
            Judges, 
            
 Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer, Registrar: M. Múgica Arzamendi, Principal Administrator,
            
after considering the written observations submitted on behalf of:
               
–
 Recheio – Cash & Carry SA, by  C. Teixeira Osório de Castro and J. Vieira Peres, advogados, 
               
–
 the Portuguese Government, by L. Fernandes and A.I. Pinto, acting as Agents,
               
–
 the Commission of the European Communities, by A. Alves Vieira and R. Lyal, acting as Agents, and by N. Castro Marques, advogado,
               
               
after hearing the oral observations of  Recheio – Cash & Carry SA, represented by J. Vieira Peres, and by P. Sousa Machado
               and M. Fontaine de Campos, advogados, of the Portuguese Government, represented by L. Fernandes and by C. Baptista Lobo, advogado,
               and of the Commission, represented by A. Alves Vieira and R. Lyal, at the hearing on November 2003,
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on December 2003,
gives the following
Judgment
            
 By order of December 2001, received at the Court on February 2002, the Tribunal Tributário de Primeira Instância de Lisboa
         (Fiscal Court of First Instance of Lisbon) referred to the Court for a preliminary ruling under Article EC three questions
         on the interpretation of Community law concerning recovery of sums paid though not due.
         
            
 Those questions were raised in proceedings between Recheio – Cash & Carry SA (‘Recheio’) and the Fazenda Pública/Registo Nacional
         de Pessoas Colectivas (Exchequer/National Register of Legal Persons) concerning repayment of registration fees paid by Recheio
         pursuant to Article 3(4) of the Schedule of Fees of the National Register of Legal Persons, approved by Decree No 366/of
         May (Diário da República I, series A, No 117, of May 1989).
         
The dispute in the main proceedings and the relevant provisions
            
 By notarial act of November 1997, Recheio increased its share capital from PTE to PTE 000.
         
            
 On March it registered that increase in capital in the National Register of Legal Persons. It was charged the sum of
         PTE by way of fees pursuant to Article 3(4) of the Schedule of Fees of the National Register of Legal Persons, which
         it paid the same day.
         
            
 On July Recheio brought an action before the Tribunal Tributário de Primeira Instância de Lisboa for an order declaring
         it to be entitled to repayment of the sum of PTE 000. It claimed that payment of the fees had been made in contravention
         of Community law, in particular to Articles 10(c) and 12(1)(e) of Council Directive 69/335/EEC of July concerning
         indirect taxes on the raising of capital (OJ, English Special Edition (II), p. 412).
         
            
 Recheio based its application on the Court of Justice’s case-law, according to which charges payable for entering an increase
         in the share capital of a capital company in a national register of legal persons are, where they amount to a tax for the
         purposes of the Directive, in principle prohibited under Article 10(c) thereof (Case C-56/Modelo [1999] ECR I-6427, and Case C-134/IGI [2000] ECR I‑7717, paragraph 25).
         
            
 The Tribunal Tributário de Primeira Instância converted Recheio’s action into an action for annulment. In its view, the action
         ought to have been brought within a period of days running from ‘the expiry of the period prescribed for voluntary payment
         of taxes’ pursuant to Article of the Código de Processo Tributário (Code of Tax Procedure, the ‘CTP’), introduced by Decree-Law
         No 154/of April (Diário da República I, series A, No 94, of April 1991), the corresponding article now being Article of the Código de Procédimento e Processo
         Tributário (Code of Tax Procedure and Proceedings, ‘the CTPP’), introduced by Decree-Law No 433/of October (Diário da República I, series A, No 250, of October 1999) and amended by Law No 15/of June (Diário da República I, series A, No 130, of June 2001).
         
            
 The Tribunal Tributário de Primeira Instância has pointed out that a period of days for introducing an action for annulment
         ought neither to be less favourable than the periods applicable to actions for repayment based on national law nor to make
         it practically impossible or excessively difficult to exercise the rights conferred by the Community legal order.
         
            
 It has found that the period in question applies to all acts that levy tax dues, whether their basis is Community or domestic
         law.
         
            
 In the circumstances, the Tribunal Tributário de Primeira Instância de Lisboa has decided to stay proceedings and to refer
         the following questions to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling: 
         
‘1)
Is it contrary to Community law for a Member State to fix a limitation period, for actions for repayment of taxes levied in
               contravention of Community law, of days reckoned from the expiry of the period for voluntary payment, so that the exercise
               of the right to reimbursement is made excessively difficult?
            
2)
If so, what is the minimum period that may be considered compatible with the rule that exercise of that right must not be
               made excessively difficult?
            
3)
What are the criteria to be used to fix that period?’ 
Concerning the application for the procedure to be reopened
            
 By application lodged at the Court Registry on January 2004, Recheio requested that the oral procedure should be reopened
         in response to the Advocate General’s Opinion. Recheio argues that the Advocate General based his Opinion on a plainly inaccurate
         reading of Portuguese law to the effect that the limitation period at issue was not days but five and a half months.
         
            
 On this point it must be borne in mind that the Court may, of its own motion, on a proposal from the Advocate General or at
         the request of the parties, order that the oral procedure should be reopened in accordance with Article of its Rules of
         Procedure, if it considers that it lacks sufficient information or that the case must be dealt with on the basis of an argument
         which has not been debated between the parties (see, inter alia, Case C-299/Philips [2002] ECR I-5475, paragraph 20; Case C-184/P Hirschfeldt  v AEE [2002] ECR I-10173, paragraph 30, and Case C-209/Schilling and Fleck-Schilling [2003] ECR I-0000, paragraph 19).
         
            
 Since neither of those two situations is a feature of this case, the Court considers that there is in the circumstances no
         need to order that the oral procedure should be reopened. In consequence, the request for that reopening must be dismissed.
         
Concerning the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
            
 By its questions, which may appropriately be examined together, the national court seeks in substance to ascertain whether,
         in relation to a claim for repayment of charges levied in breach of Community law, it is contrary to the principle of effectiveness
         of Community law for the time-limit extinguishing such a claim to be fixed at days from the end of the period allowed for
         voluntary payment of those charges.
         
            
 It must be borne in mind that Member States are in principle required to repay charges levied in breach of Community law (Joined
         Cases C-192/to C-218/Comateb and Others [1997] ECR I-165, paragraph 20).
         
            
 The Court has also observed on several occasions that the problem of the repayment of charges paid though not due is settled
         in different ways in the various Member States, and even within a single Member State, according to the various kinds of taxes
         or charges in question. In certain cases, objections or claims of that kind are subject to specific procedural conditions
         and time-limits under the law with regard both to complaints submitted to the tax authorities and to legal proceedings. In
         other cases, claims for repayment of charges paid but not due must be brought before the ordinary courts, mainly in the form
         of actions for recovery of sums paid but not owed, such claims being available for varying lengths of time, in some cases
         for the limitation period laid down under the general law (see, in particular, Case C-343/Dilexport [1999] ECR I-579, paragraph 24).
         
            
 This diversity between national systems derives mainly from the lack of Community rules on the refund of national charges
         levied though not due. In such circumstances, it is for the domestic legal system of each Member State to designate the courts
         and tribunals having jurisdiction and to lay down the detailed procedural rules governing actions for safeguarding rights
         which individuals derive from Community law, provided, first, that such rules are not less favourable than those governing
         similar domestic actions (principle of equivalence) and, second, that they do not render virtually impossible or excessively
         difficult the exercise of rights conferred by Community law (principle of effectiveness) (see, in particular, Case C-231/Edis [1998] ECR I-4951, paragraph 34). 
         
            
 As regards the latter principle, the Court has recognised that it is compatible with Community law to lay down reasonable
         time-limits for bringing proceedings in the interests of legal certainty, which protects both the taxpayer and the administration
         concerned (Edis, paragraph 35).
         
            
 In this instance, Article of the CTP, replaced by Article 102(1)(a) of the CTPP, lays down a limitation period of days
         for the introduction of an application for annulment of the act fixing the charges, reckoned from the voluntary payment of
         those charges.
         
            
 While Edis admittedly concerned a limitation period of three years from the date on which the charge was paid, that is to say, a distinctly
         longer period than that at issue in the main proceedings in this case, it follows also from that judgment and the Court’s
         settled case-law that the Member States remain at liberty to fix longer or shorter periods for repayment of sums paid though
         not due, on condition that they do not render virtually impossible or excessively difficult the exercise of rights conferred
         by the Community legal order.
         
            
 In this instance, a period of days reckoned from the end of the period allowed for voluntary payment of the charges must
         be considered to represent a sufficient length of time to enable the taxpayer to take the decision to bring an action for
         annulment in full awareness of all the facts and for that purpose to gather all the matters of fact or law required.
         
            
 As is made clear in paragraph of the Advocate General’s Opinion, that period can be called reasonable, in comparison with
         the periods of similar duration fixed in the legal systems of several other Member States.
         
            
 So far as concerns Recheio’s argument that that period is not acceptable inasmuch as the Portuguese Republic had not transposed
         Directive 69/at the time the fees were paid, but only two years after Modelo, Community law does not prohibit a Member State which has not properly transposed Directive 69/from resisting actions
         for repayment of duties levied in contravention of that directive by relying on a national limitation period. Moreover, the
         fact that the Court of Justice has given a preliminary ruling on the interpretation of the provision of Community law in question
         is as a rule immaterial in this respect (see, in particular, Edis, paragraphs and 47).
         
            
 As regards Recheio’s argument that the period at issue is not justified, in so far as there are available to the tax authorities
         longer periods for the taking of a decision levying charges on taxpayers, no more need be stated than that that fact does
         not mean that the period of days at issue in the main proceedings is insufficient having regard to the principle of effectiveness.
         Furthermore, the objectives with which the periods available to the tax authorities in exercising their fiscal powers are
         consonant are generally different from those which apply to the period prescribed for the introducing of an action for annulment.
         
            
 In the light of the foregoing, it must be held that a national limitation period such as that at issue in the main proceedings
         does not render it excessively difficult or practically impossible to exercise the rights conferred by Community law.
         
            
 In the circumstances, the answer to be given to the questions referred for a preliminary ruling by the Tribunal Tributário
         de Primeira Instância must be that, with regard to a claim for repayment of charges levied in breach of Community law, the
         principle of effectiveness of Community law does not militate against the fixing of a limitation period of days reckoned
         from the end of the period prescribed for voluntary payment of those charges.
         
Costs
            
 The costs incurred by the Portuguese Government and by the Commission, which have submitted observations to the Court, are
         not recoverable. Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before
         the national court, the decision on costs is a matter for that court.
         
On those grounds,
THE COURT (First Chamber),
 in answer to the questions referred to it by the Tribunal Tributário de Primeira Instância de Lisboa by order of December
         2001, hereby rules:
         With regard to a claim for repayment of charges levied in breach of Community law, the principle of effectiveness of Community
               law does not militate against the fixing of a limitation period of days reckoned from the end of the period prescribed
               for voluntary payment of those charges.
Jann
La Pergola
von Bahr
Silva de Lapuerta
Lenaerts
 Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on June 2004.
         
R. Grass
P. Jann
Registrar
President of the First Chamber
 –
            
Language of the case: Portuguese.
Top  
 