
Case C-363/Romana Slanina
v
Unabhängiger Finanzsenat, Außenstelle Wien
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Verwaltungsgerichtshof (Austria))
(Social security for migrant workers – Family allowances – Refusal – National of one Member State resident with her child in another Member State, while the father of the child works in the
         former Member State)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Social security for migrant workers – Family allowances – Minor child residing with one parent in a Member State other than
            the Member State providing the benefit – Other parent working in the Member State providing the benefit – Maintaining entitlement
            to family allowances payable by the Member State providing the benefit – Conditions
(Council Regulation No 1408/71, Art. 73)
2.        Social security for migrant workers – Family allowances – Community rules for prevention of overlapping benefits – Worker
            entitled to allowances in his State of employment and his State of residence – Suspension of the right to benefits in the
            Member State of residence and employment of the ex-husband up to the sum of the amount provided for by the former State
(Council Regulation No 1408/71, Art. 76)
1.        Article of Regulation No 1408/71, in the version amended and updated by Regulation No 118/97, must be interpreted as meaning
         that a divorced person who was paid family allowances by the competent institution of the Member State in which she was living
         and where her ex-husband continues to live and work maintains in respect of her child, provided that child is recognised as
         a ‘member of the family’ of the ex-husband within the meaning of Article 1(f)(i) of that regulation, entitlement to such allowances
         even though she leaves that State and settles with her child in another Member State, where she does not work, and even though
         her ex-husband could receive those allowances in his Member State of residence.
      
(see para. 32, operative part 1)
2.        The fact that a person is in employment in her Member State of residence, giving entitlement to family allowances, has, under
         Article of Regulation No 1408/71, in the version amended and updated by Regulation No 118/97, the effect of suspending
         entitlement to family allowances payable under the legislation of the Member State in whose territory her ex-husband is in
         employment, up to the sum provided for by the legislation of her Member State of residence.
      
(see para. 38, operative part 2)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Social security for migrant workers – Family allowances – Refusal – National of one Member State resident with her child in another Member State, while the father of the child works in the
         former Member State)
      
In Case C‑363/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Verwaltungsgerichtshof (Austria), made by decision of June 2008, received at the Court on August 2008, in the proceedings
      
Romana Slanina
v
Unabhängiger Finanzsenat, Außenstelle Wien,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of J.-C. Bonichot, President of the Fourth Chamber, acting as President of the Second Chamber, C. Toader, C.W.A.
         Timmermans, K. Schiemann (Rapporteur) and P. Kūris, Judges,
      
Advocate General: M. Poiares Maduro,
Registrar: B. Fülöp, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on July 2009,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Ms Slanina, by M. Tröthandl, Rechtsanwalt,
–        the Unabhängiger Finanzsenat, Außenstelle Wien, by W. Pavlik, acting as Agent,
–        the Austrian Government, by C. Pesendorfer and M. Winkler, acting as Agents,
–        the Greek Government, by S. Vodina and O. Patsopoulou, acting as Agents,
–        the Polish Government, by M. Dowgielewicz, acting as Agent,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by V. Kreuschitz, acting as Agent,
having decided, after hearing the Advocate General, to proceed to judgment without an Opinion,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/of the Council of June
         on the application of social security schemes to employed persons, to self-employed persons and to members of their families
         moving within the Community, in the version amended and updated by Council Regulation (EC) No 118/of December (OJ
         L 28, p. 1) (‘Regulation No 1408/71’).
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings between Ms Slanina, a divorced Austrian national who had transferred her
         permanent residence to Greece, and the Unabhängiger Finanzsenat, Außenstelle Wien, concerning a demand for repayment of family
         allowances and tax credits received by Ms Slanina in Austria in respect of her daughter.
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
Article 1(f)(i) of Regulation No 1408/defines ‘member of the family’ as:
      
‘… any person defined or recognised as a member of the family or designated as a member of the household by the legislation
         under which benefits are provided …; where, however, the said legislations regard as a member of the family or a member of
         the household only a person living under the same roof as the employed or self-employed person, this condition shall be considered
         satisfied if the person in question is mainly dependent on that person …’
      
According to Article 2(1) of Regulation No 1408/71, that regulation applies to:
      
‘… employed or self-employed persons who are or have been subject to the legislation of one or more Member States and who
         are nationals of one of the Member States … as well as to the members of their families and their survivors.’ 
      
Article of Regulation No 1408/provides:
      
‘1.      Subject to Article 14c, persons to whom this Regulation applies shall be subject to the legislation of a single Member State
         only. That legislation shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of this Title.
      
2.      Subject to Articles to 17:
(a)      a person employed in the territory of one Member State shall be subject to the legislation of that State even if he resides
         in the territory of another Member State; …
      
…’
Article of Regulation No 1408/71, headed ‘Employed or self-employed persons the members of whose families reside in a Member
         State other than the competent State ’, reads as follows:
      
‘An employed or self-employed person subject to the legislation of a Member State shall be entitled, in respect of the members
         of his family who are residing in another Member State, to the family benefits provided for by the legislation of the former
         State, as if they were residing in that State, subject to the provisions of Annex VI.’
      
Article 76(1) of Regulation No 1408/71, headed ‘Rules of priority in cases of overlapping entitlement to family benefits under
         the legislation of the competent State and under the legislation of the Member State of residence of the members of the family
         ’, provides:
      
‘Where, during the same period, for the same family member and by reason of carrying on an occupation, family benefits are
         provided for by the legislation of the Member State in whose territory the members of the family are residing, entitlement
         to the family benefits due in accordance with the legislation of another Member State, if appropriate under Article or
         74, shall be suspended up to the amount provided for in the legislation of the first Member State.’
      
Although amendments were made to Regulation No 1408/during the period to which the dispute in the main proceedings relates,
         they have no effect on the outcome of that dispute.
      
 National legislation
Under Paragraph 2(1) of the Law on Compensation for Family Expenses (Familienlastenausgleichsgesetz) of (‘the FLAG’),
         persons who are permanently or habitually resident in Austria are entitled to family allowances in respect of their children.
      
Paragraph 2(2) of the FLAG provides that the person entitled to receive family allowances is the person whose household the
         child belongs to. A person to whose household the child does not belong but who is mainly responsible for the cost of maintaining
         that child is entitled to family allowances where no other person is entitled to receive them under the first sentence of
         that subparagraph.
      
Paragraph 2(8) of the FLAG states that persons who have their permanent residence both in Austria and abroad are entitled
         to receive family allowances only if their centre of interests lies in Austria and if the children reside there permanently.
         That provision states that a person’s centre of interests lies in the State with which he or she has the closer personal and
         economic connections.
      
Paragraph 26(1) of the FLAG provides:
      
‘Any person who has wrongly received family allowances must repay the amounts in question …’
 The main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
According to the order for reference, Ms Slanina is the mother of a daughter, Nina, born in 1991. When family allowances were
         first paid to Ms Slanina the conditions for granting them were met.
      
Since summer 1997, Ms Slanina has been living in Greece and Nina has been at school there since autumn that year. Nina’s father,
         Ms Slanina’s ex-husband and an Austrian national, lives and is in employment in Austria. The applicant in the main proceedings
         exercises sole parental authority over her daughter. The child’s father is required to pay maintenance but does not do so.
      
From January to October Ms Slanina received family allowances and tax credits in Austria in respect of her
         daughter Nina totalling EUR 884.95, that is to say, EUR 824.in family allowances and EUR 060.in tax credits.
         By decision of the Finanzamt (Tax Office) of Mödling (Austria) of October 2003, she was ordered to repay those amounts
         on the ground that since she had been living permanently with her daughter in Greece. The Finanzamt considered that one
         of the conditions for granting family allowances under Paragraph 2(8) of the FLAG, namely the condition relating to the child’s
         centre of interests and permanent residence in Austria, was not met.
      
Until Ms Slanina was neither in employment nor registered as seeking work in Greece. She lived on contributions from
         her relations and on her savings. Since she has been working for a Greek company as a seasonal tourist guide from May
         until the beginning of October each year.
      
The action brought by Ms Slanina against the decision of the Finanzamt Mödling of October was dismissed, first by
         a preliminary decision of that Finanzamt of December and then by a decision of the Unabhängiger Finanzsenat, Außenstelle
         Wien (Independent Tax Tribunal, Vienna Office) of June 2005. Ms Slanina therefore brought proceedings in the Verwaltungsgerichtshof
         (Administrative Court). She claimed in essence that although under Austrian legislation she was not entitled to family allowances,
         Regulation No 1408/should none the less apply. Since Nina’s father, her ex-husband, was living and working in Austria,
         Ms Slanina was entitled to family allowances under Article of that regulation, despite the fact that she was living in
         Greece.
      
It is in those circumstances that the Verwaltungsgerichtshof decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following questions
         to the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.      Does it follow from Regulation No 1408/… that the divorced wife, who is not in work, of a man who is resident and employed
         in Austria, maintains her right to family allowances (in respect of a child) vis-à-vis Austria, if she establishes a permanent
         residence in another Member State and transfers her centre of interests there, and if she continues not to be in work there?
         
      
2.      Is it relevant to the answer to question that Austria, where the divorced husband remains and where he is exclusively resident
         and employed, grants him under certain conditions the right to family allowances (in respect of the child), if the divorced
         wife’s right no longer exists?
      
3.      Does Regulation No 1408/give the divorced wife a right to family allowances (in respect of the child) vis-à-vis Austria,
         where the divorced husband and father of the child is resident and employed, if the circumstances as described in question
         change in that the wife takes up employment in the new Member State?’ 
      
 The questions referred
 First and second questions
By its first and second questions, which it is appropriate to examine together, the referring court asks essentially whether
         Article of Regulation No 1408/must be interpreted as meaning that a divorced person who was paid family allowances by
         the competent institution of the Member State in which she was living and where her ex-husband continues to live and work
         maintains her entitlement to those allowances even though she leaves that State and settles with her child in another Member
         State, where she does not work, and even though her ex-husband, the father of the child, could receive those allowances in
         his State of residence. 
      
According to the documents before the Court, Ms Slanina is the ex-wife of an employee who during the period relevant to the
         dispute in the main proceedings was subject, under Article 13(1) and (2) of Regulation No 1408/71, to the legislation of the
         Republic of Austria, the Member State in which he worked.
      
Article of Regulation No 1408/provides that an employed or self-employed person subject to the legislation of a Member
         State is entitled, in respect of the members of his family who are residing in another Member State, to the family benefits
         provided for by the legislation of the former State, as if they were residing in that State.
      
The purpose of Article is to guarantee members of the family of a worker subject to the legislation of a Member State who
         are residing in another Member State the grant of the family benefits provided for by the applicable legislation of the former
         State (see Joined Cases C‑245/and C-312/HoeverandZachow [1996] ECR I-4895, paragraph 32, and Case C-255/Humer [2002] ECR I-1205, paragraph 39).
      
Even though the referring court has not put a question to the Court in that regard, it should be pointed out that the entitlement
         to family allowances in respect of a child under Article of Regulation No 1408/71, paid either to Ms Slanina or to her
         ex-husband, was in fact conditional upon the child coming within the personal scope of Regulation No 1408/71. That scope is
         defined in Article of that regulation. Thus, under Article 2(1), that regulation applies in particular to ‘employed or self-employed
         persons who are or have been subject to the legislation of one or more Member States and who are nationals of one of the Member
         States … as well as to the members of their families …’
      
The term ‘member of the family’ is defined in Article 1(f)(i) of Regulation No 1408/as ‘any person defined or recognised
         as a member of the family or designated as a member of the household by the legislation under which benefits are provided
         …; where, however, the said legislations regard as a member of the family or a member of the household only a person living
         under the same roof as the employed or self-employed person, this condition shall be considered satisfied if the person in
         question is mainly dependent on that person. …’
      
Thus, first of all, that provision makes express reference to national legislation, defining a ‘member of the family’ as ‘any
         person defined or recognised as a member of the family or designated as a member of the household by the legislation under
         which benefits are provided …’, that is to say, in the case in the main proceedings, by the FLAG.
      
Secondly, Article 1(f)(i) of Regulation No 1408/introduces the proviso ‘where, however, the said [national] legislations
         regard as a member of the family or a member of the household only a person living under the same roof as the employed or
         self-employed person, this condition shall be considered satisfied if the person in question is mainly dependent on that person.
         …’
      
Accordingly, it is for the referring court to establish whether the condition laid down in Article 1(f)(i) of Regulation No
         1408/is met in the present case, that is to say, whether the child, although not having lived with her father during the
         period at issue in the main proceedings, could be regarded for the purposes of national law as a ‘member of the family’ of
         her father and, if that is not the case, whether she could be regarded as being ‘mainly dependent on’ him.
      
It is apparent from the documents before the Court that Ms Slanina’s ex-husband was indeed required to pay maintenance in
         respect of his daughter Nina. The fact that he has not paid it is irrelevant as regards the issue of whether the child is
         a member of his family.
      
If the findings made by the referring court were to lead it to conclude that the situation at issue in the main proceedings
         came within the personal scope of Regulation No 1408/71, the question would arise whether a person in Ms Slanina’s situation
         may rely on Article of that regulation. The national court also asks whether the fact that the divorced husband remained
         in Austria, where he works and would be entitled to the benefits at issue in the main proceedings under national law, can
         affect the right of a person in Ms Slanina’s situation to retain those benefits.
      
In that regard, it should be noted that the fact that Ms Slanina and her ex-husband are divorced is irrelevant. The Court
         has already held that although Regulation No 1408/does not expressly cover family situations following a divorce there
         is nothing to justify the exclusion of such situations from the scope of Regulation No 1408/71. One of the normal consequences
         of a divorce is that custody of the children is granted to one of the parents, with whom those children will reside. It is
         possible, for a variety of reasons (in this case as the result of a divorce), that the parent with custody of a child will
         leave his or her Member State of origin and settle in another Member State in order to work there, as in Humer, or, as in the case in the main proceedings here, to take up employment there only some years after establishing his or her
         residence there. In such a case, the residence of the minor child will also be transferred to that other Member State (see
         Humer, paragraphs and 43).
      
It should be observed that family benefits by their nature cannot be regarded as payable to an individual in isolation from
         his or her family circumstances. It is therefore irrelevant that the person to whom the family benefits are to be awarded
         is Ms Slanina rather than the worker himself, namely, Ms Slanina’s ex-husband (see Humer, paragraph 50).
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the first and second questions is that Article of Regulation No 1408/must
         be interpreted as meaning that a divorced person who was paid family allowances by the competent institution of the Member
         State in which she was living and where her ex-husband continues to live and work maintains in respect of her child, provided
         that child is recognised as a ‘member of the family’ of the ex-husband within the meaning of Article 1(f)(i) of that regulation,
         entitlement to such allowances even though she leaves that State and settles with her child in another Member State, where
         she does not work, and even though her ex-husband could receive those allowances in his Member State of residence.
      
 Third question
By its third question, the referring court asks essentially whether the fact that Ms Slanina took up employment in Greece
         affected her entitlement to family allowances in Austria.
      
If it were to be established that engaging in such employment gave rise in Greece to entitlement to family allowances equivalent
         to those paid in Austria, the answer to that question would be yes. 
      
It is apparent from the observations of the Greek Government and the Commission that Greek law provides for the payment of
         family allowances only to certain employed persons. Such payment is therefore always connected to an employment relationship,
         and residence in Greece by itself is not sufficient. It is for the referring court to determine whether the fact that Ms Slanina
         was in employment in the Hellenic Republic gave her an entitlement to family allowances in that Member State.
      
If it emerged that such was the case, it would be necessary to apply the rule against ‘overlapping’ in Article of Regulation
         No 1408/71. That provision is intended to resolve cases where entitlement to family benefits under Article of that regulation
         overlaps with entitlement to family benefits under the national legislation of the family members’ State of residence by reason
         of the carrying on of an occupation (see Case C‑543/DodlandOberhollenzer [2005] ECR I‑5049, paragraph 53). 
      
Under Article of Regulation No 1408/71, the obligation to pay family benefits would in that case have fallen first of all
         on the Hellenic Republic as the Member State in which Nina and her mother are resident. Entitlement to Austrian family benefits,
         under Article of that regulation, would have been suspended up to the sum provided for by Greek legislation.
      
In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the third question is that the fact that a person in a situation such as that
         of the applicant in the main proceedings is in employment in her Member State of residence, giving entitlement to family allowances,
         has, under Article of Regulation No 1408/71, the effect of suspending entitlement to family allowances payable under the
         legislation of the Member State in whose territory her ex-husband is in employment, up to the sum provided for by the legislation
         of her Member State of residence.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/of the Council of June on the application of social security schemes to
            employed persons, to self-employed persons and to members of their families moving within the Community, in the version amended
            and updated by Council Regulation (EC) No 118/of December 1996, must be interpreted as meaning that a divorced person
            who was paid family allowances by the competent institution of the Member State in which she was living and where her ex-husband
            continues to live and work maintains in respect of her child, provided that child is recognised as a ‘member of the family’
            of the ex-husband within the meaning of Article 1(f)(i) of that regulation, entitlement to such allowances even though she
            leaves that State and settles with her child in another Member State, where she does not work, and even though her ex-husband
            could receive those allowances in his Member State of residence. 
2.      The fact that a person in a situation such as that of the applicant in the main proceedings is in employment in her Member
            State of residence, giving entitlement to family allowances, has, under Article of Regulation No 1408/71, in the version
            amended and updated by Regulation No 118/97, the effect of suspending entitlement to family allowances payable under the legislation
            of the Member State in whose territory her ex-husband is in employment, up to the sum provided for by the legislation of her
            Member State of residence.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: German.
      
Top  
 