
Case C-192/TeliaSonera Finland Oyj
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Korkein hallinto-oikeus)
(Telecommunications sector – Electronic communications – Directive 2002/19/EC – Article 4(1) – Networks and services – Interconnection agreements between telecommunications undertakings – Obligation to negotiate in good faith – Definition of ‘operator of public communications networks’ – Articles and – Powers of the national regulatory authorities – Undertaking without significant market power)
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Approximation of laws – Electronic communications networks and services – Access to and interconnection of communications
            networks and associated facilities –  Directive 2002/(European Parliament and Council Directives 2002/19, Arts 2, 4(1), and 8, and 2002/21, Art. 2)
2.        Approximation of laws – Electronic communications networks and services – Access to and interconnection of communications
            networks and associated facilities –  Directive 2002/(European Parliament and Council Directive 2002/19, Arts 4(1), 8(2), and 12(1))
3.        Approximation of laws – Electronic communications networks and services – Access to and interconnection of communications
            networks and associated facilities – Directive 2002/(European Parliament and Council Directive 2002/19, Arts 4(1), and 5(1), first subpara. and second subpara., point (a), and
            (4), and 2002/21, Art. 8)
1.        Article 4(1) of Directive 2002/on access to, and interconnection of, electronic communications networks and associated
         facilities read in conjunction with recitals 5, 6, and in its preamble and with Articles and thereof, precludes national
         legislation which does not restrict the possibility of relying on the obligation to negotiate on the interconnection of networks
         solely to operators of public communications networks.
      
The reciprocity of the interconnection provided for in Article 4(1) of that directive implies that the two parties to the
         negotiations are public network operators. Therefore, the obligation to negotiate laid down in Article 4(1) concerns only
         the interconnection of networks, to the exclusion of other forms of network access, and applies only to operators of public
         communications networks with respect to other operators of public communications networks. 
      
It is for the national court, taking into account the definitions given in Article of Directives 2002/and 2002/21, to
         determine whether, having regard to the status and the nature of the operators concerned they may be classified as operators
         of public communications networks.
      
(see paras 33-34, 47-48, operative part 1)
2.        A national regulatory authority may take the view that the obligation to negotiate an interconnection, provided for under
         Article 4(1) of Directive 2002/(on access to and interconnection of electronic communications networks and associated facilities),
         has been breached where an undertaking which does not have significant market power offers another undertaking interconnection
         under unilateral conditions which are likely to hinder the emergence of a competitive market at the retail level where those
         conditions prevent the clients of the other undertaking from benefiting from its services.
      
(see para. 55, operative part 2)
3.        The relevant provisions of Directive 2002/on a common regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and services
         and of Directive 2002/on access to, and interconnection of, electronic communications networks and associated facilities
         enable a national regulatory authority to order an undertaking which does not have significant market power but which controls
         access to end-users to negotiate in good faith with another undertaking either an interconnection of the two networks concerned
         if the undertaking requesting such access must be classified as an operator of public communications networks, or interoperability
         of text and multimedia message services if the undertaking which makes the request is not covered by that classification.
      
(see paras 61-62, operative part 3)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Second Chamber)
November (*)
      
(Telecommunications sector – Electronic communications – Directive 2002/19/EC – Article 4(1) – Networks and services – Interconnection agreements between telecommunications undertakings – Obligation to negotiate in good faith – Definition of ‘operator of public communications networks’ – Articles and – Powers of the national regulatory authorities – Undertaking without significant market power)
In Case C‑192/08,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Korkein hallinto-oikeus (Finland), made by decision of May 2008, received at the Court on the same day, in the proceedings
      
TeliaSonera Finland Oyj,
intervening parties:
iMEZ Ab,
THE COURT (Second Chamber),
composed of, J.‑C. Bonichot, President of the Fourth Chamber, acting as President of the Second Chamber, C.W.A. Timmermans,
         K. Schiemann, P. Kūris (Rapporteur) and L. Bay Larsen, Judges,
      
Advocate General: D. Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer,
Registrar: C. Strömholm, Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on April 2009,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        TeliaSonera Finland Oyj, by K. Mattila, oikeustieteen kandidaatti,
–        iMEZ Ab, by S. Aalto, asianajaja,
–        the Finnish Government, by A. Guimaraes-Purokoski, acting as Agent,
–        the Italian Government, by I. Bruni, acting as Agent, and P. Gentili, avvocato dello Stato,
–        the Lithuanian Government, by I. Jarukaitis, acting as Agent,
–        the Netherlands Government, by C. Wissels and M. de Mol, acting as Agents,
–        the Polish Government, by M. Dowgielewicz, acting as Agent,
–        the Romanian Government, by A. Ciobanu-Dordea, acting as Agent, and E. Gane and L. Nicolae, consilieri,
–        the Commission of the European Communities, by I. Koskinen and A. Nijenhuis, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on May 2009,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Articles 4(1), and of Directive 2002/19/EC of the
         European Parliament and of the Council of March on access to, and interconnection of, electronic communications networks
         and associated facilities (‘the Access Directive’) (OJ L 108, p. 7). 
      
The reference was made in the course of proceedings brought by TeliaSonera Finland Oyj (‘TeliaSonera’), successor in law to
         Sonera Mobile Networks Oy, against the Viestintävirasto (Finnish Communications Regulatory Authority, ‘the CRA’) and iMEZ
         Ab (‘iMEZ’) concerning a decision adopted on December by the CRA with respect to TeliaSonera.
      
 Legal context
 Community legislation
Recitals 5, 6, and in the preamble to the ‘Access’ Directive state:
      
‘(5)      In an open and competitive market, there should be no restrictions that prevent undertakings from negotiating access and interconnection
         arrangements between themselves, in particular on cross-border agreements, subject to the competition rules of the [EC] Treaty.
         In the context of achieving a more efficient, truly pan-European market, with effective competition, more choice and competitive
         services to consumers, undertakings which receive requests for access or interconnection should in principle conclude such
         agreements on a commercial basis, and negotiate in good faith.
      
(6)      In markets where there continue to be large differences in negotiating power between undertakings, and where some undertakings
         rely on infrastructure provided by others for delivery of their services, it is appropriate to establish a framework to ensure
         that the market functions effectively. National regulatory authorities should have the power to secure, where commercial negotiation
         fails, adequate access and interconnection and interoperability of services in the interest of end-users. In particular, they
         may ensure end‑to‑end connectivity by imposing proportionate obligations on undertakings that control access to end-users;
         …
      
…
(8)      Network operators who control access to their own customers do so on the basis of unique numbers or addresses from a published
         numbering or addressing range. Other network operators need to be able to deliver traffic to those customers, and so need
         to be able to interconnect directly or indirectly to each other. The existing rights and obligations to negotiate interconnection
         should therefore be maintained. …
      
…
(19)      Mandating access to network infrastructure can be justified as a means of increasing competition, but national regulatory
         authorities need to balance the rights of an infrastructure owner to exploit its infrastructure for its own benefit, and the
         rights of other service providers to access facilities that are essential for the provision of competing services. Where obligations
         are imposed on operators that require them to meet reasonable requests for access to and use of networks elements and associated
         facilities, such requests should only be refused on the basis of objective criteria such as technical feasibility or the need
         to maintain network integrity. …’
      
Under Article 1(1) of the Access Directive:
      
‘… this Directive harmonises the way in which Member States regulate access to, and interconnection of, electronic communications
         networks and associated facilities. The aim is to establish a regulatory framework, in accordance with internal market principles,
         for the relationships between suppliers of networks and services that will result in sustainable competition, interoperability
         of electronic communications services and consumer benefits.’
      
Article of that directive includes the following definitions:
      
‘…
(a)       “access” means the making available of facilities and/or services, to another undertaking, under defined conditions, on either
         an exclusive or non-exclusive basis, for the purpose of providing electronic communications services. It covers inter alia:
         access to network elements and associated facilities, which may involve the connection of equipment, by fixed or non-fixed
         means (in particular this includes access to the local loop and to facilities and services necessary to provide services over
         the local loop), access to physical infrastructure including buildings, ducts and masts; access to relevant software systems
         including operational support systems, access to number translation or systems offering equivalent functionality, access to
         fixed and mobile networks, in particular for roaming, access to conditional access systems for digital television services;
         access to virtual network services;
      
(b)      “interconnection” means the physical and logical linking of public communications networks used by the same or a different
         undertaking in order to allow the users of one undertaking to communicate with users of the same or another undertaking, or
         to access services provided by another undertaking. Services may be provided by the parties involved or other parties who
         have access to the network. Interconnection is a specific type of access implemented between public network operators;
      
(c)      “operator” means an undertaking providing or authorised to provide a public communications network or an associated facility;
…’
According to Article 3(1) of the Access Directive:
      
‘Member States shall ensure that there are no restrictions which prevent undertakings in the same Member State or in different
         Member States from negotiating between themselves agreements on technical and commercial arrangements for access and/or interconnection,
         in accordance with Community law. The undertaking requesting access or interconnection does not need to be authorised to operate
         in the Member State where access or interconnection is requested, if it is not providing services and does not operate a network
         in that Member State.’
      
Article of the Access Directive, entitled ‘Rights and obligations for undertakings’, is worded as follows:
      
‘Operators of public communications networks shall have a right and, when requested by other undertakings so authorised, an
         obligation to negotiate interconnection with each other for the purpose of providing publicly available electronic communications
         services, in order to ensure provision and interoperability of services throughout the Community. Operators shall offer access
         and interconnection to other undertakings on terms and conditions consistent with obligations imposed by the national regulatory
         authority pursuant to Articles 5, 6, and 8.
      
…’
Article of the Access Directive, entitled ‘Powers and responsibilities of the national regulatory authorities with regard
         to access and interconnection’, provides:
      
‘1.      National regulatory authorities shall, acting in pursuit of the objectives set out in Article of Directive 2002/21/EC [of
         the European Parliament and of the Council of March on a common regulatory framework for electronic communications
         networks and services (“the Framework Directive”) (OJ L 108, p. 33)], encourage and where appropriate ensure, in accordance
         with the provisions of this Directive, adequate access and interconnection, and interoperability of services, exercising their
         responsibility in a way that promotes efficiency, sustainable competition, and gives the maximum benefit to end-users.
      
In particular, without prejudice to measures that may be taken regarding undertakings with significant market power in accordance
         with Article 8, national regulatory authorities shall be able to impose:
      
(a)      to the extent that is necessary to ensure end-to-end connectivity, obligations on undertakings that control access to end-users,
         including in justified cases the obligation to interconnect their networks where this is not already the case;
      
...
2.      When imposing obligations on an operator to provide access in accordance with Article 12, national regulatory authorities
         may lay down technical or operational conditions to be met by the provider and/or beneficiaries of such access, in accordance
         with Community law, where necessary to ensure normal operation of the network. Conditions that refer to implementation of
         specific technical standards or specifications shall respect Article of Directive 2002/21/EC (“Framework Directive”).
      
3.      Obligations and conditions imposed in accordance with paragraphs and shall be objective, transparent, proportionate and
         non-discriminatory, and shall be implemented in accordance with the procedures referred to in Articles and of Directive
         2002/21/EC (“Framework Directive”).
      
4.      With regard to access and interconnection, Member States shall ensure that the national regulatory authority is empowered
         to intervene at its own initiative where justified or, in the absence of agreement between undertakings, at the request of
         either of the parties involved, in order to secure the policy objectives of Article of Directive 2002/21/EC (“Framework
         Directive”), in accordance with the provisions of this Directive and the procedures referred to in Articles and 7, and
         of Directive 2002/21/EC (“Framework Directive”).’
      
Articles to of the Access Directive define the obligations imposed on operators and the market review procedures.
      
In particular, Articles to of that directive define the obligations and the procedures applicable to operators designated
         as having significant market power.
      
Under Article 12, entitled ‘Obligations of access to, and use of, specific network facilities’:
      
‘1.       A national regulatory authority may, in accordance with the provisions of Article 8, impose obligations on operators to meet
         reasonable requests for access to, and use of, specific network elements and associated facilities, inter alia in situations
         where the national regulatory authority considers that denial of access or unreasonable terms and conditions having a similar
         effect would hinder the emergence of a sustainable competitive market at the retail level, or would not be in the end-user’s
         interest.
      
Operators may be required inter alia:
(a)      to give third parties access to specified network elements and/or facilities, including unbundled access to the local loop;
(b)      to negotiate in good faith with undertakings requesting access;
…
(g)      to provide specified services needed to ensure interoperability of end-to-end services to users, including facilities for
         intelligent network services or roaming on mobile networks;
      
…
i)      to interconnect networks or network facilities.
National regulatory authorities may attach to those obligations conditions covering fairness, reasonableness and timeliness.
…’
Directive 2002/20/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of March on the authorisation of electronic communications
         networks and services (‘Authorisation Directive’) (OJ L 108, p. 21), contains in Article 2(2)(a) the following definition:
      
‘“general authorisation” means a legal framework established by the Member State ensuring rights for the provision of electronic
         communications networks or services and laying down sector specific obligations that may apply to all or to specific types
         of electronic communications networks and services, in accordance with this Directive.’
      
Article of that directive, entitled ‘Minimum list of rights derived from the general authorisation’ is worded as follows:
      
‘1.      Undertakings [so] authorised pursuant to Article 3, shall have the right to:
(a)      provide electronic communications networks and services;
…
2.      When such undertakings provide electronic communications networks or services to the public the general authorisation shall
         also give them the right to:
      
(a)      negotiate interconnection with and where applicable obtain access to or interconnection from other providers of publicly available
         communications networks and services covered by a general authorisation anywhere in the Community under the conditions of
         and in accordance with Directive 2002/19/EC (“Access Directive”);
      
…’
Article of the Authorisation Directive provides:
      
‘1.      The general authorisation for the provision of electronic communications networks or services … may be subject only to the
         conditions listed respectively in part … A … of the Annex. Such conditions shall be objectively justified in relation to the
         network or service concerned, non-discriminatory, proportionate and transparent.
      
2.      Specific obligations which may be imposed on providers of electronic communications networks and services under Articles 5(1),
         5(2), and of [the Access Directive] … shall be legally separate from the rights and obligations under the general authorisation.
         …
      
…’
According to Part A of the Annex to the Authorisation Directive, one of the conditions which may be attached to a general
         authorisation is to ensure the interoperability of services and interconnection of networks in conformity with the Access
         Directive.
      
As to the Framework Directive, Article contains, inter alia, the following definitions:
      
‘…
(c)       “communications service” means a service normally provided for remuneration which consists wholly or mainly in the conveyance
         of signals on electronic communications networks, including telecommunications services and transmission services in networks
         used for broadcasting, but exclude services providing, or exercising editorial control over, content transmitted using electronic
         communications networks and services; it does not include information society services, as defined in Article of Directive
         98/34/EC [of the European Parliament and of the Council of June laying down a procedure for the provision of information
         in the field of technical standards and regulations (OJ L 204, p. 37)], which do not consist wholly or mainly in the
         conveyance of signals on electronic communications networks; 
      
(d) “public communications network” means an electronic communications network used wholly or mainly for the provision of
         publicly available electronic communications services;
      
…’ 
Articles to of the Framework Directive define the tasks which the national regulatory authorities must accomplish in
         order to secure the objectives of competition, the development of the internal market and the promotion of the interests of
         the citizens of the European Union. 
      
National law
Paragraph of the Communications Market Law (Viestintämarkkinalaki (393/2003)) of May 2003, entitled ‘Definitions’, provides
         as follows:
      
‘For the purposes of this Law
…
(13)      “interconnection” means the physical and functional connection of different communication networks and communications services
         in order to ensure users can access the communication network and communication services of other telecommunications undertakings;
      
…
(17)      “network operator” means an undertaking that provides a communications network in its ownership or for other reasons in its
         possession for the purposes of transmitting, distributing or providing messages;
      
…
(19)       “service operator” means an undertaking that transmits messages over a communications network in its possession or obtained
         for use from a network operator or distributes or provides messages in a mass communications network;
      
…
(21)      “telecommunications operator” means any network operator or any service operator;
…’
In accordance with Paragraph of the Communications Market Law, entitled ‘Interconnection obligations of a telecommunications
         operator’, a telecommunications operator has an obligation to negotiate on interconnection with another telecommunications
         operator. Under subparagraph thereof, the CRA may, by decision, impose an obligation on an undertaking with significant
         market power to connect a communications network or communications service to the communications network or communications
         service of another telecommunications operator. Paragraph 39(3) also authorises the CRA to impose an identical obligation
         on undertakings which do not have significant market power provided that the telecommunications undertakings concerned control
         user connections to the communications network and that that obligation is necessary to ensure the interconnection of communications
         networks.
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
It is apparent from the order for reference that, on May 2006, iMEZ requested the CRA, the Finnish national regulatory
         authority, to take the measures necessary in order to secure the conclusion of an interconnection agreement with TeliaSonera
         concerning the transmission of text messages (‘SMS messages’) and multimedia messages (‘MMS messages’).
      
On May 2006, the CRA referred the case to arbitration, at the end of which it was held that negotiations had failed.
      
On August 2006, iMEZ, which is established in Sweden, asked the CRA to compel TeliaSonera to negotiate the interconnection
         in good faith by offering it a reciprocal agreement on reasonable conditions. In the alternative and if this were not achieved,
         iMEZ asked the CRA to impose an interconnection obligation on TeliaSonera with respect to SMS and MMS messages and to require
         it to price the forwarding of those two types of messages on the basis of the costs incurred and in a non-discriminatory manner.
         In the further alternative, iMEZ asked the CRA for a declaration that the forwarding of SMS and MMS messages to the specific
         mobile network was the relevant communications market, and that TeliaSonera was an undertaking having significant market power,
         thus enabling iMEZ to obtain the interconnection.
      
By decision of December 2006, the CRA found that TeliaSonera had not fulfilled its obligation to negotiate pursuant to
         Paragraph of the Communications Market Law and ordered it to negotiate in good faith the interconnection of the SMS and
         MMS message services with iMEZ. In accordance with that decision, the negotiations were to take account of the objectives
         which interconnection sought to achieve and to start from the premiss that the proper functioning of SMS and MMS message services
         between the systems could be ensured on reasonable terms so that users would be able to use messaging services between the
         undertakings concerned.
      
TeliaSonera appealed against that decision to the Korkein hallinto-oikeus (Supreme Administrative Court), arguing that the
         CRA was not empowered to impose substantive conditions concerning the terms of an agreement to be negotiated with respect
         to the interconnection of SMS and MMS services. In that appeal, TeliaSonera seeks, first, a declaration that it has complied
         with the obligation to negotiate laid down in Paragraph of the Communications Market Law and, second, the annulment of
         the CRA’s decision of December 2006.
      
In those circumstances, the Korkein hallinto-oikeus decided to stay the proceedings and to refer the following questions to
         the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘1.       Is Article 4(1) of Directive 2002/19/EC of the … Access Directive, when read in conjunction with recitals 5, and in the
         preamble to that directive and with Article and Article thereof, to be interpreted as meaning that:
      
(a)      national legislation may provide, as in Paragraph 39(1) of the … [Communications Market Law], that any telecommunications
         operator has an obligation to negotiate on interconnection with another telecommunications operator and, if so, 
      
(b)       a national regulatory authority can take the view that the obligation to negotiate has not been complied with where a telecommunications
         operator which does not have significant market power has offered another undertaking interconnection under conditions which
         the authority regards as wholly unilateral and likely to hinder the emergence of a competitive market at the retail level,
         where they have hindered in practice the second undertaking from offering its customers the opportunity to transmit [MMS]
         messages to end-users subscribed to the telecommunications operator’s network and, if so,
      
(c)      the national regulatory authority can in its decision require the aforementioned telecommunications operator, which therefore
         does not have significant market power, to negotiate in good faith on the interconnection of [SMS] and [MMS] communications
         services between [the] systems [of the two undertakings concerned] in such a way that, in commercial negotiations, regard
         must be had to the objectives which interconnection seeks to achieve and negotiations must be based on the premiss that the
         operation of SMS and MMS services between undertakings’ systems can be made subject to reasonable conditions so that users
         have the possibility of using telecommunications operators’ communications services?
      
2.       Do the nature of [iMEZ’s] network or whether iMEZ … should be regarded as an operator of public electronic communications
         networks have any bearing on the assessment of the questions set out above?’
      
 The questions referred
 The first part of the first question and the second question
By the first part of the first question, the national court asks essentially whether Article 4(1) of the Access Directive,
         read in conjunction with recitals 5, and in its preamble and with Articles and thereof, preclude national legislation,
         such as that at issue in the main proceedings, which does not limit the possibility of relying on the obligation to negotiate
         with respect to interconnection solely to operators of public communications networks. By its second question, which it is
         appropriate to examine at the same time, the national court also asks whether, as a consequence, the status and nature of
         the network of an undertaking relying on the obligation to negotiate has an effect on the relations with the other undertaking
         concerned.
      
As a preliminary point, it should be stated that, in view of the definitions given in Paragraph of the Communications Market
         Law, as set out in paragraph of this judgment, the first question referred asks in fact whether the obligation to negotiate
         provided for in Article 4(1) of the Access Directive may be relied on by service providers in order to ensure the interoperability
         of communications services.
      
It is clear from the wording of Article 4(1) that the obligation to negotiate an interconnection applies to all operators
         of public communications networks when requested to do so by another authorised undertaking.
      
As regards the authorisation, it should be noted that Article 2(2)(a) of the Authorisation Directive defines ‘general authorisation’
         issued to operators pursuant to Article 3(2) of that directive as ‘a legal framework established by the Member State ensuring
         rights for the provision of electronic communications networks or services’.
      
That authorisation thus also concerns service operators. 
      
However, Article 4(2)(a) of the Authorisation Directive states that undertakings authorised to provide electronic communications
         networks or services to the public have the right to negotiate interconnection with other providers of communications networks
         or services in accordance with the Access Directive.
      
Article 2(b) of the Access Directive defines ‘interconnection’ as ‘the physical and logical linking of public communications
         networks’, and points out that it ‘is a specific type of access implemented between public network operators’.
      
Furthermore, the reciprocity of the interconnection, provided for in Article 4(1) of the Access Directive, implies that the
         two parties to the negotiations are public network operators.
      
Therefore, the obligation to negotiate laid down in Article 4(1) concerns only the interconnection of networks, to the exclusion
         of other forms of network access (see, to that effect, Case C‑227/Commission v Poland [2008] ECR I‑0000, paragraph 36), and applies only to operators of public communications networks with respect to other operators
         of public communications networks.
      
Consequently, as electronic communications services providers do not fall within the category of ‘operators of public communications
         networks’, they cannot rely on the obligation to negotiate laid down in Article 4(1) of the Access Directive.
      
In any event, it must be held that that obligation to negotiate is independent of whether the undertaking concerned has significant
         market power, and does not entail the obligation to conclude an interconnection agreement, but merely an obligation to negotiate
         such an agreement.
      
Therefore, it is appropriate to consider whether, as the Netherlands Government submits, Member States may provide by general
         legislation, such as the Communications Market Law at issue in the main proceedings, for the possibility for telecommunications
         services providers to rely on the obligation to negotiate that applies to operators of public communications networks. 
      
In that connection it should be observed, first of all, that the new regulatory framework implemented in in the telecommunications
         sector, consisting of the Framework Directive and specific directives, including the Authorisation and Access Directives,
         aims to establish a harmonised framework for the regulation of electronic communications services, electronic communications
         networks, associated facilities together with resources and associated services in an environment of effective competition.
      
Secondly, both recital in the preamble and Article 3(1) of the Access Directive establish a freedom for undertakings to
         negotiate and to conclude agreements. That freedom forms part of the objective of the Access Directive, defined in Article 1(1)
         thereof, namely to establish ‘a regulatory framework … that will result in sustainable competition, interoperability of electronic
         communications services and consumer benefits’.
      
It follows that, as the Romanian Government submits, an obligation to negotiate such as that provided for in Article 4(1)
         of the Access Directive is an exception and must therefore be interpreted strictly. 
      
Thirdly, Articles to of the Access Directive clearly set out the obligations of the Member States as regards the determination
         of the powers and responsibilities of the national regulatory authorities.
      
Therefore, the power of the national legislature is duly defined.
      
Fourthly, as the Advocate General notes, in paragraphs et seq. of his Opinion, and contrary to the Netherlands Government’s
         submissions, Article 6(1) of the Authorisation Directive cannot provide the basis for national legislation such as that at
         issue in the main proceedings.
      
Article 6(1) of the Authorisation Directive provides only for a general authorisation subject to the conditions set out in
         Part A of the Annex to that directive, which refers in point to the Access Directive. 
      
It follows that the Access Directive establishes the framework in which negotiations take place or obligations to be imposed
         on communications undertakings are determined.
      
Having regard to the foregoing, it must be held that the nature of the network of an undertaking relying on the obligation
         to negotiate, laid down in Article 4(1) of the Access Directive, and the question whether that undertaking is an operator
         of public communications networks, affect the relationship with the other undertaking concerned in so far as the Member States
         may not impose that obligation on operators other than operators of public communications networks.
      
It is for the national court, taking into account the definitions given in Article of the Access Directive and the Framework
         Directive, to determine whether, having regard to the status and the nature of the operators concerned in the main proceedings,
         they may be classified as operators of public communications networks.
      
It follows from the foregoing that the answer to the first part of the first question and to the second question is that Article 4(1)
         of the Access Directive, read in conjunction with recitals 5, 6, and in its preamble and with Articles and thereof,
         preclude national legislation such as the Communications Market Law, in so far as it does not restrict the possibility of
         relying on the obligation to negotiate on the interconnection of networks solely to operators of public communications networks.
         It is for the national court to determine whether, having regard to the status and the nature of the operators concerned in
         the main proceedings, they may be classified as operators of public communications networks.
      
 The second part of the first question
By the second part of the first question, the national court asks whether a national regulatory authority may take the view
         that the obligation to negotiate an interconnection, provided for under Article 4(1) of the Access Directive, has been breached
         where an undertaking which does not have significant market power offers another undertaking interconnection under unilateral
         conditions which are likely to hinder the emergence of a competitive market at the retail level where those conditions prevent
         the clients of the other undertaking from benefiting from its services.
      
It should be observed, first of all, that the Court has held that the regulatory tasks of a national regulatory authority
         are set out in Articles to of the Framework Directive. Furthermore, the Court has interpreted Article as placing on
         the Member States the obligation to ensure that the national regulatory authorities take all reasonable measures aimed at
         promoting competition in the provision of electronic communications services, ensuring that there is no distortion or restriction
         of competition in the electronic communications sector and removing remaining obstacles to the provision of those services
         at European level (Commission v Poland, paragraphs and 63, and the case-law cited).
      
Second, recital in the preamble to the Access Directive states that undertakings which receive requests for access or interconnection
         should, in principle, conclude such agreements on a commercial basis and negotiate in good faith.
      
In that connection, Article 5(4) of that directive enables the national regulatory authorities to intervene in the absence
         of agreement in order to secure the objectives laid down in Article of the Framework Directive.
      
Third, as the Advocate General observed in point of his Opinion, in order to give practical effect to Article 4(1) of
         the Access Directive, which provides for an obligation to negotiate under the conditions set out in paragraphs to of
         this judgment, it must be accepted that the negotiations are to be carried out in good faith.
      
Fourth, contrary to the Finnish Government’s submission, Article 12(1) of the Access Directive cannot serve as a basis for
         an appraisal such as that referred to by the national court unless the operator to which the interconnection request is addressed
         has not been designated as having significant power on the market concerned in accordance with Article 8(2) of that directive.
      
It is clear from the foregoing that the answer to the second part of the first question referred is that a national regulatory
         authority may take the view that the obligation to negotiate an interconnection has been breached where an undertaking which
         does not have significant market power proposes interconnection to another undertaking under unilateral conditions likely
         to hinder the emergence of a competitive market at the retail level where those conditions prevent the clients of the second
         undertaking from benefiting from its services.
      
 The third part of the first question
By the third part of its first question, the national court asks essentially whether a national regulatory authority may require
         an undertaking which does not have significant market power to negotiate in good faith with another undertaking on the interconnection
         of SMS and MMS message services between the systems of those two undertakings.
      
As a preliminary point, it must be stated that the necessary premiss for the answer to that part of the first question is
         either that Article 4(1) of the Access Directive applies to the case in the main proceedings since the two operators concerned
         are operators of public communications networks but the obligations imposed by that article have not been complied with by
         the operator requested to negotiate an interconnection, or that the situation at issue in the main proceedings falls outside
         the scope of that article since one of the operators concerned cannot be classified as an operator of public communications
         networks.
      
It must be observed, first, that it follows from the wording of the first subparagraph of Article 5(1) of the Access Directive
         that the national regulatory authorities are responsible for ensuring adequate access and interconnection and also interoperability
         of services by means which are not exhaustively listed there.
      
In that context, in accordance with point (a) of the second subparagraph of Article 5(1), those authorities must be able to
         impose ‘obligations on undertakings that control access to end-users, including in justified cases the obligation to interconnect
         their networks’ solely in order to ensure end-to-end connectivity.
      
Second, Article 5(4) of the Access Directive also concerns access and interconnection and requires that national regulatory
         authorities be empowered to intervene, since it provides that those authorities may intervene at their own initiative in order
         to secure the objectives of Article of the Framework Directive, but without defining or limiting the detailed rules for
         that intervention.
      
Thus it is apparent that the relevant provisions of the Framework Directive and the Access Directive enable a national regulatory
         authority to take a decision ordering an undertaking which does not have significant market power but which controls access
         to end-users to negotiate either an interconnection of the two networks concerned if the undertaking requesting such access
         must be classified as an operator of public communications networks, or interoperability of SMS and MMS message services if
         the undertaking which makes the request is not covered by that classification.
      
It follows from the foregoing that the answer to the third part of the first question referred is that a national regulatory
         authority may require an undertaking which does not have significant market power but which controls access to end-users to
         negotiate in good faith with another undertaking for either interconnection of the two networks concerned if the undertaking
         which requests such access must be classified as an operator of public communications networks, or interoperability of SMS
         and MMS message services if that undertaking is not covered by that classification.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Second Chamber) hereby rules:
1.      Article 4(1) of Directive 2002/19/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of March on access to, and interconnection
            of, electronic communications networks and associated facilities (the ‘Access Directive’), read in conjunction with recitals
            5, 6, and in its preamble and with Articles and thereof, precludes national legislation such as the Communications
            Market Law (Viestintämarkkinalaki) of May in so far as it does not restrict the possibility of relying on the obligation
            to negotiate on the interconnection of networks solely to operators of public communications networks. It is for the national
            court to determine whether, having regard to the status and the nature of the operators concerned in the main proceedings,
            they may be classified as operators of public communications networks.
2.      A national regulatory authority may take the view that the obligation to negotiate an interconnection has been breached where
            an undertaking which does not have significant market power proposes interconnection to another undertaking under unilateral
            conditions likely to hinder the emergence of a competitive market at the retail level where those conditions prevent the clients
            of the second undertaking from benefiting from its services.
3.      A national regulatory authority may require an undertaking which does not have significant market power but which controls
            access to end-users to negotiate in good faith with another undertaking for either interconnection of the two networks concerned
            if the undertaking which requests such access must be classified as an operator of public communications networks, or interoperability
            of SMS and MMS message services if that undertaking is not covered by that classification.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Finnish.
      
Top  
 