
Judgment of the Court (Third Chamber) of May —Legris Industries v Commission(Case C‑289/P)
Appeal — Competition — Cartels — Copper fittings and copper alloy fittings sector — Commission decision finding an infringement of Article EC — Fines — Parent companies and subsidiaries — Imputability of the unlawful conduct
1.                     Appeals — Grounds — Plea submitted for the first time in the context of the appeal — Inadmissibility — Entry into force of
            the Treaty of Lisbon — New fact warranting the late introduction of a head of claim based on breach of the right to a fair
            hearing — Excluded (Art. 6(2) TEU; Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, Art. 47; Statute of the Court of Justice,
            Art. 58; Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, Arts 42(2) and 113(2)) (see paras 33, 35, 36)
2.                     Competition — Rules of the Union — Infringements — Attribution — Parent company and subsidiaries — Unilateral conduct — Criteria
            for assessment — Presumption that a parent company exerts a decisive influence over its wholly-owned subsidiaries — Rebuttable —
            Burden of proof (Art. TFEU; Council Regulation No 1/2003, Art. 23(2)) (see paras 45‑47)
3.                     Appeals — Grounds — Mistaken assessment of the facts — Inadmissibility — Review by the Court of the findings of fact — Possible
            only where the clear sense of the evidence has been distorted (Art. TFEU; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first
            para.) (see paras 51, 53)
Re: 
Appeal brought against the judgment of the General Court (Eighth Chamber) of March in Case T‑376/Legris Industries
 v 
Commission
, by which that court dismissed the action for partial annulment of Commission Decision C(2006) final of September
                  relating to a proceeding under Article [EC] and Article of the EEA Agreement (Case COMP/F‑1/38.— Fittings) —
                  Copper Fittings and Copper Alloy Fittings Sector — Infringement of the right of access to an independent and impartial tribunal —
                  Imputability of the unlawful conduct — Breach of the principles of equal treatment, personal liability and the principle that
                  the penalty must be specific to the offender — Distortion of evidence.
               
Operative part
The Court: 
1.
	Dismisses the appeal;
2.
	Orders Legris Industries SA to pay the costs.
Top  
 