
Order of the Court (Fifth Chamber) of October – Victoria Sánchez v Parliament and Commission
(Case C-52/P)
Appeal – Action for failure to act – Letter addressed to the Parliament and Commission – Response – Decision to take no further action – Appeal manifestly unfounded and manifestly inadmissible
1.                     Procedure – Application initiating proceedings – Formal requirements – Brief summary of the pleas in law on which the application
            is based (Statute of the Court of Justice, Arts 21, first para., and 53, first para; Rules of Procedure of the General Court,
            Art. 44(1)(c)) (see para. 20)
2.                     Appeals – Grounds – Error of law – Failure of the Parliament and the Commission to examine a petition submitted by the appellant
            – Claims inconsistent with the body of the application brought before the General Court – No error (Art. 256(1), second para.,
            TFEU) (see paras 21-23)
3.                     Appeals – Grounds – Mere repetition of the pleas and arguments put forward before the General Court – Error of law relied
            on not identified – Inadmissibility (Art. TFUE; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.; Rules of Procedure
            of the General Court, Art. 112(1)(c)) (see para. 30)
4.                     Actions for failure to act – Jurisdiction of the Union judicature – Directions issued to an institution – Not permissible
            (Art. TFEU) (see para. 38)
Re: 
Appeal brought against the order of the General Court (Fourth Chamber) of November in Case T‑61/Victoria Sánchez
 v 
Parliament and Commission
, by which the General Court dismissed an action seeking a declaration that the European Parliament and the European Commission
                  had failed to act, in that they unlawfully abstained from replying to the letter of October sent by the appellant,
                  an application for the issue of directions and a request for protective measures.
               
Operative part 
1.
	The appeal is dismissed.
2.
	Mr Victoria Sánchez is ordered to pay the costs.
Top  
 