
Case C-242/Albron Catering BV
v
FNV Bondgenoten and John Roest
(Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Gerechtshof te Amsterdam)
(Social policy – Transfers of undertakings – Directive 2001/23/EC – Safeguarding of employees’ rights – Group of companies in which staff are employed by an ‘employer’ company and assigned on a permanent basis to an ‘operating’
         company – Transfer of an operating company)
      
Summary of the Judgment
1.        Social policy – Approximation of laws – Transfers of undertakings – Safeguarding of employees' rights – Directive 2001/– Transferor – Meaning
(Council Directive 2001/23, Art. 2(1)(a))
2.        Preliminary rulings – Interpretation – Temporal effects of judgments by way of interpretation – Retroactive effect – Limits
            – Legal certainty – Discretion of the Court
(Art. TFEU)
1.        In the event of a transfer, within the meaning of Directive 2001/on the approximation of the laws of the Member States
         relating to the safeguarding of employees’ rights in the event of transfers of undertakings, businesses or parts of undertakings
         or businesses, of an undertaking belonging to a group to an undertaking outside that group, it is also possible to regard
         as a ‘transferor’, within the meaning of Article 2(1)(a) of that directive, the group company to which the employees were
         assigned on a permanent basis without however being linked to the latter by a contract of employment, even though there exists
         within that group an undertaking with which the employees concerned were linked by such a contract of employment.
      
The requirement under Article 3(1) of Directive 2001/that there be either an employment contract, or, in the alternative
         and thus as an equivalent, an employment relationship at the date of the transfer suggests that, in the mind of the Union
         legislature, a contractual link with the transferor is not required in all circumstances for employees to be eligible for
         the protection conferred by Directive 2001/23.On the other hand, it is not apparent from Directive 2001/that the relationship
         between the employment contract and the employment relationship is one of subsidiarity and that, therefore, where there is
         a plurality of employers, the contractual employer must systematically be given greater weight. Since the transfer of an undertaking,
         within the meaning of Directive 2001/23, presupposes, in particular, a change in the legal or natural person who is responsible
         for the economic activity of the entity transferred and who, in that capacity, establishes working relations as employer with
         the staff of that entity, in some cases despite the absence of contractual relations with those employees, the position of
         a contractual employer, who is not responsible for the economic activity of the economic entity transferred, cannot systematically
         take precedence, for the purposes of determining the identity of the transferor, over the position of a non-contractual employer
         who is responsible for that activity.
      
(see paras 24-25, 28-29, 32, operative part)
2.        In exercising its jurisdiction under Article TFEU, it is only exceptionally that the Court of Justice may, in application
         of the general principle of legal certainty inherent in the legal order of the Union, be moved to restrict for any person
         concerned the opportunity of relying on a provision which it has interpreted with a view to calling in question legal relationships
         established in good faith. Two essential criteria must be fulfilled before such a limitation can be imposed, namely, that
         those concerned should have acted in good faith and that there should be a risk of serious difficulties.  In that regard,
         when no concrete evidence has been submitted to the Court of Justice of a risk of serious difficulties in connection with
         massive litigation which might be brought, following a judgment of the Court of Justice on the interpretation of Directive
         2001/23, against undertakings which have carried out a transfer falling within that directive, there is no cause to limit
         the temporal effects of such a judgment.  Moreover, the fact that the undertaking making such a transfer has already made
         a severance payment to employees who have entered into the service of the transferee undertaking is in any event irrelevant.
      
(see paras 36, 38, 40)
  
  
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Third Chamber)
October (*)
      
(Social policy – Transfers of undertakings – Directive 2001/23/EC – Safeguarding of employees’ rights – Group of companies in which staff are employed by an ‘employer’ company and assigned on a permanent basis to an ‘operating’
         company – Transfer of an operating company)
      
In Case C‑242/09,
REFERENCE for a preliminary ruling under Article EC from the Gerechtshof te Amsterdam (Netherlands), made by decision
         of June 2009, received at the Court on July 2009, in the proceedings
      
Albron Catering BV
v
FNV Bondgenoten,
      
John Roest,
      
THE COURT (Third Chamber),
composed of K. Lenaerts, President of the Chamber, D. Šváby, R. Silva de Lapuerta, G. Arestis and J. Malenovský (Rapporteur),
         Judges,
      
Advocate General: Y. Bot,
Registrar: M. Ferreira, Principal Administrator,
having regard to the written procedure and further to the hearing on May 2010,
after considering the observations submitted on behalf of:
–        Albron Catering BV, by P. Kuypers and P.M. Klinckhamers, advocaten,
–        FNV Bondgenoten and Mr Roest, by E. Unger, advocaat, and P. Kruijff, legal adviser,
–        the Netherlands Government, by C. Wissels, M. Noort and Y. de Vries, acting as Agents,
–        the European Commission, by J. Enegren and W. Wils, acting as Agents,
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on June 2010,
gives the following
Judgment
This reference for a preliminary ruling concerns the interpretation of Article 3(1) of Council Directive 2001/23/EC of March on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the safeguarding of employees’ rights in the
         event of transfers of undertakings, businesses or parts of undertakings or businesses (OJ L 82, p. 16).
      
The reference was made in the context of a dispute between Albron Catering BV (‘Albron’), of the one part, and FNV Bondgenoten
         (‘FNV’) and Mr Roest, of the other part, in order to determine whether, in the context of a group of companies one of whose
         legal entities performs the function of central employer and detaches its employees amongst various companies which constitute
         that group, the transfer of the activities of one company in the said group to a company outside the group, namely Albron,
         must be regarded as falling within the rules for the protection of employees instituted by Directive 2001/23.
      
 Legal context
 European Union legislation
Directive 2001/was a consolidation of Council Directive 77/187/EEC of February on the approximation of the laws
         of the Member States relating to the safeguarding of employees’ rights in the event of transfers of undertakings, businesses
         or parts of businesses (OJ L 61, p. 26), as amended by Council Directive 98/50/EC of June (OJ L 201, p. 88).
      
Recital of the preamble to Directive 2001/states that ‘it is necessary to provide for the protection of employees in
         the event of a change of employer, in particular, to ensure that their rights are safeguarded’.
      
Article 1(1) of that directive provides:
      
‘(a)      This Directive shall apply to any transfer of an undertaking, business, or part of an undertaking or business to another employer
         as a result of a legal transfer or merger.
      
(b)      Subject to subparagraph (a) and the following provisions of this Article, there is a transfer within the meaning of this Directive
         where there is a transfer of an economic entity which retains its identity, meaning an organised grouping of resources which
         has the objective of pursuing an economic activity, whether … that activity is central or ancillary.’
      
Article of Directive 2001/provides:
      
‘1.      For the purposes of this Directive:
(a)      “transferor” shall mean any natural or legal person who, by reason of a transfer within the meaning of Article 1(1), ceases
         to be the employer in respect of the undertaking, business or part of the undertaking or business;
      
(b)      “transferee” shall mean any natural or legal person who, by reason of a transfer within the meaning of Article 1(1), becomes
         the employer in respect of the undertaking, business or part of the undertaking or business;
      
…
(c)      “employee” shall mean any person who, in the Member State concerned, is protected as an employee under national employment
         law.
      
2.      This Directive shall be without prejudice to national law as regards the definition of contract of employment or employment
         relationship.
      
...’
According to Article 3(1) to (3) of Directive 2001/23:
      
‘1.      The transferor’s rights and obligations arising from a contract of employment or from an employment relationship existing
         on the date of a transfer shall, by reason of such transfer, be transferred to the transferee.
      
Member States may provide that, after the date of transfer, the transferor and the transferee shall be jointly and severally
         liable in respect of obligations which arose before the date of transfer from a contract of employment or an employment relationship
         existing on the date of the transfer.
      
2.      Member States may adopt appropriate measures to ensure that the transferor notifies the transferee of all the rights and obligations
         which will be transferred to the transferee under this Article, so far as those rights and obligations are or ought to have
         been known to the transferor at the time of the transfer. A failure by the transferor to notify the transferee of any such
         right or obligation shall not affect the transfer of that right or obligation and the rights of any employees against the
         transferee and/or transferor in respect of that right or obligation.
      
3.      Following the transfer, the transferee shall continue to observe the terms and conditions agreed in any collective agreement
         on the same terms applicable to the transferor under that agreement, until the date of termination or expiry of the collective
         agreement or the entry into force or application of another collective agreement.
      
Member States may limit the period for observing such terms and conditions with the proviso that it shall not be less than
         one year.’
      
 National legislation
Article 610(1) of Book of the Netherlands Civil Code (Burgerlijk Wetboek) defines a contract of employment for the purposes
         of Netherlands law as follows:
      
‘An employment contract is a contract whereby one party, the employee, undertakes for a defined period and for a salary to
         work for the other party, the employer.’
      
Article of Book of the Netherlands Civil Code provides:
      
‘By virtue of the transfer of an undertaking, the employer’s rights and obligations, at the time of the transfer, under an
         employment contract concluded between the latter and an employee in that undertaking are automatically transferred to the
         transferee.  For a period of one year after the transfer, that employer remains jointly and severally liable with the transferee
         for compliance with the obligations under the employment contract which came into being before the transfer.’
      
 The dispute in the main proceedings and the questions referred for a preliminary ruling
Heineken International is a group of Netherlands beer producers.  Within that group, all the staff are employed by Heineken
         Nederlands Beheer BV (‘HNB’).  HNB thus performs the function of central employer and detaches the staff to the various operating
         companies of the Heineken group in the Netherlands.
      
Mr Roest was employed by HNB from July to March as a staff member in the ‘catering’ department.  He was assigned
         by HNB, along with about other staff members in that department, to Heineken Nederland BV (‘Heineken Nederland’), a company
         which, until March 2005, supplied catering at various locations to employees of the Heineken group.  In the context of that
         assignment, the collective agreement reached within HNB applied.
      
Mr Roest is a member of the FNV, a trade union the aims of which include defence of its members’ interests in the area of
         working conditions and salaries, in particular by the conclusion of collective agreements.
      
The catering activities carried out by Heineken Nederland were transferred, by virtue of an agreement, to Albron on March
         2005. 
      
Albron is involved throughout the Netherlands in, amongst other things, contract catering, namely the management and operation
         of catering services, particularly in staff restaurants in the private and public sectors on the basis of appropriate contracts
         with clients.  Mr Roest entered the service of Albron as a member of the catering staff in a company restaurant as from March 2005.
      
FNV and Mr Roest brought an action against Albron before the Kantonrechter (Cantonal Court) for a declaration that the transfer
         of the catering business which took place on March between Heineken Nederland and Albron constituted the transfer of
         an undertaking within the meaning of Directive 2001/and that employees of HNB who were assigned to Heineken Nederland automatically
         became staff members of Albron as from that date.
      
The FNV and Mr Roest also sought an order against Albron that the latter be required to apply to the employment contract concluded
         by Albron with Mr Roest, with restrospective effect from March 2005, the conditions which applied between HNB and Mr Roest
         before that date, and that, in so far as such application related to wage arrears from March 2005, Albron be ordered to
         pay the statutory increase of 50% pursuant to Article of Book of the Netherlands Civil Code together with statutory
         interest from the date of the indebtedness.  The FNV and Mr Roest also applied for a costs order against Albron.
      
By a judgment of March 2006, the Kantonrechter upheld the claims, save for the statutory increase of 50%.
      
Albron appealed against that judgment before the Gerechtshof te Amsterdam (Regional Court of Appeal, Amsterdam).
      
In those circumstances, the Gerechtshof te Amsterdam decided to stay the proceedings and refer the following questions to
         the Court for a preliminary ruling:
      
‘(1)      Should Directive 2001/… be interpreted as meaning that there is a transfer of rights and obligations to the transferee
         referred to in the first sentence of Article 3(1) only if the transferor of the undertaking to be transferred is also the
         formal employer of the employees concerned, or does the protection of employees envisaged by Directive [2001/23] imply that,
         upon transfer of an undertaking from an operating company belonging to a group, the rights and obligations pertaining to the
         employees working for that undertaking are transferred to the transferee if all the personnel working in the group are in
         the employ of a personnel company (which also belongs to that group) which functions as the central employer?
      
(2)      What would be the answer to the second part of the first question if the employees referred to there who work for an undertaking
         belonging to a group are in the employ of another company which also belongs to that group, which is not a personnel company
         as described in the first question?’
      
 The questions referred
 Substance
By its two questions, which it will be convenient to examine together, the national court asks, in essence, whether, in the
         case of a transfer, within the meaning of Directive 2001/23, of an undertaking belonging to a group to an undertaking outside
         that group, it is possible to regard as a ‘transferor’, within the meaning of Article 2(1)(a) of that directive, the group
         company to which the employees were assigned on a permanent basis without however being linked to the latter by a contract
         of employment (‘the non-contractual employer’), given that there exists within that group a undertaking with which the employees
         concerned were linked by such a contract of employment (‘the contractual employer’).
      
First, it is apparent from the wording of Article 2(1)(a) of Directive 2001/that the transferor is the party which, by
         reason of a transfer, within the meaning of Article 1(1) of that directive, loses the capacity of employer. 
      
It is clear from the facts at issue in the main proceedings that the non-contractual employer lost its capacity as non-contractual
         employer following the transfer of the business.  Therefore, one cannot exclude the possibility that it might be regarded
         as a ‘transferor’, within the meaning of Article 2(1)(a) of Directive 2001/23.
      
Next, as is apparent from the very wording of Article 3(1) of Directive 2001/23, the protection conferred by that directive
         on employees in the event of a change of employer concerns the rights and obligations arising for the transferor from the
         existence, at the date of the transfer of the undertaking, of an employment contract or an employment relationship, the existence
         or otherwise of a contract or employment relationship being, according to Article 2(2) of that directive, a matter for assessment
         under national law.
      
The requirement under Article 3(1) of Directive 2001/that there be either an employment contract, or, in the alternative
         and thus as an equivalent, an employment relationship at the date of the transfer suggests that, in the mind of the Union
         legislature, a contractual link with the transferor is not required in all circumstances for employees to be able to benefit
         from the protection conferred by Directive 2001/23. 
      
On the other hand, it is not apparent from Directive 2001/that the relationship between the employment contract and the
         employment relationship is one of subsidiarity and that, therefore, where there is a plurality of employers, the contractual
         employer must systematically be given greater weight.
      
Thus, in a context such as that in the main proceedings, Directive 2001/does not prevent the non-contractual employer,
         to which employees are assigned on a permanent basis, from being likewise capable of being regarded as a ‘transferor’, within
         the meaning of Directive 2001/23. 
      
Finally, it follows from the provisions of Article 1(1)(b) of Directive 2001/that ‘there is a transfer within the meaning
         of the directive where there is a transfer of an economic entity which retains its identity, meaning an organised grouping
         of resources which has the objective of pursuing an economic activity, whether … that activity is central or ancillary’.
      
Thus, the transfer of an undertaking, within the meaning of Directive 2001/23, presupposes, in particular, a change in the
         legal or natural person who is responsible for the economic activity of the entity transferred and who, in that capacity,
         establishes working relations as employer with the staff of that entity, in some cases despite the absence of contractual
         relations with those employees.
      
It follows that the position of a contractual employer, who is not responsible for the economic activity of the economic entity
         transferred, cannot systematically take precedence, for the purposes of determining the identity of the transferor, over the
         position of a non-contractual employer who is responsible for that activity.
      
That analysis is supported by recital of Directive 2001/23, which emphasises the need to protect employees in the event
         of a change of ‘employer’.  That concept may, in a context such as that in the main proceedings, designate the non-contractual
         employer, responsible for the running of the business transferred.
      
In those circumstances, if, within a group of companies, there are two employers, one having contractual relations with the
         employees of that group and the other non-contractual relations with them, it is also possible to regard as a ‘transferor’,
         within the meaning of Directive 2001/23, the employer responsible for the economic activity of the entity transferred which,
         in that capacity, establishes working relations with the staff of that entity, despite the absence of contractual relations
         with those staff.
      
The answer to the questions referred must therefore be that, in the event of a transfer, within the meaning of Directive 2001/23,
         of an undertaking belonging to a group to an undertaking outside that group, it is also possible to regard as a ‘transferor’,
         within the meaning of Article 2(1)(a) of that directive, the group company to which the employees were assigned on a permanent
         basis without however being linked to the latter by a contract of employment, even though there exists within that group an
         undertaking with which the employees concerned were linked by such a contract of employment.
      
 The temporal effects of the present judgment
In its observations, Albron has raised the possibility, in the event of the Court finding that a situation such as that at
         issue in main proceedings falls under Directive 2001/23, of the Court limiting in time the effects of the present judgment
         to the cases which are pending before it.
      
In support of its claim, Albron argues, first, that the number of claims brought against HNB and other undertakings which
         have made a transfer will be ‘considerable’ and that HNB has already paid a severance payment to employees who have entered
         the service of Albron.  It also argues that economic operators may have a legitimate expectation, having regard to the case-law
         of the Court of Justice, in the application of Directive 2001/being subject to the conclusion of an employment contract
         with the transferor.
      
According to settled case-law, the interpretation which the Court, in the exercise of the jurisdiction conferred upon it by
         Article TFEU, gives to a rule of Union law clarifies and where necessary defines the meaning and scope of that rule as
         it must be, or ought to have been, understood and applied from the time of its coming into force.  It follows that the rule
         as thus interpreted can, and must, be applied by the courts even to legal relationships arising and established before the
         judgment ruling on the request for interpretation, provided that in other respects the conditions for bringing before the
         courts having jurisdiction an action relating to the application of that rule are satisfied (see, inter alia, Case 24/Blaizot and Others [1988] ECR 379, paragraph 27; Case C‑415/Bosman [1995] ECR I‑4921, paragraph 141; and Case C‑402/Skov and Bilka [2006] ECR I‑199, paragraph 50).
      
Accordingly, it is only exceptionally that the Court may, in application of the general principle of legal certainty inherent
         in the legal order of the Union, be moved to restrict for any person concerned the opportunity of relying on a provision which
         it has interpreted with a view to calling in question legal relationships established in good faith. Two essential criteria
         must be fulfilled before such a limitation can be imposed, namely that those concerned should have acted in good faith and
         that there should be a risk of serious difficulties (see, inter alia, Case C‑313/Brzeziński [2007] ECR I-513, paragraph 56, and Case C‑73/Bressol and Others [2010] ECR I-0000, paragraph 91).
      
More specifically, the Court has taken that step only in quite specific circumstances, where there was a risk of serious economic
         repercussions owing in particular to the large number of legal relationships entered into in good faith on the basis of rules
         considered to be validly in force and where it appeared that individuals and national authorities had been led to adopt practices
         which did not comply with Union legislation by reason of objective, significant uncertainty regarding the implications of
         Union provisions, to which the conduct of other Member States or the Commission may even have contributed (see, inter alia,
         Case C‑423/Richards [2006] ECR I‑3585, paragraph 42, and Brzeziński, paragraph 57).
      
This Court finds that, in the main proceedings, Albron has not submitted to the Court any concrete evidence capable of establishing
         a risk of serious difficulties in connection with massive litigation which might be brought, following this judgment, against
         HNB and other undertakings which have carried out a transfer.  Moreover, as the Advocate General has pointed out in point
         of his Opinion, the fact that HNB has already made a severance payment to employees who have entered into the service of
         Albron is in any event irrelevant.
      
In those circumstances, it is not necessary to determine whether the criterion relating to the good faith of those concerned
         is fulfilled.
      
It is therefore not appropriate to limit in time the effects of the present judgment.
      
 Costs
Since these proceedings are, for the parties to the main proceedings, a step in the action pending before the national court,
         the decision on costs is a matter for that court. Costs incurred in submitting observations to the Court, other than the costs
         of those parties, are not recoverable.
      
On those grounds, the Court (Third Chamber) hereby rules:
In the event of a transfer within the meaning of Council Directive 2001/23/EC of March on the approximation of the
            laws of the Member States relating to the safeguarding of employees’ rights in the event of transfers of undertakings, businesses
            or parts of undertakings or businesses, of an undertaking belonging to a group to an undertaking outside that group, it is
            also possible to regard as a ‘transferor’, within the meaning of Article 2(1)(a) of that directive, the group company to which
            the employees were assigned on a permanent basis without however being linked to the latter by a contract of employment, even
            though there exists within that group an undertaking with which the employees concerned were linked by such a contract of
            employment.
[Signatures]
* Language of the case: Dutch.
      
Top  
 