
         				Arrêt de la Cour
         			
      
Case C-226/Commission of the European CommunitiesvKingdom of Denmark
«(Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Quality of bathing water – Inadequate implementation of Directive 76/160/EEC)»
Opinion of Advocate General Mischo delivered on October I - Judgment of the Court (Sixth Chamber), January I - Summary of the Judgment
Approximation of laws – Quality of bathing water – Directive 76/– Implementation by the Member States – Obligation as to the result to be achieved – Assessment each year(Council Directive 76/160, Art 4(1) and (13))Under Article 4(1) of Directive 76/concerning the quality of bathing water, Member States are to take all necessary measures
         to ensure that the quality of bathing water conforms to the limit values set in accordance with the directive within years
         following the notification of the directive. Such conformity must be assessed each year and not over a number of years.see paras 24-JUDGMENT OF THE COURT (Sixth Chamber)January 2003(1)
((Failure by a Member State to fulfil its obligations – Quality of bathing water – Inadequate implementation of Directive 76/160/EEC))
In Case C-226/01, 
            
 Commission of the European Communities,  represented by H.C. Støvlbæk, acting as Agent, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
applicant, 
v
 Kingdom of Denmark,  represented by J. Molde and J. Bering Liisberg, acting as Agents, with an address for service in Luxembourg,
            
defendant, 
APPLICATION for a declaration that, by failing to take all necessary measures to ensure that the quality of its bathing water
            conforms to the limit values laid down by Council Directive 76/160/EEC of December concerning the quality of bathing
            water (OJ L 31, p. 1) and by failing to adhere to the minimum sampling frequencies required by that directive, the Kingdom
            of Denmark has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 4(1) and 6(1) of the same directive, 
            
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),,
composed of: J.-P. Puissochet, President of the Chamber, R. Schintgen, C. Gulmann, V. Skouris and J.N. Cunha Rodrigues (Rapporteur), Judges, 
            
Advocate General: J. Mischo, Registrar: H. von Holstein, Deputy Registrar, 
            
having regard to the Report for the Hearing,after hearing oral argument from the parties at the hearing on September 2002, 
            
after hearing the Opinion of the Advocate General at the sitting on October 2002, 
gives the following
Judgment
            
By application lodged at the Court Registry on June 2001, the Commission of the European Communities brought an action under
         Article EC for a declaration that, by failing to take all necessary measures to ensure that the quality of its bathing
         water conformed to the limit values laid down by Council Directive 76/160/EEC of December concerning the quality of
         bathing water (OJ L 31, p. 1,  
         the Directive) and by failing to adhere to the minimum sampling frequencies required by that directive, the Kingdom of Denmark has failed
         to fulfil its obligations under Articles 4(1) and 6(1) of the same directive.  
         
Legal framework
            
Article 1(2)(a) of the Directive provides: For the purposes of this Directive:
         
(a)
bathing water means all running or still fresh waters or parts thereof and sea water, in which: 
         
─
bathing is explicitly authorised by the competent authorities of each Member State,  
               
or
            
─
bathing is not prohibited and is traditionally practised by a large number of bathers
               
. 
         
            
Article 3(1) of the Directive provides that  
         Member States shall set, for all bathing areas or for each individual bathing area, the values applicable to bathing water
         for the parameters given in the Annex.  
         
            
Article 3(2) provides that  
         [t]he values set pursuant to paragraph may not be less stringent than those given in column I of the Annex. The Annex to the Directive contains parameters, as well as mandatory limit values for most of those parameters. 
         
            
Under  Article 4(1) of the Directive, the Member States were required to take all necessary measures to ensure that, within
         years following the notification of the Directive, the quality of bathing water conforms to the limit values set in accordance
         with Article of the Directive. 
         
            
Article of the Directive provides: 
         
1.
 For the purposes of Article 4, bathing water shall be deemed to conform to the relevant parameters:
         if samples of that water, taken at the same sampling point and at the intervals specified in the Annex, show that it conforms
         to the parametric values for the quality of the water concerned, in the case of: 
         
─
95% of the samples for parameters corresponding to those specified in column I of the Annex; 
         
─
90% of the samples in all other cases with the exception of the  
            total coliform and  
            faecal coliform parameters where the percentage may be 80% and if, in the case of the 5, or 20% of the samples which do not comply: 
         
─
the water does not deviate from the parametric values in question by more than 50%, except for microbiological parameters,
         pH and dissolved oxygen; 
         
─
consecutive water samples taken at statistically suitable intervals do not deviate from the relevant parametric values. 
         
2.
 Deviations from the values referred to in Article shall not be taken into consideration in the calculation of the percentage
         referred to in paragraph when they are the result of floods, other natural disasters or abnormal weather conditions.
         
            
Article 6(1) of the Directive provides that the competent authorities in the Member States are to carry out sampling operations,
         the minimum frequency of which is laid down in the Annex. 
         
            
Article provides for the possibility of derogations from the Directive: 
         
(a)
in the case of certain parameters marked (0) in the Annex, because of exceptional weather or geographical conditions; and
          
         
(b)
when bathing water undergoes natural enrichment in certain substances causing a deviation from the values prescribed in the
         Annex.  
         
            
According to the third and fourth paragraphs of Article of the Directive, in no case may the derogations disregard the requirements
         essential for public health protection and that, where a Member State derogates from the provisions of the directive, it must
         forthwith notify the Commission thereof,  
         stating its reasons and the periods anticipated. 
         
            
Article of the Directive, as amended by Council Directive 91/692/EEC of December standardising and rationalising
         reports on the implementation of certain Directives relating to the environment (OJ L 377, p. 48) provides that, every
         year, the Member States are to send to the Commission a report on the implementation of the Directive in the current year.
         The report must be made to the Commission before the end of the year in question. 
         
            
The Directive was notified to the Kingdom of Denmark on December 1975. 
         Facts and pre-litigation procedure
            
The Danish Government sent the Commission reports on the implementation of the Directive for the 1995, 1996, and bathing seasons. The Commission found therein a number of lacunae in the application of the Directive. On August 1999, it
         therefore sent that government a letter of formal notice concerning those omissions and invited it to submit its observations
         on the matter. 
         
            
The Danish Government replied by letter of October 1999, setting out the measures put into effect to deal with deviations
         from the limit values laid down in the Directive.  
         
            
The Commission considered that the Danish Government had not taken all necessary measures to ensure that the quality of bathing
         water conformed to the limit values laid down in the Directive and to ensure compliance with the minimum sampling frequencies.
         On April 2000, it therefore sent a reasoned opinion to the Kingdom of Denmark, in which it found that there was infringement
         of Articles 4(1) and 6(1) of the Directive and calling on Denmark to adopt the necessary measures to comply with that opinion
         within two months of the date of its notification. 
         
            
The Danish Government replied by letters of and June 2000, setting out the steps taken in Denmark with a view to achieving
         overall improvement in purification of residual water and water quality, and describing more specifically the measures taken
         during the past years to deal with various sources of pollution in bathing waters. 
         
            
The Commission nevertheless took the view that the infringement was continuing and it therefore brought the present action.
         
         The actionThe complaint concerning the quality of bathing water
         Arguments of the parties
         
            
Whilst specifying that the present action concerns only the years to 1998, the Commission maintains that the quality
         of bathing water in Denmark did not comply fully with the limit values set by the Directive for each of the years in the period
         to 2000. The following table shows the rates of compliance:  
         
Year
Compliance with the mandatory values, expressed as a percentage
Sea water
Fresh water
91.82.97.88.95.87.94.90.92.93.95.92.In its defence, the Danish Government disputes the Commission's calculation of the rates of compliance on several grounds.
         First, it maintains, the vast majority of the deviations should be characterised as  
         fortuitous, since they are possibly of animal origin and occur suddenly, in the form of isolated deviations scattered across various
         bathing areas. Second, the calculation method used by the Commission does not take account of the measures, such as bathing
         bans, taken to deal with specific instances of deviations. Of the existing bathing resorts in Denmark, formal bathing
         bans are imposed in to of them each year during the summer season. Third, the Commission's calculation of the deviations
         is based on figures which are valid for one year at a time. This calculation method gives a distorted statistical picture
         of the quality of bathing water in Denmark and finds no support in the Directive. 
         
            
Whilst noting, like the Commission, that the present action concerns only the years to 1998, the Danish Government submits
         the table reproduced below on the compliance of bathing water in Denmark with the mandatory limit values for the years to 2000. It explains that the figures in this table have been adjusted to take account of fortuitous deviations, communication
         of erroneous information and the introduction of bathing bans.  
         
Year
Compliance with the mandatory values, expressed as a percentage
Sea water
Fresh water
95.85.99.90.98.91.98.92.98.94.98.94.For the period to 1998, there were deviations in all, in bathing areas, of which were attributable to fortuitous
         occurrences (through, in particular, birds and other animals). The Danish Government submits that other deviations were
         due to waste water and that, in those cases, remedial measures were taken. In the remaining cases, the bathing resort in
         question was put under surveillance. Lastly, the data for and confirm that, in general, the deviations were fortuitous.
          
         
            
The Danish Government acknowledges that, according to the case-law of the Court, the Directive imposes on the Member States
         the obligation to take all necessary measures to ensure compliance with it. The Court has, however, left open the possibility
         that deviations may be compatible with the Directive, provided that it is established that it was impossible to prevent them.
         
         
            
According to the Danish Government, deviations due to excreta from birds or other animals, or to sudden, heavy precipitation,
         are of a fortuitous nature, which is why it is impossible to foresee where they will occur. Deviations of this nature are
         due to general circumstances which make compliance with the Directive impossible. The Danish Government submits that most
         of the infringements which occurred in the to period were due to fortuitous deviations which were caused by nature
         and which it was absolutely impossible to guard against effectively. 
         Findings of the Court
         
            
As a preliminary point, it should be recalled that it is settled case-law that the question whether a Member State has failed
         to fulfil its obligations must be determined by reference to the situation obtaining in the Member State at the end of the
         period laid down in the reasoned opinion and that the Court cannot take account of any subsequent changes (see, in particular,
         Case C-220/Commission  v  
          France  [2001] ECR I-5831, paragraph 33; and Case C-323/Commission  v  
          Italy  [2002] ECR  I-4711, paragraph 8). It follows that, in the present case, only the bathing seasons to are relevant
         for determining whether there were infringements as alleged. 
         
            
Under Article 4(1) of the Directive, Member States are to take all necessary measures to ensure that the quality of bathing
         water conforms to the limit values set in accordance with Article (see Case C-92/Commission  v  
          Spain  [1998] ECR I-505, paragraph 27; and Case C-307/Commission  v  
          Belgium  [2000] ECR I-3933, paragraph 48). 
         
            
In that regard, the conformity of the quality of bathing water to the limit values set by the Directive must be assessed each
         year and not over a number of years, as the Danish Government has argued. Article of the Directive, as amended by Directive
         91/692, requires the Member States to send to the Commission each year a report on the implementation of the Directive for
         the current year. It is not consonant with the objective of public-health protection pursued by the Directive for there to
         be a period of several years during which the Member States are free not to take any action. That interpretation is confirmed
         by paragraph of the judgment in Case C-198/Commission  v  
          Germany  [1999] ECR I-3257, where the Court held that deviations even in a single season constitute an infringement of the Directive.
         
         
            
The Directive requires the Member States to ensure that, each year, 100% of their bathing areas conform to the limit values
         laid down in column I of the Annex to the Directive. Under Article 5(1) of the Directive, bathing water is to be deemed to
         conform to those relevant parameters when a certain percentage of the samples of that water, taken at the frequencies specified
         in the Annex to the Directive, complies with the values laid down therein.  
         
            
The figures provided by the Commission in its application show that, for each of the years in the period to 1998, a certain
         proportion of the bathing areas in Denmark ─ both fresh- and sea-water areas ─ did not conform to the mandatory limit values
         set by the Directive. 
         
            
The Danish Government disputes the figures relied on by the Commission and proposes that they be corrected to take account
         of the impact of the deviations it characterises as  
         fortuitous, errors in the transmission of data and bathing bans. Those corrections result in the figures showing higher rates of compliance
         with the mandatory limit values than those alleged by the Commission. 
         
            
However, even taking into account the figures suggested by the defendant Member State, it is clear that, during the years
         to 1998, a certain proportion of the bathing-water areas in Denmark, both fresh- and sea-water areas, still did not conform
         to the mandatory limit values set by the Directive. It follows that there must be a finding of infringement so far as the
         complaint regarding the quality of bathing water in Denmark is concerned, without its being necessary to consider whether
         the corrections proposed by the Danish Government are justified.  
         The complaint concerning the frequency of sampling
         
            
The Commission submits that in seven bathing areas the minimum sampling frequency, as required by Article 6(1) of and the
         Annex to the Directive, read in conjunction, was not complied with during the period to 1998. 
         
            
The Danish Government does not dispute this, but claims that on an annual basis the infringement concerns a mere 0.2% of the
         bathing resorts in Denmark. It adds that the insufficient number of samples did not conceal a decrease in the quality
         of the bathing water at the local level and that the Danish authorities remedied these deficiencies, ensuring that they would
         not recur. It therefore maintains that the insufficient number of local samples comes within the  
          de minimis  rule and that, accordingly, there is no infringement of the Directive, as considered in the light of its purpose.  
         
            
It is clear that the infringement alleged against the Danish Government is of limited scope and has negligible practical consequences.
         However, as the Court has held (see Case C-209/Commission  v  
          Italy  [1991] ECR I-1575, paragraphs and 19; Case C-404/Commission  v  
          France  [2001] ECR I-2667, paragraph 51), an action against a Member State for failure to fulfil its obligations is objective in
         nature and, consequently, where a Member State fails to fulfil its obligations under the Treaty or under secondary legislation,
         the infringement exists regardless of the frequency or the scale of the circumstances complained of. 
         
            
It follows that, in the present case, the infringement is established so far as the complaint about the frequency of sampling
         is concerned. 
         
            
It must therefore be held  that, by failing, during the years to 1998, to take all necessary measures to ensure that
         the quality of its bathing water conformed to the mandatory limit values laid down in the Directive and by failing, during
         the same years, to adhere to the minimum sampling frequencies required by the Directive, the Kingdom of Denmark has failed
         to fulfil its obligations under Articles 4(1) and 6(1) of the Directive.  
         
Costs
            
Under Article 69(2) of the Rules of Procedure, the unsuccessful party is to be ordered to pay the costs if they have been
         applied for in the successful party's pleadings. Since the Commission has applied for costs and the Kingdom of Denmark has
         been unsuccessful, the latter must be ordered to pay the costs. 
         
On those grounds, 
THE COURT (Sixth Chamber),
hereby:  
         
1.
 Declares that, by failing, during the years to 1998, to take all necessary measures to ensure that the quality of its
               bathing water conformed to the limit values laid down in Council Directive 76/160/EEC of December concerning the quality
               of bathing water and by failing, during the same years, to adhere to the minimum sampling frequencies required by that directive,
               the Kingdom of Denmark has failed to fulfil its obligations under Articles 4(1) and 6(1) of the same directive;  
2.
 Orders the Kingdom of Denmark to pay the costs. 
Puissochet
Schintgen 
Gulmann 
Skouris
Cunha Rodrigues 
Delivered in open court in Luxembourg on January 2003. 
         
R. Grass 
J.-P. Puissochet  
Registrar
President of the Sixth Chamber
 –
            
 Language of the case: Danish.
Top  
 