
Judgment of the Court (Seventh Chamber) of April – Commission v Netherlands
(Case C‑398/06)
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Right of residence of nationals of Members States of the European Union and of the European Economic Area who are non-active
         and pensioned persons – National legislation and administrative practice requiring personal resources sufficient for a stay of at least a year in
         the host Member State
      
1.                     Actions for failure to fulfil obligations – Examination of merits by the Court – Situation to be taken into consideration
            – Situation on expiry of the period laid down in the reasoned opinion (Art. EC) (see para. 26)
2.                     Freedom of movement for persons – Right of entry and residence of nationals of Member States – Directives 68/360, 90/and
            90/– Conditions for the issuing of a residence permit (Council Directives 68/360, Art. 9(1) and (3), 90/and 90/365)
            (see paras 29, 31, operative part)
Re: 
Failure of a Member State to fulfil obligations – Infringement of the Community rules on the residence of citizens of the
                  Union – National legislation and administrative practice requiring that, in order to obtain a residence permit, non‑active
                  and pensioned persons must have adequate personal resources.
               
Operative part
The Court:
1.
	Declares that, by maintaining in force national provisions under which, in order to obtain a residence permit, nationals of
                     the European Union and of the European Economic Area who are non-active and retired must prove that they have sustainable
                     resources, the Kingdom of the Netherlands has failed to fulfil its obligations under Council Directive 68/360/EEC of October
                     on the abolition of restrictions on movement and residence within the Community for workers of Member States and their
                     families, Council Directive 90/364/EEC of June on the right of residence and Council Directive 90/365/EEC of June
                     on the right of residence for employees and self-employed persons who have ceased their occupational activity;
                  
2.
	Orders the Kingdom of the Netherlands to pay the costs;
3.
	Orders the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to bear its own costs.
Top  
 