
Order of the Court (First Chamber) of November – Agapiou Joséphidès v Commission and EACEA
(Case C-626/P)
Appeal – Access to documents – Regulation (EC) No 1049/– Article 4(1)(b) and (2), first indent – Protection of private life and integrity of the individual – Protection of commercial interests – Regulation (EC) No 58/– Executive agencies – Competence to handle confirmatory requests regarding applications for access to documents – Principle of transparency – ‘Overriding public interest’ – Errors of law
1.                     Appeals – Pleas in law – Necessity of a specific challenge to a point in the General Court’s reasoning (Art. TFEU; Statute
            of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.; Rules of Procedure of the Court of Justice, Art. 112(1)(c)) (see para. 60)
2.                     Procedure – Statement of reasons for judgments – Scope (see para. 87)
3.                     Appeals – Pleas in law – Mistaken assessment of the facts – Inadmissibility – Review by the Court of Justice of the assessment
            of the facts put before the General Court – Possible only where the clear sense of the evidence has been distorted (Art. TFEU; Statute of the Court of Justice, Art. 58, first para.) (see para. 107)
4.                     Actions for annulment – Time-limits – Point from which time starts to run – Measure not notified to the applicant – Duty to
            request the whole text of the decision within a reasonable time once aware of its existence (Art. 230, fifth para, EC) (see
            paras 127, 131)
Re: 
Appeal brought against the judgment of the General Court (Seventh Chamber) of October in Case T‑439/Agapiou Joséphidès v Commission and EACEA
, by which that court dismissed the action brought by the applicant seeking annulment, first, of the decision of EACEA of
                  August relating to an application for access to documents concerning the allocation of a Jean Monnet centre of excellence
                  to the University of Cyprus and, second, of Commission Decision C(2007) of August relating to an individual decision
                  to allocate subsidies in the context of the lifelong learning programme, a Jean Monnet sub-programme – Infringement of the
                  right of access to documents and of the principle of transparency – Errors of law.
               
Operative part 
1.
	The appeal is dismissed. 
2.
	Ms Agapiou Joséphidès is ordered to pay the costs.
Top  
 